Journal of Diversity in Higher Education
Valuing Neurodiversity on Campus: Perspectives and Priorities of
Neurodivergent Students, Faculty, and Professional Staff
Amy L. Accardo, Estyr M. Bomgardner, Mollie B. Rubinstein, and John Woodruff
Online First Publication, April 18, 2024. https://dx.doi.org/10.1037/dhe0000571
CITATION
Accardo, A. L., Bomgardner, E. M., Rubinstein, M. B., & Woodruff, J. (2024). Valuing neurodiversity on
campus: Perspectives and priorities of neurodivergent students, faculty, and professional staff.. Journal of
Diversity in Higher Education . Advance online publication. https://dx.doi.org/10.1037/dhe0000571

Valuing Neurodiversity on Campus: Perspectives and Priorities of
Neurodivergent Students, Faculty, and Professional Staff
Amy L. Accardo1, 2, Estyr M. Bomgardner1, 2, Mollie B. Rubinstein1, 3, and John Woodruff2, 3
1College of Education, Rowan University
2Center for Neurodiversity, Rowan University
3Ofﬁce of Accessibility Services, Rowan University
Colleges and universities are broadening their social inclusion reach and increasingly recognizing
the importance of valuing neurodivergent students, faculty, and staff. Holding the understanding that
neurodiversity is valuable to society, we gathered perspectives around neurodiversity from students,
faculty, and staff on our university and af ﬁliated campuses via a mixed method sequential two-phase study.
First, a neurodiversity survey was used to gather campus perspectives around neurodiversity and
neurodiversity culture. A total of 254 neurodivergent participants completed the survey. Next, focus groups
and interviews were designed to expand upon and increase reliability of initial survey data. Eight
neurodivergent campus community members participated in follow-up focus groups and/or interviews.
Speci ﬁc research questions included: What are the perspectives of neurodivergent university students,
faculty, and staff around neurodiversity? How does the university currently value and support neurodivergent
students, faculty, and staff? What are suggestions for improvement around valuing and supporting
neurodiversity on campus? Findings include four emerging participant priorities to (a) expand mental
health supports; (b) provide faculty training and professional development around neurodiversity and
universal design for learning; (c) center neurodiversity in diversity and equity initiatives; and (d) expand
neurodiversity speci ﬁc supports.
Keywords: neurodiversity, university, culture, autism, universal design
Historically, colleges and universities have limited the access
and inclusion of people with disability labels including autism,
attention-de ﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), dyslexia, and
Tourette syndrome, and students who do attend college have
reported experiencing disability -related prejudice and stigma
(Dwyer et al., 2023 ). Although all neurodivergent people do not
identify as disabled ( Walker, 2021 ), issues faced by disabled and
neurodivergent students, faculty, and staff in higher education
often align ( den Houting, 2019 ;Hughes, 2016 ). Compounding the
postsecondary education access barriers faced by disabled students,
disability is routinely left out of university ( Scheef et al., 2020 ) and
employment ( Williams & Hagood, 2019 ) diversity, equity, and
inclusion (DEI) initiatives. Researchers and self-advocates have
reported upon the exclusion of neurodivergent students from highereducation, social justice initiatives, and higher education research
(e.g., see Hughes, 2016 ).
In a postpandemic world as we strive to overcome systemic
racism and new COVID variants, we are also broadening our
understanding of diversity, access, and inclusion ( Cassidy et al.,
2020 ). Correspondingly, universities worldwide are broadening
their social inclusion reach. University administration and community
members are increasingly recognizing the importance of creating
equitable opportunities for neurodivergent students, faculty, and
staff. This includes advocating for the centering of neurodiversity in
college campus DEI initiatives ( Kuder et al., 2021 ). With leadership
from university DEI groups and autistic self-advocates, initiatives to
value neurodiversity are emerging along with the call to establish
neurodiversity and disability cultural centers ( Chiang, 2020 ;Dwyer
et al., 2023 ).
The Neurodiversity Paradigm
The neurodiversity movement reframes neurocognitive differences
as diversity and provides a paradigm shift to understanding that
different ways of thinking and behaving are natural variations of being
human (see Kapp, 2020 ). As members of a university neurodiversity
taskforce, we recognize neurodiversity as the full range of variations
in cognition, learning, behaving, and interacting that exists among
individuals. We approach the present study through the conceptual
framework of the neurodiversity paradigm, embracing the perspective
that neurodivergence is valuable ( Walker, 2021 ). Valuing neuro-
diversity from a strengths perspective has the potential to alleviate
inequities inherent in educational systems solely reliant on de ﬁcit-
focused need models ( Gobbo & Shmulsky, 2019 ). NeurodivergenceAmy L. Accardo
 https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2287-0464
Noﬁnancial support was given for this research. The authors declare they
have no con ﬂicts of interest.
This work is licensed under a Crea tive Commons Attribution-Non
Commercial-No Derivatives 4.0 International License (CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0;
https://creativecommons.org /licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0 ). This license permits copy-
ing and redistributing the work in any medium or format for noncommercial use
provided the original authors and source are credited and a link to the license is
included in attribution. No derivative works are permitted u nder this license.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Amy L.
Accardo, College of Education, Rowa n University, 201 Mullica Hill Road,
Glassboro, NJ 08028, United States. Email: accardo@rowan.eduNATIONAL ASSOCIATION
OF DIVERSITY OFFICERS 
IN HIGHER EDUCATION Journal of Diversity in Higher Education
© 2024 The Author(s)
ISSN: 1938-8926 https://doi.org/10.1037/dhe0000571
1

is not exclusionary and students who are autistic, ADHD, dyslexic,
experience mental health conditions, and so forth are increasingly
attending college ( Dwyer et al., 2023 ). For this article, we focused
broadly on neurodivergent identity and used identity ﬁrst language
in alignment with the preference of self-advocates and the neurodiversity
paradigm. We recognize it is a personal choice and often a sign
of pride to identify as neurodivergent. Following, we provide an
overview of neurodiversity in higher education, barriers to college
success, and initiatives to support the valuing of neurodiversity in
higher education.
Neurodiversity in Higher Education
The research literature remains limited in the area of neurodiversity
and higher education ( Anderson et al., 2017 ;Cox et al., 2021 ;
Gelbar et al., 2014 ), with publications dispersed across the special
education, psychology, higher education, and autism speci ﬁcj o u r n a l s .
With the aims of increasing postsecondary access, understanding
barriers, and developing inclusive postsecondary initiatives, research
is increasingly considering the ﬁrst-hand experiences of neurodi-
vergent people (e.g., Accardo et al., 2019 ;Cox et al., 2021 ;Dwyer et
al., 2023 ;Gillespie-Lynch et al., 2017 ;McLeod et al., 2019 ;Peña et
al., 2016 ). Much of the extant research is focused on understanding
barriers to college success.
Barriers
Research teams have identi ﬁed commonly reported barriers to
the academic success of neurodivergent college students. Barriers
include weaknesses in executive functioning skills such as time
management and organization, as well as inadequate study skills
and unexpected high demands on information processing including
reading (e.g., Jansen et al., 2017 ;Kuder et al., 2021 ;Nuske et al.,
2019 ;Van Hees et al., 2015 ). Unfortunately, typical academic
accommodations such as increased time on tests are reported to not
meet the unique needs of many neurodivergent students who report
beneﬁt from individualized supports and relationships forged with
supportive faculty and staff ( Cox et al., 2021 ;Sarrett, 2018 ).
Research teams have likewise identi ﬁed commonly reported barriers
to the nonacademic success of neurodivergent college students. Barriers
include sensory processing, less str uctured daily schedules, differences
in communication, and lack of social contacts (e.g., Jansen et al., 2017 ;
Kuder et al., 2021 ;Nuske et al., 2019 ;Van Hees et al., 2015 ). Of utmost
concern, neurodivergent students in higher education have reported
facing the barrier of stigma and bias ( Dwyer et al., 2023 ). Stigma has
been linked to student hesitancy disclosing disability labels
(Bolourian et al., 2018 ;Van Hees et al., 2015 ) and to the common
practice of masking/camou ﬂaging neurodivergent characteristics.
This is troubling as neurodiverge nt college students experience
heightened incidences of mental health conditions including
anxiety and depression ( Gelbar et al., 2014 ;Kuder et al., 2020 ;
Van Hees et al., 2015 ), and masking has been found to exacerbate
mental health conditions ( Scheerer et al., 2020 ).
Neurodivergent faculty and staff also face barriers in higher
education. Findings from a narrative review of articles on the lived
experiences of higher education faculty and staff include career
satisfaction and supportive environments, yet also troubling reports
of ableism, stigma and discrimi nation following disclosure of
neurodivergence ( Mellifont, 2023 ). While faculty and staff may beincreasingly aware of the stigma that comes with disclosure, Price
et al. (2017) found that faculty and staff with mental health conditions
were primarily unaware of the accommodations available to them
and felt that it would be too risky to ask for environmental support
that may bene ﬁt them, such as natural lighting, access to quiet spaces,
and options for ﬂexible scheduling. Mellifont (2023) identi ﬁed
barriers to success for neurodivergent faculty and staff as disability
stigma, avoiding disclosure of disabilities to employers, workplaces
that are unwelcoming to neurodivergent staff, and neurodivergent
contributions to the academy controlled by neurotypical faculty.
Despite holding employable talents and skills, up to 80% of
neurodivergent people remain unemployed ( Austin & Pisano, 2017 ).
Valuing neurodiversity from a strength-based perspective is essential
for college students as well as faculty and staff, as neurodivergent
people face discrimination and hostility in workspaces which do
not recognize their talents or provide adequate accommodations
(Robertson, 2009 ). While limited, the literature on neurodiversity and
higher education faculty and staff suggests that increased initiatives
aimed at improving the experiences of neurodivergent students on
campus should also include initiatives for neurodivergent faculty
and staff.
Diversity Initiatives
Neurodiversity speci ﬁc initiatives on campus are vital for
decreasing barriers and improving the experiences of neurodivergent
students. For example, researchers have found that neurodiversity
speciﬁc initiatives can support students in transitioning to changing
routines inherent in college life ( Jansen et al., 2017 ;Kuder
et al., 2021 ;Van Hees et al., 2015 ). There is some evidence that
university-wide initiatives may reduce barriers for students, faculty,
and staff. Wilke et al. (2019) found that disabled students in higher
education have bene ﬁted from accessible and ﬂexible options, from
using accommodations, and from faculty and staff ’s understanding
of disability. An important component of the initiatives was
professional development for staff around disability and issues
of campus access on a broad scale. Similarly, Cox et al. (2017)
identi ﬁed several potential university initiatives to support disabled
and/or neurodivergent students, including offering more than just
formal disability accommodations, staf ﬁng an ample number of
mental health counselors, and incorporating universal design into
the institutional culture and practice, for example, through the
offering of single living options, peer mentors, and support with
social engagement opportunities on campus.
The concept of universal design stems from the ﬁeld of architecture
and emphasizes planning for the natural diversity of people when
designing buildings and environments ( Mace, 1997 ). Building on
the concept of universal design, universal design for learning (UDL)
was developed by Meyer and Rose in the 1990s and provides
a framework to minimize barriers in education and to universally
support the learning of all students ( Rose & Meyer, 2002 ). The
Higher Education Opportunity Act (2008) endorsed UDL, bridging
the focus on developing accessible learning opportunities from
K–12 education settings to higher education. Despite decades of
endorsements, universal design is not yet widespread in higher
education; however, universally designing university spaces and
courses has been reported as bene ﬁcial for supporting postsecondary
students with disability labels (e.g., Burgstahler & Russo-Gleicher,
2015 )a sw e l la ss t u d e n t so fc o l o r( e . g . , Fritzgerald, 2020 ).2 ACCARDO, BOMGARDNER, RUBINSTEIN, AND WOODRUFF

The framework of universal design/UDL may be a promising
diversity af ﬁrming initiative for higher education as it supports
student responsiveness and values the growing diversity on today ’s
university campuses.
University initiatives which include engagement in a critique of
how disability is constructed and viewed may also lead to greater
empowerment for disabled campus members. Peña et al. (2016)
reported a critical disability lens can challenge the construction of
disability as a list of individual impairments and de ﬁcits, leading
to the valuing of neurodiversity, an aim of the present study. In
addition, Peña et al. (2020) recommended the use of a community-
based, participatory research approach in program design to be vital
for autistic campus members, noting participation in the planning and
assessment process helps to ensure that university initiatives provide
real bene ﬁts for those they are meant to serve and emphasizing the
importance of valuing the voices of disabled and/or neurodivergent
campus community members. This study builds on existing research by
valuing the voices of our neurodivergent campus community members.
Purpose
Through the lens of the neurodiversity paradigm and holding
the understanding that neurodiversity is valuable to society, we
recognized the need to gather the perspectives and priorities around
neurodiversity on our university and af ﬁliated campuses. Gathering
information from the neurodivergent community is essential to
prioritizing and valuing neurodiversity culture on campus; to meeting
the support needs of neurodivergent students, staff, and faculty; and
to gleaning implications for systems of higher education in relation to
disability and diversity.
A neurodiversity survey was developed to gather information
about campus perspectives around neurodiversity and neurodiversity
culture from both neurodivergent and neurotypical members of our
campus community. Valuing and prioritizing neurodivergent students,
faculty, and staff, the present study reports upon the perspectives
of neurodivergent campus community members. Speci ﬁc research
questions follow:
1. What are the perspectives of neurodivergent university
students, faculty, and staff around neurodiversity?
2. How does the university currently value and support
neurodivergent students, faculty, and staff?
3. What are suggestions for improvement around valuing and
supporting neurodiversity on campus?
Method
A university taskforce with expertise in neurodiversity was
established through the university division of DEI with a goal of
understanding campus priorities and perspectives around neuro-
diversity. The taskforce met bimonthly over one academic year,
discussed topics pertinent to neurodiversity on campus, and developed
and conducted an exploratory sequential mixed methods two-phase
study: (a) a nonexperimental neurodiversity survey and (b) qualitative
follow-up focus groups and interviews with neurodivergent faculty,
staff, and students. Guided by survey responses, semistructured
interviews and focus groups were designed to expand upon and
increase reliability of initial survey data ( Teddlie & Tashakkori, 2009 )and to allow for probing of information based on survey data
(Merriam & Tisdell, 2016 ).
Data Sources: The Neurodiversity Survey, Focus
Groups, and Interviews
Our data sources included an online survey distributed across
multiple campuses af ﬁliated with one university in the Northeastern
United States and focus groups/interviews held with interested
survey participants.
Neurodiversity Survey
The neurodiversity survey was developed with three parts:
(a) demographic questions, (b) Likert-scale questions, and (c)
open-ended questions. The demographic questions gathered partici-
pant neurodiversity identity, disability identity, role on campus,
college/department af ﬁliation, race/ethnicity, gender identity, and age.
The Likert-scale questions asked students, faculty, and staff
about their level of familiarity with neurodiversity, recognition of
neurodiversity on campus, observation or experiences of inequities,
accessibility on campus, teaching and learning supports, and available
accommodations. Faculty were asked about the accommodations they
provided for their students in the classroom as well as their preferred
teaching and meeting modes, while students were asked about their
preferred instructional methods and aspects of classroom design.
All participants were also asked about their satisfaction with their
social involvement on campus, accommodations and supports, and
with campus culture. Finally, faculty, staff, and students were asked
if training on neurodiversity would bene ﬁt them and if they were
comfortable identifying and preferred identifying as neurodivergent.
The neurodiversity survey included six open-ended questions:
(a) What does neurodiversity mean to you? (b) What are ways our
university supports our neurodivergent student body? (c) What are
ways we can improve the university experience for neurodivergent
students? (d) What are spaces you may have seen neurodiversity
discussed? (e) Did our provided resources and supports impact
your decision to come to our university? (f) What ideas do you
have for bringing neurodiversity-related expertise and initiatives
to our university?
Neurodiversity Interview and Focus Group Questions
As part of the survey, students, faculty, and staff were invited
to take part in a follow-up interview. Semistructured questions were
organized by ﬁve major themes emerging from the initial survey
data: (a) disclosure/identity, (b) mental health, (c) existing neurodi-
versity af ﬁrming supports, (d) needed neurodiversity af ﬁrming
supports, and (e) ideas and insights to foster neurodiversity culture.
Theﬁrst and second author conducted the interviews implementing
a two-probe rule (e.g., can you provide an example? Do you have
anything to add?). In line with a semistructured interview format,
additional follow-up questions were asked if something arose in
a response that needed clari ﬁcation or expansion.
Phase I: Survey
Participants had the opportunity to participate in this research
study over a 2-year time period. The survey was administeredVALUING NEURODIVERSITY ON CAMPUS 3

through Qualtrics during the Spring 2021 semester via a posting of
the Institutional Review Board approved invitation and link in our
university daily online announcer. The invitation was posted four
times, once a week, across 1 month. Responses with less than 50%
completion were deleted and if a participant identi ﬁed as being both a
student and faculty member, their responses were only included in
faculty data. Likert-scale responses were analyzed as interval data
and closed-ended data analyzed descriptively using frequency
counts and mean percentages through IBM SPSS 27. Open-ended
data were coded by two authors in a cyclical manner. In the ﬁrst
round of coding, each author individually applied in vivo codes.
Next, authors worked together, discussing and revising codes to
reach 100% agreement. In vivo coding was selected to honor
participant voices in response to open-ended question topics
(Saldaña, 2016 ). In the second round of coding, passages were
synthesized into patterns ( Saldaña, 2016 ). Emerging patterns were
considered in conjunction with Likert-scale survey results to guide
follow-up interview/focus group questions. A total of 254
neurodivergent participants completed the survey.
Phase 2: Interviews and Focus Groups
Interviews and focus groups were conducted during the Spring
2022 semester. Participants were recruited via emails sent to all
neurodivergent faculty, staff, and students who indicated they would
be interested in participating in a follow-up interview or focus
group. Two separate recruitments were sent 2 weeks apart. With
consideration of neurodiversity af ﬁrming practices, participation
options were provided including the option to participate in an
interview (one-on-one) or focus groups (two or more participants)
and the option to participate in-person or via web-based video
conferencing. Zoom was used as the platform for remote participation
and options of chat or verbal participation were provided as well
as the option to use closed captioning and video on or off features.
The same semistructured interview format and questions were used
for both interviews and focus groups. A total of three neurodivergent
faculty and staff and ﬁve neurodivergent students responded and
participated in an interview ( n=4) or focus group ( n=4) format. All
but one participant chose to participate via Zoom. All participants ’
names were changed to maintain con ﬁdentiality.
The data from the focus groups and interviews were audio recorded
and transcribed verbatim. Data were analyzed using qualitative
coding methodologies based on Saldaña (2016) .T h es e c o n da n dt h i r d
authors followed a multistep process ﬁrst reviewing all responses
independently to become familiar with the data and then performing
ﬁrst round coding with a combination of descriptive, in vivo,
and process codes. In the second cycle, pattern coding was applied
to synthesize information coded in the ﬁrst round into broader
categories ( Saldaña, 2016 ;s e ea l s o Corbin & Strauss, 2015 ).
Coding was conducted by the second and third authors, then
shared with the ﬁrst author, with all codes discussed and revised to
reach 100% agreement.
Participants
Included survey results are limited to participants identifying
as neurodivergent. Of the 254 neurodivergent participants, 103 were
faculty/staff and 151 were students. All participants self-disclosed
identifying as neurodivergent. In terms of speci ﬁc disability labels,both faculty/staff and students most commonly reported mental
health (14% and 33%) and ADHD (13% and 25%). In terms of
demographics, the majority of participants identi ﬁed as women
(64% faculty/staff; 73% students) and as White (78% faculty/staff;
66% students). Participants came from multiple campuses af ﬁliated
with one major university in the Northeastern United States
and represented a wide array of academic departments and majors
(e.g., of 64 reported majors, 4% was the highest reporting: Computer
Science; Engineering; and Health Sciences, followed by 3% reporting
for Biological Sciences and undecided). A majority of students were
sophomores and maintained a grade point average of 3.5 –4.0. Only
26.5% of students reported receiving accommodations from the
accessibility services center. See Table 1 .
Positionality
All authors hold personal and extensive lived experience with
neurodiversity identifying as neurodivergent or as parent, sibling,
and/or spouse to neurodivergent family members. Af ﬁliated with
the university division of DEI, all authors are committed to valuing
intersectional identities, to providing equitable postsecondary
education experiences to historically marginalized groups, and
to centering disability as diversity. The authors were part of the
university neurodiversity taskforce, a neurodiverse group of faculty,
staff, and graduate students codeveloping the initiative to gather
perspectives of neurodivergent students, faculty, and staff on our
university and af ﬁliated campuses. Following, we share the results of
our neurodiversity survey and follow-up focus groups and interviews.
Results
Survey and focus group/interview ﬁndings are organized by
research questions with Phase 1 survey results discussed ﬁrst, followed
by Phase 2 focus group and interview data.
Perspectives of University Students, Faculty, and Staff
Around Neurodiversity
Research Question 1 elicited the perspectives of neurodi-
vergent students, faculty, and staff around neurodiversity. Of the
151 neurodivergent student participants and 103 neurodivergent
faculty and staff participants, 84% of students as well as 83% of
faculty and staff reported being very or somewhat familiar with
neurodiversity. While all participants identi ﬁed as neurodivergent as
per the study inclusion criteria, when asked if they were comfortable
identifying as neurodivergent within their campus community, 68%
of students and only 38% of faculty and staff reported agreement.
SeeTable 2 .
Survey participants were also asked whether or not they identi ﬁed
as disabled in addition to neurodivergent. While 46% of students
identi ﬁed as both neurodivergent and disabled, only 24% of
neurodivergent faculty identi ﬁed as disabled. The most frequently
occurring disability label reported was mental health condition
(33% students, 14% faculty), followed by ADHD (25% students, 13%
faculty), and autism (14% students, 3% faculty). Of note, only 27%
of students reported being of ﬁcially registered for accommodations
through the campus disability center and only 10% of students reported
receiving ﬁnancial aid or student funding related to their disability.4 ACCARDO, BOMGARDNER, RUBINSTEIN, AND WOODRUFF

Table 1
Demographics of Survey Participants
DemographicNeurodivergent
faculty and staff
(N=103)Neurodivergent
student
(N=151)
Race (may select more than one)
White 80 (78%) 100 (66.2%)
Of African descent 4 (4%) 14 (9.3%)
Of Asian descent 2 (2%) 3 (2%)
Hispanic, Latina/Chicano 4 (4%) 11 (7.3%)
Indigenous (Maori, Aboriginal, Native American, Alaskan Native, etc.) 2 (1.3%)
Of Arab or Middle Eastern descent 1 (1%)
More than one race 3 (3%) 17 (11.4%)
Prefer not to respond 7 (7%) 4 (3%)
Gender (may select more than one)
Men 31 (30%) 19 (24.1%)
Women 66 (64%) 58 (73.4%)
Transgender men 4 (3%)
Transgender women 1 (1%)
Gender ﬂuid 2 (1.3%)
Nonbinary 5 (3.3%)
Other 3 (2%)
No response 6 (6%)
Age
18–20 62 (41.1%)
21–25 3 (3%) 50 (33%)
26–29 9 (9%) 16 (11%)
30–39 21 (20.4%) 12 (8%)
40–49 25 (24.3) 7 (5%)
50–59 17 (16.5%) 3 (2%)
60 or older 24 (23.3%) 1 (1%)
Prefer not to respond 3 (3%)
Employment type
Faculty (full-time, instructors, lecturers, adjuncts) 61 (59.2%)
Professional staff 42 (40.8%)
Disability identity
Disabled 25 (24.3%) 69 (46%)
Nondisabled 76 (74%) 65 (43%)
Prefer not to respond 2 (2%) 17 (11.3%)
Disability label (may select more than one)
ADHD 13 (13%) 36 (25%)
Autistic/autism spectrum/Aspergers 3 (3%) 20 (14%)
Hearing impairment 5 (5%) 2 (1.4)
Mental health condition (e.g., anxiety, depression, obsessive compulsive
disorder, bipolar disorder, etc.)14 (14%) 50 (33%)
Health impairment 6 (6%) 10 (7%)
Orthopedic impairment 2 (2%) 4 (3%)
Neurological condition (e.g., epilepsy, traumatic brain injury) 1 (1%) 9 (6.3%)
Speci ﬁc learning disability (e.g., dyslexia, auditory processing, dyspraxia, etc.) 7 (7%) 19 (13%)
Visual impairment 1 (1%) 2 (1.3)
Traumatic brain injury 1 (1%) 9 (6.3%)
Other-sensory avoidance 1 (1%)
Other-auditory processing 1 (1%)
Other-Fragile ×Syndrome 1 (1%)
Other-chronic illness 3 (2.1%)
Other-executive function disorder 1 (1%)
Other-misophonia 1 (1%)
Receive support services or accommodation
Yes 1 (1%) 40 (26.5%)
No 3 (3%) 25 (17%)
I do not know 1 (1%) 4 (3%)
GPA
3.5–4.0 82 (54.3%)
3.0–3.49 27 (18%)
2.5–2.99 21 (14%)
1.0–1.49 2 (1.3%)
Just starting ﬁrst semester 10 (7%)
(table continues )VALUING NEURODIVERSITY ON CAMPUS 5

Deﬁning Neurodiversity
When asked what neurodiversity means to them via open-ended
survey prompt, faculty, staff, and students focused on variation in
thinking and ways of being. They also emphasized the importance
of inclusion, celebration, and acceptance. For example, one faculty
member responded, “celebrating differences in the way people
function and learn, designing educational opportunities and work-
places that support individuals with different abilities for a more
equitable environment. ”Similarly, a student shared, “It’s both a
blessing and a curse such as being very creative but also not being
able to sit through online classes without struggling. ”Overall, faculty
and staff responses focused on neurodiversity as natural difference.
See quotes in Table 3 .
Disclosure and Identity
Perspectives around disclosure an d disability identity emerging from
survey data were further explore d within follow-up semistructured
interviews and focus groups. When asked why neurodivergent campus
members would decide to disclose or not disclose their identity as
neurodivergent, participants shared perspectives that involved both
external and internal barriers primarily related to lack of societal
acceptance around neurodivergence resulting in the pressure to
mask neurodivergent identities or risk being socially ostracized. One
student participant indicated the external barriers of stigma and past
school trauma:
Another thing is that I mean this is sort of personal experience for me, is
that I ’m one who masks in a lot of situations …it comes from back
when I was in school like middle school, elementary school when like I
was like the weird kid or the strange kid, and people used to pick on me
for that.
Another student identi ﬁed as neurodivergent on campus, but
understood why others may have different internal motivators
causing them to feel differently:
I can de ﬁnitely answer that; it ’s interesting but it ’s complicated.
So, when I think of like disclosure and camou ﬂaging I think it ’s more
of like, it depends on the individual ’s comfortability and realizing they
want to be identi ﬁed as such, or how they would personally feel. And
personally, like, I do feel comfortable identifying as neurodivergent.
Another student shared that opening up and disclosing as
neurodivergent risks social alienation and losing the respect of
others, “I think the reason why they might not want to do that isbecause they don ’t want to be treated as different and we want to be
respected and accepted into society. ”
Perspectives around identifying as disabled among neurodivergent
students, faculty, and staff were further explored with the follow-up
question, why do you think campus members choose to identify
as neurodivergent versus having a disability, vice versa, or as both
terms? Participant responses convey the term disabled is perceived
as negative and stigmatizing, while the term neurodivergent is
perceived as positive. One student was emphatic about having a
neurodivergent identity instead of a disability identity and shared,
“I don ’t consider myself disabled. Some people might but I do like
the term neurodivergent. It feels less harsh. it feels less aggressive. ”
Another student agreed and shared:
There ’re still some negative connotations about disability, and because
of how being disabled is still stigmatized; so some people might not
want to have that label, but for me the way I see it is, I identify as both
neurodivergent and being disabled in that sometimes it ’s the way that
society works- that it ’s made for people mostly neurotypical people, but
not for the way, I think, or the way my brain is wired.
Student responses convey the complexities of disability-related
identity formation with the decision to identify as disabled potentially
more stigmatizing than the decision to identify as neurodivergent.
Student responses also highlight the tensions around disability
language use and identity formation, as another student explained
they identi ﬁed as both neurodivergent and disabled but were
confused by the terminology and imagined disability as negative
and neurodiversity as a more positive label.
Satisfaction With Neurodiversity Af ﬁrming Supports
Research Question 2 elicited perspectives around existing supports
for neurodivergent students, faculty, and staff with participants
expressing mixed views on the strengths of campus neurodiversity
culture as well as concerning experiences with inequities and
inaccessibility in campus attitudes, policies, and environments. More
faculty and staff (63%) than students (45%) believed that
neurodivergent students were recognized and respected as a cultural
group on campus. Yet most (60% faculty/staff, 59% students) also
reported a lack of accessibility toward neurodivergent people.
Similarly, 60% of students and 57% of faculty/staff reported
experiencing or witnessing inequities on campus. While neurodi-
vergent faculty/staff and students reported minimal connection with
other neurodivergent campus members (18%; 28%), most were
satisﬁed with their level of social involvement on campus (58%; 61%).Table 1 (continued )
DemographicNeurodivergent
faculty and staff
(N=103)Neurodivergent
student
(N=151)
Years in college
Freshman 30 (20%)
Sophomore 46 (30.5%)
Junior 26 (17.2%)
Senior 15 (10%)
Graduate/doctoral 10 (7%)
Transfer student 15 (10%)
Note. ADHD =attention-de ﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder; GPA =grade point average.6 ACCARDO, BOMGARDNER, RUBINSTEIN, AND WOODRUFF

In terms of supports, more than half (56%) of students were satis ﬁed
with the accommodations (formal and informal) available to them, yet
only 35% of faculty and staff felt satis ﬁed with the supports they
received. When asked about speci ﬁc supports, 56% of students and
46% of faculty/staff reported satisfa ction with the mental health support
provided on campus. Similarly, about half agreed that there was ample
assistive technology on campus. When asked about satisfaction with
career and employment supports, 78% of students reported satisfaction
or a neutral response. The majority of participants also felt that thecampus is a sensory-friendly place, considering details such as lighting,
smells, sounds, and dedicated sensory spaces. See Table 2 .
Neurodivergent students agreed that access to professors during
classroom instruction consistently met their needs (76%). The design
of quizzes, exams, and class assignments were also reported to meet
the needs of a majority of students (60%). Half of students reported
ﬂexible due dates and presentation of information during classroom
instruction met their needs. Students were divided on preferred
instructional delivery methods, with the highest number of studentsTable 2
Neurodiversity Survey Results: Student and Faculty/Staff Perspectives Around Neurodiversity
Neurodiversity factorNeurodivergent faculty
(N=103)Neurodivergent student
(N=151)
Familiarity with neurodiversity
Very familiar 32 (31%) 81 (54%)
Somewhat familiar 53 (51.5%) 44 (29.1%)
Somewhat unfamiliar 17 (16.5%) 26 (17.2%)
Totally unfamiliar 1 (1%)
Neurodivergent students are recognized and respected as a cultural group on campus
Agree 65 (63.1%) 68 (45%)
Disagree 33 (32%) 64 (42.4%)
Not applicable 5 (5%) 19 (13%)
I experience or witness inequities toward neurodivergent people on campus
(e.g., attitudes, policies, and environments)
Agree 59 (57.2%) 91 (60.3%)
Disagree 36 (34.9%) 48 (32%)
Not applicable 7 (7%) 11 (7.3%)
I experience or witness a lack of accessibility toward neurodivergent people on campus
(e.g., attitudes, policies, and environments)
Agree 62 (60.2%) 89 (59%)
Disagree 30 (29.2%) 46 (30.5%)
Not applicable 9 (8.7%) 13 (9%)
I prefer not to identify as neurodivergent as a faculty, professional staff member, or student
Agree 38 (37%) 36 (24%)
Disagree 32 (31.1%) 103 (68.2%)
Not applicable 16 (15.5%) 10 (7%)
There is value in incorporating topics of neurodiversity on campus
Agree 100 (97.1%) 134 (89%)
Disagree 2 (2%) 16 (10.5%)
I am satis ﬁed with my current level of social involvement in campus
Agree 63 (61.2) 87 (58%)
Disagree 26 (25.3%) 62 (51.1%)
Not applicable 12 (12%)
I am comfortable identifying as a neurodivergent faculty, professional staff, or student
Agree 39 (38%) 102 (67.5%)
Disagree 35 (34%) 39 (26%)
Not applicable 13 (13%) 7 (5%)
The campus environment is a sensory-friendly place (i.e., lighting, colors, smells,
sounds, and dedicated sensory spaces)
Agree 56 (54.3%) 93 (62%)
Disagree 40 (39%) 49 (32.4%)
Not applicable 5 (5%)
I am satis ﬁed with the accommodations available to me as a neurodivergent faculty/staff
member or student
Agree 36 (35%) 85 (56.2%)
Disagree 29 (28.2%) 38 (25.2%)
Not applicable 20 (19.4%) 26 (17.2%)
I am able to use assistive technology in classrooms and around campus with relative ease
Agree 40 (39%) 60 (40%)
Disagree 15 (15%) 24 (16%)
Not applicable 30 (29%) 64 (42.4%)
I am satis ﬁed with the supports available for my mental health needs on campus
Agree 47 (46%) 85 (56%)
Disagree 36 (35%) 44 (29.1%)
Not applicable 17 (16.5%) 20 (13.2%)VALUING NEURODIVERSITY ON CAMPUS 7

preferring to learn in person (35%). Only 30% of students reported
alternative presentation formats, alternative assessments, or alternate
options for assignments as addressing their needs. Students further
shared that they were currently supported on campus through
neurodiversity-centered clubs and activities. See Table 4 .
Neurodivergent faculty and staff reported satisfaction with provided
modes of meeting access, including in-person and online meeting
options (85%). About half of neurodivergent faculty and staff (48%)
reported having classes, programs, and of ﬁces structured to meet
their individual preferences. Faculty and staff were divided on
preferred modality of instructional methods, with the highest
number of faculty (33%) preferring in-person instruction. In terms
of supporting their students, a majority of neurodivergent faculty
and staff (79%) reported structuring their classes to meet the
preferences of their neurodivergent student population. They also
reported routinely providing options for students to communicate
using alternative methods such as speaking, text, and visual
representations (80%). See Table 5 .
When asked about supports in follow-up interviews and focus
groups, students, faculty, and staff shared positive experiences aroundneurodiversity resources and groups, noting speci ﬁc areas with pride
including mental health supports, af ﬁnity and student groups, and
accessibility services. A student shared, “I think the university does
a great job of letting students know what resources are available
to them. I think it is great that there are psychologists available
to students, not every campus provides this service. ”One faculty
member shared, “The development of the (neurodiversity) af ﬁnity
group has been a great start. I have had conversations with
individual members of my department on how to support me in
groups and meetings. ”Neurodiversity speci ﬁc student clubs and the
Ofﬁce of Accessibility Services were also identi ﬁed as supporting
the neurodivergent campus community ( Table 6 ).
Recommendations for Neurodiversity
Afﬁrming Supports
The third research question elicited suggestions for university-
wide action steps valuing and supporting neurodivergent students,
faculty, and staff. Recommendations emerging from participant
interview and focus groups responses include: (a) expanding mental
Table 4
Neurodiversity Survey Results: Student Speci ﬁc Experiences
Students ’experience N=151 Agree Disagree Other
Access to professors during classroom instructions have consistently addressed my needs as
a student115 (76.2%) 30 (20%) 6 (4%)
I have connected with other neurodivergent students on campus 32 (28%) 76 (50.3%) 30 (20%)
Alternative assessments have consistently addressed my needs as a student 49 (30.4%) 71 (47.1%) 32 (20.5%)
Alternative presentation formats have consistently addressed my needs as a student 57 (38%) 65 (43.1%) 29 (19.2%)
Design of quizzes/exams has consistently addressed my needs as a student 90 (60%) 53 (35.1%) 7 (5%)
Options for assignments during classroom instruction have consistently addressed my needs as
a student52 (41%) 66 (44%) 23 (15.2%)
Flexible due dates during classroom instruction have consistently addressed my needs as a student 76 (50.4%) 65 (43%) 9 (6%)
Design of class assignments has consistently addressed my needs as a student 91 (60.3%) 52 (34.4%) 8 (5.3%)
The presentation of information during classroom instruction have consistently addressed my needs
as a student95 (53%) 44 (29.1%) 10 (7%)
I am satis ﬁed with the career and employment support on campus 57 (38%) 16 (11%) 75 (49.7%)
As a student, I am routinely provided options to communicate including use of speaking, text, and
visual representations70 (46.3%) 49 (32.5%) 31 (20.5%)
There is ample assistive technology available to me as a college student 71 (47%) 33 (22%) 43 (28.5%)Table 3
Open-Ended Response: What Neurodiversity Means to Neurodivergent Students, Faculty/Staff
Role Example quote
Student “Learning freely and independently is what neurodiversity means to me. I am still trying to gain autonomy and control with self-directed
progressive learning and teaching methods with the help of the unique teachers that I currently have. ”
Faculty “Differences in ways of being, engaging, and understanding the world. ”
Faculty “Neurodiversity refers to the broad expanse of neurological development in different people. It challenges the notion that there is not one
‘normal ’way of thinking, processing, interacting, or behaving. ”
Student “It means that my brain works differently than most. I have to ﬁnd systems that work for me that better suit my brain and not try to do it like
those that are neurotypical. ”
Student “Every brain works differently. Some folks are born with brains that need more or less of some things to function, that neurotypical folks
wouldn ’t even notice: stimulation, downtime, comfort objects, etc. ”
Faculty “Celebrating differences in the way people function and learn, designing educational opportunities and workplaces that support individuals
with different abilities for a more equitable environment. ”
Student “Not being able to conform with the average or expected though patterns by society. It ’s both a blessing and a curse such as being very
creative but also not being able to sit through online classes without struggling. ”
Faculty “Different mental frameworks and approaches that shape how individuals interact with the world and make meaning. ”8 ACCARDO, BOMGARDNER, RUBINSTEIN, AND WOODRUFF

health supports, (b) providing faculty professional development,
(c) centering neurodiversity in diversity and equity initiatives, and
(d) expanding neurodiversity speci ﬁc supports, all with the aim of
improving the experiences of neurodivergent students, faculty,
and staff. See Table 7 .
Expanding Mental Health Supports
Despite the neurodiversity survey results suggesting roughly
half of neurodivergent students, faculty, and staff (46% of faculty/
staff and 56% of students) were satis ﬁed with campus mental
health supports, further expanding mental health supports emerged
as a priority of both students and faculty/staff. Speci ﬁc suggestions
to better support mental health needs across campuses shared by
students include the perspective that campus resources could be
more impactful if they were speci alized and individualized.I think most people, I would say, do not feel even personally, maybe feel
that the resources aren ’t enough. I mean there ’s an abundant amount-
base- there seems to be an abundant amount of resources. but I don ’t
think it ’s to a degree where it ’s impacting the students correctly or even
beneﬁting the students. It seems like …this resource is available, but
it’s not providing great bene ﬁciary actions.
Requests for expanding services in the area of mental health were
shared, even though existing supports were noted as abundant. This
suggests a needed shift to holistic and individualized university
mental health supports. One student on the university main campus
reported both a positive and negative experience using services at
the university wellness center. The student suggested improving
services by providing long-term continuity of care. Speci ﬁcally,
the student r eported follow-through when a counselor leaves or a
student approaches graduation as areas of improvement. The
student said,Table 5
Neurodiversity Survey Results: Faculty/Staff Speci ﬁc Experiences
Faculty/staff experience N=103 Agree Disagree Other
I am able to structure my classes/programs/of ﬁces to meet my preferences as a neurodivergent
faculty or staff49 (48%) 18 (18.5%) 19 (18.4%)
I have connected with other neurodivergent faculty or professional staff on campus 19 (18.4%) 47 (46%) 20 (19.4%)
There is ample assistive technology to support me with my work-related responsibilities 48 (47%) 15 (15%) 20 (20%)
I am satis ﬁed with provided modes of meeting access (in-person, Zoom/WebEx, having both
options, etc.)88 (85.4%) 8 (8%) 5 (5%)
I structure my classes/programs/of ﬁces to meet the preferences of a neurodivergent student
population78 (79%) 10 (10%) 12 (12%)
There is ample assistive technology available to me to support students 56 (54.4%) 33 (32.1%) 14 (14%)
I routinely provide options for students to communicate using alternatives that include speaking, text,
and visual representations82 (79.6%) 7 (7%) 12 (12%)
I would like more information and/or professional development about providing supports for
neurodivergent students94 (91.3%) 4 (3.9%) 3 (1.2%)
Training on neurodiversity would bene ﬁt me and how I complete my work day-to-day 92 (89.35%) 8 (8%)
Table 6
Open-Ended Response: Ways the University Supports Neurodivergent Faculty/Staff and Students
Role Example quote
Student “There is some support but not a lot of awareness for students. There (are) not really a lot of peers, allies to understand us. ”
Student “I think the university does a great job of letting students know what resources are available to them. I think it is great that there are
psychologists available to students, not every campus provides this service. ”
Faculty “Through the Academic Success Center and support resources, student clubs and organizations, information sessions at orientation, and
attendance at all open houses and accepted student receptions to bring awareness to incoming students that these services are offered. ”
Student “The Of ﬁce for Disability Resources is fantastic, all staff there are wonderful. Aside from that department, I don ’t see a lot of information or
event promotion. ”
Faculty “Disability Resources does an amazing job with insuf ﬁcient resources to support a growing population with a wide spectrum of needs for
supports and services. ”
Faculty “There are many different ways that we can interact with our students, virtual meetings, recorded lectures, closed captions on lectures, face to
face, student services, etc. ”
Student “Allowing students with disabilities to serve as success coaches, disability portal for students, and creating some accommodations. ”
Faculty “Clinical programs, expansion of neurodiverse department/of ﬁce and staff, additional programs to students. ”
Faculty “The development of the af ﬁnity group has been a great start. I have had conversations with individual members of my department on how to
support me in groups and meetings. ”
Faculty “I’m not out as neurodivergent to my colleagues. My mask is impenetrable and my scripts are perfect. So, I have not really sought
out support. ”
Faculty “Accommodations can be provided, the existence of af ﬁnity groups, but I imagine that acceptance varies depending on department and
departmental leadership. ”
Faculty “I have not seen evidence of this (support for neurodivergent faculty/staff). ”
Faculty “Ample opportunities for professional development. ”VALUING NEURODIVERSITY ON CAMPUS 9

I’m someone who has like de ﬁnitely received a lot of help from
(the university) in their mental health services. …I think the primary
place where they ’ve fallen short for me is with the individual therapy.
I’m bothered with the fact that it ’s so temporary, because it is very
stressful to have to re-explain your whole story to someone. And so for
me, my individual therapist moved to a private practice, and I couldn ’t
see her anymore. Because you know I would have had to pay and I just
can’t afford that. And so I couldn ’t get her through. (the university) and
I didn ’t want to start with the new person, because I ’m only here for
one more year, and I know that I would have to change after a year.
The same student reported they would like to see neurodiversity
speciﬁc mental health support on campus, stating, “I’d also really
like to see maybe like more specialized clinics. ”
Several students expressed a general desire for more mental health
support as a way to improve mental health on campus. Speci ﬁcally,
they spoke about the need for more space and counselors for the
number of students in need. One student said,
It’s still a long process to get done and it ’s, there ’s not enough people
or hires to be accommodated for not just neurotypical people, but
also for a variety of students per se because it ’s hard enough when
you have an undergrad population of 20,000 students, when you only
have so many professionals hired on campus when there ’sl i k es p a c e
issues (there ’s a need to have) immediate response to help them when
it’s not there.
A faculty member also emphasized a need for more counselors to
support the mental health needs of students as priority, expressing
concerns with suicide and potentially limited resources. They said
“we’ve had a number of suicides …so I don ’t think there ’s enough
resources. There ’s not enough, you know, there ’s not a high enough
proportion of counselors to students. ”
Faculty elaborated on the connection between student mental health
and faculty mental health. One participant felt opening up readily
available mental health resources to faculty may help faculty mentally
cope with triggers from hearing about student mental health issues,
an unrecognized, cascading event. Faculty also suggested improving
compassion among university staff to improve the mental health
of faculty, placing emphasis on fostering compassionate workplace
culture over providing accommodations.
I really think it ’s, it comes down to being accommodating and I don ’t
necessarily mean that in strict like registered for accommodations
ways, I think kind of recognizing, like, for example, if I ’m, if I ’m havinga week where I ’m just really struggling with either stuff ADHD wise
or mental health wise, I think, um just knowing that, like my team
understands that like there ’sa -Im i g h th a v ea ﬂuctuation to my
workﬂow but recognizing that I ’m not like intentionally dropping the
ball or anything
Other staff corroborated this need for mental health acceptance
stating while they acknowledge some compassion exists, they often
feel it lacks genuineness, “Sometimes it feels like lip service. But
yeah luckily, I ’ve had some really understanding colleagues, and
I’ve seen a lot of people being understanding, but sometimes I do
think that there ’s a limit to that. ”
Provide Faculty Training and Professional Development
In addition to recommendations focused on mental health, faculty/
staff and students also prioritized training, professional development,
and information-sharing about neurodiversity. Almost all of the
faculty, staff, and students felt that there was value in incorporating
topics of neurodiversity on campus (97% faculty, 89% students).
Training on neurodiversity was considered bene ﬁcial for day-to-day
work by 89% of all faculty and staff. For the faculty and staff that
work directly with students, 96% would like more information
and/or professional development about providing supports for
neurodivergent students.
Multiple participants emphas ized that they felt becoming
a supportive campus meant educating faculty on neurodiversity
and improving inclusive pedagogy and practices. One student
shared, “So I think a neurodiversity supportive campus would be
like more training for professors to understand neurodiversity. ”
Other recommendations included, “professors need training on
how to differentiate learning ”and“educate faculty on how they
can do better. ”
Faculty agreed with students regarding fostering a more inclusive
campus through faculty learning and identi ﬁed a need for a shared
framework for inclusive practices such as UDL. One faculty member
recommended the university increase inclusive pedagogy and
practices to help faculty support neurodivergent students: “I think
somehow making it standard practice for faculty to provide different
ways for people to do their work ”should be a priority. Elaborating
on the desire to educate faculty on neurodiversity to become an
inclusive campus, other faculty speci ﬁcally spoke on their desire toTable 7
Open-Ended Response: Suggestions for Valuing Neurodivergent Faculty/Staff and Students
Role Example quote
Faculty “Provide explanations of what types of accommodations are possible. Do a better job of creating a safe space to share these experiences
without fear of judgment or job security. ”
Faculty “Build centers and satellites to include a neurodiverse population, incorporating universal design for learning. ”
Faculty “Start designing inclusive workplaces and policies, start hiring more staff and faculty who are neurodiverse, representation matters, Design an
department to start overhauling curriculum and workspaces/policies for neurodiverse students and staff. ”
Student “Providing more robust mental health services. ”
Student “Professors need training on how to differentiate learning. ”
Student “Create true quiet places, provide stimming tools, listen to students when they have issues in class and aren ’t being truly heard, educate
faculty on how they can do better for their students. ”
Faculty “More staff for equity and inclusion efforts. ”
Faculty “Support groups, mentorship opportunities, dedicated sensory-friendly spaces, programming to not only increase awareness of neurodiversity
but to encourage concrete improvements in the ways we support neurodiverse members of the (university) community. ”10 ACCARDO, BOMGARDNER, RUBINSTEIN, AND WOODRUFF

see more UDL. One faculty member expressed frustration with the
lack of UDL adoption:
one of our strategic action plan items for the (diversity, equity and
inclusion initiative) that we ’re supposed to be doing is developing like
a sense of UDL like universal design. Nothing ever happens for it,
though. I think the biggest like- ﬁrst and foremost thing we would need
here is like mandatory faculty development.
Center Neurodiversity in Diversity and Equity Initiatives
Building on recommendations for professional development,
neurodivergent faculty felt the lack of implementation of UDL
reﬂected a larger need for faculty training on diversity and equity in
general and expressed a desire for neurodiversity to be centered in
DEI initiatives along with race and lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender, and queer initiatives:
but the faculty and staff are way behind and it ’s not just for
neurodiversity. I mean it ’s for like racial issues and lesbian, gay,
bisexual, transgender, and queer stuff, and like just in a general sense of
you know, social justice kind of things. Our faculty and staff are behind
the times for sure.
Another faculty member felt the need for increased education
was important; however, it was not enough. They suggested creating
a more inclusive campus by ﬁxing what they perceive as a lack of
faculty/staff willingness to commit to equity and/or ability to put
learning into action.
if supervisors and professors and the like are well trained, that ’s really
important, but not just the training part of it, they also have to be able
to actually implement the things that they have learned in training. Um,
because I found that I think a lot of people have really good intentions
but might not have the resources or the time or the energy to be able to
actually like do certain things.
Pulling together a need to center neurodiversity within campus
diversity and equity initiatives and UDL, one faculty member
recommended, “build centers and satellites to include a neurodiverse
population, incorporating Universal Design for Learning. ”Another
professional staff member recommended “more staff for (expanding
existing) equity and inclusion efforts. ”
Focus group and interview participants also shared ideas for
strengthening neurodiversity culture and for new neurodiversity-
afﬁrming supports. In terms of fostering neurodiversity culture,
students mentioned the importance of working to dispel myths and
misinformation surrounding neurodiversity, exploring the history of
neurodiversity and disability cultures, representing disability culture
more strongly on campus (similar to other diversity groups), and
discussing the strengths of neurodiversity.
Expand Neurodiversity Speci ﬁc Supports
In terms of new supports and insights for building neurodiversity
culture, ideas varied and spanned across providing transparency of
access to accommodations, af ﬁrming neurodivergent faculty, increasing
sensory-friendly environments and events, and valuing the voices
of neurodivergent campus community members.
In connection to accommodations access, students suggested
being transparent about who can ask for accommodations on campus.Similarly, one faculty member shared, “provide explanations of what
types of accommodations are possible. Do a better job of creating a
safe space to share these experiences without fear of judgment or job
security. ”Faculty and staff further prioritized a need for ﬂexibility
and transparency within their departments as a means to create more
inclusive workplaces, along with concrete recommendations to
increase neurodiversity culture through a neurodiversity mentor-
ship program for faculty and staff, and university human resource
provided neurodiversity training.
Suggestions related to programs and curriculum included student
requests to incorporate neurodiversity culture and perspectives in
coursework and conversations. In connection to attending events,
faculty and staff suggested creating a buddy system for attending
new or unfamiliar events on campus. One student shared, “create
true quiet places, provide stimming tools, listen to students when
they have issues in class and aren ’t being truly heard. ”Student
environmental recommendations included a dedicated hangout
space and (more) sensory-friendly rooms around campus.
Recommendations were also provided in support of the newly
launched university neurodiversity cultural center. A faculty member
suggested more ﬂexible scheduling for existing center programming
so that scheduling con ﬂicts would not become an issue. Another
faculty member suggested the center develop neurodiversity training
modules for all faculty and staff on campus. Finally, a staff member
suggested increasing the visibility of the center by incorporating the
center into large campus events, such as graduation ceremonies.
Finally, faculty, staff, and students shared ideas for bringing
expertise to the university to help raise awareness and knowledge
about neurodiversity. Recommendations included valuing neurodi-
vergent people working and writing from a neurodiversity paradigm,
speaking directly to neurodivergent people on campus, and reaching
out to key people on campus well-versed in neurodiversity. Students
recommended encouraging self-advocates at the university to
share their ideas on campus, increasing support for social media self-
advocates, and welcoming visiting self-advocates working in the
neurodiversity paradigm as experts.
Discussion
Our primary aim was to gain an understanding of campus
perspectives and priorities around neurodiversity initiatives on
campus. Eliciting and analyzing survey and interview data provided
information for improving neurodiversity af ﬁrming policies and
practices on our university af ﬁliated campuses and for recognizing
systemic disability and diversity issues, such as stigma surrounding
neurodivergence, in the broader ﬁeld of higher education. With
the understanding that neurodiversity is a valuable part of society,
all members of a campus community bene ﬁt when neurodivergent
experiences are understood and when ability differences are
recognized as diversity and as one of many intersectional identities
to be recognized and valued (see Shmulsky & Gobbo, 2019 ).
We focused our discussion of our ﬁndings around the participant
shared priorities of centering neurodiversity in DEI initiatives,
expanding neurodiversity speci ﬁc supports, expanding mental
health and wellness supports, and increasing professional develop-
ment around neurodiversity.VALUING NEURODIVERSITY ON CAMPUS 11

Neurodiversity and DEI Initiatives
Beginning with a focus on identity, it was important to note
that more students than faculty and staff openly embraced their
own neurodivergent identity. Despite identifying as neurodivergent,
only 38% of faculty (compared to 68% of students) reported being
comfortable identifying as neurodivergent on campus. This may be
because neurodivergence is not usually viewed as a valuable cultural
identity (see Hughes, 2016 ) and stigma surrounding brain-based
differences is still widely prevalent ( Gillespie-Lynch et al., 2021 ).
Additionally, most participants reported a lack of accessible
attitudes, policies, and environments on campus (60% faculty/staff,
59% students) and reported experiencing or witnessing inequities
toward neurodivergent people on campus (60% of students, 57%
of faculty/staff). This lack of accessibility may lead to students,
faculty, and staff choosing to camou ﬂage their neurodivergence
in an attempt to pass as neurotypical ( Hull et al., 2017 ). This is of
concern as camou ﬂaging has been linked to increased mental health
conditions including anxiety and negative feelings of self ( Hull
et al., 2017 ).
Neurodivergent participants also noted confusion around
identifying with the terms disabled versus neurodivergent. This is
a notable implication for DEI campus initiatives, as an important
part of DEI work is fostering an appreciation and understanding
of differing and intersecting identities. On college campuses,
neurodiversity can be an important part of cultural identity when
supported by the work of DEI and dedicated neurodiversity cultural
centers ( Kuder et al., 2021 ;Dwyer et al., 2023 ). Campus-wide
education about neurodiversity emerges as essential to support all
campus community members in recognizing that neurodiversity and
disability coexist ( den Houting, 2019 ;Hughes, 2016 ).
Neurodiversity Speci ﬁc Supports
Second, many students, faculty, and staff provided a strength-
based perspective in their shared perspectives of neurodiversity, as
well as the desire to build neurodiversity and disability culture on
our campus. This may be an indication that the university ’s actions to
situate neurodiversity within our DEI campus initiatives are making
a positive impact. Building on this foundation, recommendations
emerge for universities to increase neurodiversity speci ﬁc support.
Dwyer et al. (2023) described the importance of recognizing
neurodiversity initiatives within broader DEI initiatives for many
reasons, including to help build a stronger neurodiversity culture and
to guide the development of neurodiversity speci ﬁc accommodations
and supports. In our study, only 26% of students reported being
ofﬁcially registered to receive accommodations. This is concerning
because almost half (46%) of neurodivergent students indicated that
they also identi ﬁed as disabled, with 30% of neurodivergent and
disabled students reporting a mental health condition. The process
for formally receiving accommodations as a student in higher
education is often dif ﬁcult ( Marshak et al., 2010 ), and may be a
barrier for students who could bene ﬁt from more robust access to
individualized accommodations. For some neurodivergent students,
obstacles to their college success include factors such as mental
health conditions, dif ﬁculty with study skills, and worrying about
their college professors ( Kuder et al., 2021 ). Understanding these
factors and providing accommodations that help remove some of
these barriers could allow students to focus more on their academicstrengths and be more successful in their postsecondary endeavors.
University accommodations designed to meet the preferences of
those with brain-based differences could help students feel that their
identities are being acknowledged and that their neurodivergent
strengths are being recognized.
Mental Health and Wellness
Third, the frequent mention of mental health and wellness by
faculty, staff, and students warrants ongoing attention. While half
of all participants were satis ﬁed with the mental health services they
personally received (50% satis ﬁed), an equal number of students,
faculty, and staff reported university mental health and wellness
services to be lacking. McMorris et al. (2019) found that
neurodivergent students utilized mental health services at a much
higher rate than the general population but often encountered barriers
accessing services, such as ﬁnding the process, to be overwhelming.
This makes sense considering anxiety and depression are two of the
most frequent mental health conditions reported among neurodi-
vergent populations ( Gelbar et al., 2014 ). Perhaps the process of
obtaining mental health services prevents some neurodivergent
students, faculty, and staff from successfully receiving mental health
and wellness support on campus. The high rates of suicidal ideations
among neurodivergent student populations ( Jackson et al., 2018 )
creates a sense of urgency for higher education systems to meet the
mental health and wellness needs of neurodivergent populations.
Professional Development
Finally, a need for professional development with an emerging
emphasis on UDL was spotlighted by faculty and staff throughout
the survey, focus groups, and interviews. Almost all (89%) of
faculty and staff felt training on neurodiversity would be bene ﬁcial,
and 96% of all faculty and staff wanted more information about how
to support neurodivergent students. While students were not aware
of UDL speci ﬁcally, they did provide feedback on faculty needing
increased training on understanding neurodivergent learners. It
seemed that UDL was a particularly important aspect of training,
and that faculty and staff considered UDL to be bene ﬁcial for
neurodivergent students. This aligns with the work of Spaeth and
Pearson (2023) , who found that utilizing UDL in classes decreased
the necessity for students to disclose their disabilities and created
more ﬂexible classroom environments for all students via practices
such as recognizing student strengths, reconceptualizing mandatory
attendance policies, being ﬂexible and giving choices, avoiding
using group work as the primary form of student engagement, and
considering the sensory aspects of their classroom spaces.
Moreover, it seems that UDL is considered bene ﬁcial by those
who received training in UDL practices as reported in the higher
education literature ( Nachman, 2022 ;Waisman et al., 2023 ). For
example, Nachman (2022) found that faculty completing a course
focused on inclusive practices and UDL reported increased readiness
to teach autistic college students. Similarly, Waisman et al. (2023)
found that 80% of faculty participating in UDL training developed
plans for their classes that incorporated UDL strategies and 64% of
those participants went on to implement those practices. Professional
development on UDL may lead to increased use of UDL practices
and to increased valuing of neurodiversity on campus.12 ACCARDO, BOMGARDNER, RUBINSTEIN, AND WOODRUFF

Implications
Findings from the present study warrant further research as well
as practical considerations around how disability and neurodiversity
are understood and valued by institutions of higher education.
In terms of identity, the ﬁnding that a majority of neurodivergent
students in the present study do not identify as disabled and do
not apply for or receive of ﬁcial accommodations implies a need
to reconsider the traditional practice of providing student supports
primarily through university disability service centers. Traditional
systems of education that address ability differences by identifying
and remediating de ﬁcits through a needs model may prohibit students
from developing a positive sense of identity ( Shmulsky et al., 2021 ).
The reported lack of accessible policies, attitudes, and environ-
ments on campus may suggest that neurodivergent people do not
feel supported within their colleges and departments to disclose their
neurodivergent identities ( Mellifont, 2023 ). Targeted initiatives
such as book studies around neurodiversity in the workplace, human
resources provided training around neurodiversity, or campus-wide
identity af ﬁrming initiatives including faculty and staff af ﬁnity
groups are recommended. The campus community may bene ﬁt from
inviting neurodivergent people to work within participatory projects
focused on neurodiversity, as well as disclosure by neurodivergent
campus leaders as role models to build neurodiversity culture.
Beyond not identifying as disabled, neurodivergent students may
choose not to use university disability services centers for a myriad
of reasons warranting further research including barriers faced
by a cumbersome process, not feeling accommodations have met
their needs in the past, wanting a fresh start as a college student free
of stigma and discrimination, not perceiving existing available
accommodations as valuable, and not needing accommodations.
For students and faculty that did identity as disabled in the present
study, the most commonly reported disability was a mental health
condition. To support neurodivergent students, faculty, and staff,
higher education institutions may bene ﬁt from rethinking siloed
practices related to mental health, for example, establishing set time
for mental health and wellness of ﬁces to collaborate with DEI of ﬁces
and disability services centers with an aim of forging a wider system
of neurodiversity af ﬁrming practices. Findings from the present study
also warrant further research into the faculty-reported connection
between student mental health needs and their own mental health
needs as well as how wellness support is provided to university
faculty and staff. Establishing a transparent process to obtain mental
health supports, as well as designated counselors who understand
neurodivergence and are available to build consistent relationships
with neurodivergent students they work with, are also recommended.
Further, the ﬁnding that a majority of neurodivergent faculty/staff
and a large percentage of neurodivergent students de ﬁne neurodi-
versity as a positive term yet mask their neurodivergence on campus
in the present study suggests ongoing stigma surrounding neurodi-
vergence as a continuing systemic issue in higher education (e.g.,
Dwyer et al., 2023 ). University initiatives to dismantle bias, stigma,
and related incidences of discrimination should be reviewed
for inclusion of topics of ableism, neurodiversity, and positive
representations of neurodiversity culture. In general, it is recom-
mended that universities take an intersectional approach to supporting
student identity, centering neurodiversity among other identities
within DEI, wellness, and af ﬁnity initiatives ( Shmulsky et al., 2021 ).As noted by participants in the present study, supporting
neurodiversity on campus requires faculty/staff commitment to
equity. Marchiondo et al. (2023) found that faculty working with
strong DEI-focused academic leaders are more likely to recognize
bias and stigma, and to support institutional diversity. In terms of
faculty/staff recruitment and onboarding, ﬁndings from the present
study suggest a need to train human resource departments to meet the
needs of neurodivergent candidates and employees and to provide
neurodiversity training to new hires and university leaders.
A primary takeaway from the present study is the need to
recognize and value neurodiversity culture (see Gobbo & Shmulsky,
2019 ). Participants shared the desire for neurodiversity culture to
be recognized on campus, for example, through focused centers,
initiatives, and groups. Despite the increase in neurodivergent college
students, there remains a dearth of neurodiversity cultural centers
within higher education institutions. Such centers differ from
accessibility services and align more closely with cultural centers
for other marginalized groups ( Dwyer et al., 2023 ). The broader
higher education community may bene ﬁt from forging participatory
neurodiversity partnerships across universities routinely engaging as
neurodiverse scholars and students to share what works on campus,
for example, sharing tips for forming antistigma initiatives and/or
steps taken to form and strengthen neurodiversity cultural centers.
Implications for the broader ﬁeld of higher education include
consideration of campus-wide frameworks for improving and
developing policies and procedures around disability and diversity
(such as UDL). While it is up to individual institutions of higher
education to consider how to recruit and meet the needs of diverse
student populations, moving beyond providing traditional academic
accommodations such as extended time on tests to recognizing
ability differences as natural human variation to be valued and
supported with universally designed and specialized supports
emerges as essential. First step recommendations include providing
professional development around neurodiversity and UDL open to
all campus community members, for example, through neurodi-
vergent speaker series and forming working groups to assess the
accessibility of workspaces/classroom environments and courses.
Limitations
We recognize that our roles af ﬁliated with the university division
of DEI and our commitment to valuing intersectional identities
including neurodiversity may have biased our ﬁndings. In terms of
demographics, faculty, staff, and students were predominantly White
college educated women, groups not necessarily representative of the
wider neurodivergent community. We did not maintain demographic
data speci ﬁc to individual interview participants which could have
provided factors of positionality around shared quotations. Further,
this study only captured those both willing to self-identify as
neurodivergent and willing to participate in research and may not
represent the larger group of neurodivergent students and faculty/
staff. Additionally, graduating students were limited in their access
to follow-up interviews conducted in the subsequent academic year.
Comfort level regarding neurodi vergent identity, disclosure,
and self-acceptance ranges signi ﬁcantly from full disclosure to
full masking. The nature of this research alone suggests some
neurodivergent people may not have chosen to participate and as
such the results shared do not re ﬂect all neurodivergent campus
community members. Finally, combining participant data acrossVALUING NEURODIVERSITY ON CAMPUS 13

multiple campuses allowed us to amplify collective voices but
limited our reporting of data speci ﬁc to different university af ﬁliated
campus communities. Results may not be generalizable to other
college campuses. For future studies, focusing on just one campus or
separating data by each campus may be bene ﬁcial.
Conclusion
The present study reports upon the perspectives of neurodivergent
university students, faculty, and staff around neurodiversity. Overall,
students, faculty, and staff reported familiarity with neurodiversity
and de ﬁned neurodiversity from a strength perspective. Notable
ﬁndings for faculty/staff include that only 37% have a comfort
level disclosing their neurodiversity and only 35% are satis ﬁed with
the support they receive on campus. Notable ﬁndings for students
include that of the roughly half that identify as both neurodivergent
and disabled, 30% report a mental health condition, and only 26%
receive formal accommodations.
Emerging from this study is the need to prioritize college/university
initiatives that establish neurodiversity cultural centers on university
campuses, situate neurodiversity in DEI initiatives, simplify the
process to receive neurodiversity af ﬁrming accommodations and
supports, expand supports including those for mental health, and
increase professional development around neurodiversity. Also
emerging from this study is a need to value and prioritize the
voices of our neurodivergent campus community through ongoing
participatory research with students, faculty, and staff that takes
a social justice, strength-based lens.
References
Accardo, A. L., Bean, K., Cook, B., Gillies, A., Edgington, R., Kuder, S. J., &
Bomgardner, E. M. (2019). College access, success, and equity for students
on the autism spectrum. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders ,
49(12), 4877 –4890. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-019-04205-8
Anderson, A. H., Stephenson, J., & Carter, M. (2017). A systematic literature
review of the experiences and supports of students with autism spectrum
disorder in post-secondary education. Research in Autism Spectrum
Disorders ,39,3 3–53.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rasd.2017.04.002
Austin, R. D., & Pisano, G. P. (2017). Neurodiversity as a competitive
advantage. Harvard Business Review ,95(3), 96 –103.https://hbr.org/2017/
05/neurodiversity-as-a-competitive-advantage
Bolourian, Y., Zeedyk, S. M., & Blacher, J. (2018). Autism and the
university experience: Narratives from students with neurodevelopmental
disorders. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders ,48(10), 3330 –
3343. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-018-3599-5
Burgstahler, S., & Russo-Gleicher, R. J. (2015). Applying universal design
to address the needs of postsecondary students on the autism spectrum.
Journal of Postsecondary Education and Disability ,28(2), 199 –212.
https:// ﬁles.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/EJ1074670.pdf
Cassidy, S. A., Nicolaidis, C., Davies, B., Rosa, S. D. R., Eisenman, D.,
Onaiwu, M. G., Kapp, S. K., Kripke, C. C., Rodgers, J., & Waisman, T. C.
(2020). An expert discussion on autism in the COVID-19 pandemic. Autism
in Adulthood: Challenges and Management ,2(2), 106 –117.https://doi.org/
10.1089/aut.2020.29013.sjc
Chiang, E. S. (2020). Disability cultural centers: How colleges can move
beyond access to inclusion. Disability & Society ,35(7), 1183 –1188. https://
doi.org/10.1080/09687599.2019.1679536
Corbin, J., & Strauss, A. (2015). Basics of qualitative research: Techniques
and procedures for developing theory . Sage Publications.
Cox, B. E., Edelstein, J., Brogdon, B., & Roy, A. (2021). Navigating
challenges to facilitate success for college students with autism. TheJournal of Higher Education ,92(2), 252 –278. https://doi.org/10.1080/
00221546.2020.1798203
Cox, B. E., Thompson, K., Anderson, A., Mintz, A., Locks, T., Morgan,
L., Edelstein, J., & Wolz, A. (2017). College experiences for students
with autism spectrum disorder: Pers onal identity, public disclosure, and
institutional support. Journal of College Student Development ,58(1),
71–87.https://doi.org/10.1353/csd.2017.0004
den Houting, J. (2019). Neurodiversity: An insider ’s perspective. Autism:
An International Journal of Research and Practise ,23(2), 271 –273.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1362361318820762
Dwyer, P., Mineo, E., Mifsud, K., Lindholm, C., Gurba, A., & Waisman,
T. C. (2023). Building neurodiversity-inclusive postsecondary campuses:
Recommendations for leaders in higher education. Autism in Adulthood:
Challenges and Management ,5(1), 1 –14.https://doi.org/10.1089/aut
.2021.0042
Fritzgerald, A. (2020). Antiracism and universal design for learning:
Building expressways to success . CAST Professional Publishing.
Gelbar, N. W., Smith, I., & Reichow, B. (2014). Systematic review of articles
describing experience and supports of individuals with autism enrolled
in college and university programs. Journal of Autism and Developmental
Disorders ,44(10), 2593 –2601. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-014-2135-5
Gillespie-Lynch, K., Bublitz, D., Donachie, A., Wong, V., Brooks, P. J., &
D’Onofrio, J. (2017). “For a long time our voices have been hushed ”:
Using student perspectives to develop supports for neurodiverse college
students. Frontiers in Psychology ,8, Article 544. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fpsyg.2017.00544
Gillespie-Lynch, K., Daou, N., Obeid, R., Reardon, S., Khan, S., &
Goldknopf, E. J. (2021). What contributes to stigma towards autistic
university students and students with other diagnoses? Journal of Autism
and Developmental Disorders ,51(2), 459 –475. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10803-020-04556-7
Gobbo, K., & Shmulsky, S. (2019). Should neurodiversity culture in ﬂuence
how instructors teach. Academic Exchange Quarterly ,23(4), 12 –17.
https://www.rapidintellect.com/AEQweb/ed-5971.pdf
Higher Education Opportunity Act of 2008. Pub. L. No. 110-315 (2008).
Hughes, J. M. (2016). Increasing neurodiversity in disability and social
justice advocacy groups . Autistic Self Advocacy Network. https://autistica
dvocacy.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/06/whitepaper-Increasing-Neuro
diversity-in-Disability-and-Social-Justice-Advocacy-Groups.pdf
Hull, L., Petrides, K. V., Allison, C., Smith, P., Baron-Cohen, S., Lai, M. C., &
Mandy, W. (2017). “Putting on my best normal ”:S o c i a lc a m o u ﬂaging
in adults with autism spectrum conditions. Journal of Autism and
Developmental Disorders ,47(8), 2519 –2534. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10803-017-3166-5
Jackson, S. L. J., Hart, L., Brown, J. T., & Volkmar, F. R. (2018). Brief
report: Self-reported academic, social, and mental health experiences of
post-secondary students with autism spectrum disorder. Journal of Autism
and Developmental Disorders ,48(3), 643 –650. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10803-017-3315-x
Jansen, D., Petry, K., Ceulemans, E., Noens, I., & Baeyens, D. (2017).
Functioning and participation problems of students with ASD in higher
education: Which reasonable accommodations are effective? European
Journal of Special Needs Education ,32(1), 71 –88.https://doi.org/10.1080/
08856257.2016.1254962
Kapp, S. K. (2020). Introduction. In S. K. Kapp (Ed.), Autistic community
and the neurodiversity movement: Stories from the frontline (pp. 1 –19).
Springer Singapore. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-13-8437-0_1
Kuder, S. J., Accardo, A. L., & Bomgardner, E. M. (2020). Mental health
and university students on the autism spectrum: A literature review.
Review Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders ,8, 421 –435.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40489-020-00222-x
Kuder, S. J., Accardo, A. L., & Woodruff, J. (2021). College success for
students on the autism spectrum: A neurodiversity perspective . Routledge.
https://doi.org/10.4324/978100344345214 ACCARDO, BOMGARDNER, RUBINSTEIN, AND WOODRUFF

Mace, R. (1997). What is universal design? The Center for Universal Design
at North Carolina State University ,19, Article 2004.
Marchiondo, L. A., Verney, S. P., & Venner, K. L. (2023). Academic leaders ’
diversity attitudes: Their role in predicting faculty support for institutional
diversity. Journal of Diversity in Higher Education ,16(3), 323 –332.
https://doi.org/10.1037/dhe0000333
Marshak, L., Van Wieren, T., Ferrell, D. R., Swiss, L., & Dugan, C. (2010).
Exploring barriers to college student use of disability services and
accommodations. Journal of Postsecondary Education and Disability ,
22(3), 151 –165. https:// ﬁles.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/EJ906688.pdf
McLeod, J. D., Meanwell, E., & Hawbaker, A. (2019). The experiences of
college students on the autism spectrum: A comparison to their neurotypical
peers. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders ,49(6), 2320 –2336.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-019-03910-8
McMorris, C. A., Baraskewich, J., Ames, M. A., Shaikh, K. T., Ncube, B. L., &
Bebko, J. M. (2019). Mental health issues in post-secondary students with
autism spectrum disorder: Experiences in accessing services. International
Journal of Mental Health and Addiction ,17(3), 585 –595.https://doi.org/10
.1007/s11469-018-9988-3
Mellifont, D. (2023). Ableist ivory towers: A narrative review informing
about the lived experiences of neurodivergent staff in contemporary higher
education. Disability & Society ,38(5), 865 –886. https://doi.org/10.1080/
09687599.2021.1965547
Merriam, S. B., & Tisdell, E. J. (2016). Qualitative research: A guide to
design and implementation . Jossey-Bass.
Nachman, B. R. (2022). Preparing future faculty to more inclusively teach
autistic college students: Examining an inclusive teaching professional
development course. International Journal on Teaching and Learning in
Higher Education ,33(3), 306 –318. http://www.isetl.org/ijtlhe/
Nuske, A., Rillotta, F., Bellon, M., & Richdale, A. (2019). Transition to
higher education for students with autism: A systematic literature review.
Journal of Diversity in Higher Education ,12(3), 280 –295.https://doi.org/
10.1037/dhe0000108
Peña, E. V., Gassner, D., & Brown, K. R. (2020). Autistic-centered program
development and assessment practices (Practice Brief). Journal of
Postsecondary Education and Disability ,33(3), 233 –240.
Peña, E. V., Stapleton, L. D., & Schaffer, L. M. (2016). Critical perspectives
on disability identity. New Directions for Student Services ,2016 (154),
85–96.https://doi.org/10.1002/ss.20177
Price, M., Salzer, M. S., O ’Shea, A., & Kerschbaum, S. L. (2017). Disclosure
of mental disability by college and university faculty: The negotiation
of accommodations, supports, and barriers. Disability Studies Quarterly ,
37(2).https://doi.org/10.18061/dsq.v37i2.5487
Robertson, S. M. (2009). Neurodiversity, quality of life, and autistic adults:
Shifting research and professional focuses onto real-life challenges.
Disability Studies Quarterly ,30(1), 2 –19.https://doi.org/10.18061/dsq
.v30i1.1069
Rose, D., & Meyer, A. (2002). Teaching every student in the digital age:
Universal design for learning . Association for Supervision and Curriculum
Development.
Saldaña, J. (2016). The coding manual for qualitative researchers (3rd ed.).
Sage Publications.Sarrett, J. C. (2018). Autism and accommodations in higher education:
Insights from the autism community. Journal of Autism and Developmental
Disorders ,48(3), 679 –693. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-017-3353-4
Scheef, A., Caniglia, C., & Barrio, B. L. (2020). Disability as diversity:
Perspectives of institutions of higher education in the US. Journal of
Postsecondary Education and Disability ,33(1), 49 –61.
Scheerer, N. E., Aime, H., Boucher, T., & Iarocci, G. (2020). The association
between self-reported camou ﬂaging of autistic traits and social competence
in nonautistic young adults. Autism in Adulthood: Challenges and
Management ,2(4), 298 –306. https://doi.org/10.1089/aut.2019.0062
Shmulsky, S., & Gobbo, K. (2019). Autism support in a community college
setting: Ideas from intersectionality. Community College Journal of
Research and Practice ,43(9), 648 –652.https://doi.org/10.1080/10668926
.2018.1522278
Shmulsky, S., Gobbo, K., Donahue, A., & Klucken, F. (2021). Do
neurodivergent college students forge a disability identity? A snapshot and
implications. Journal of Postsecondary Education and Disability ,34(1),
53–63.https://www.ahead.org/professional-resources/publications/jped
Spaeth, E., & Pearson, A. (2023). A re ﬂective analysis on neurodiversity and
student wellbeing: Conceptualizing practical strategies for inclusive
practice. Journal of Perspectives in Applied Academic Practice ,11(2),
109–120. https://doi.org/10.56433/jpaap.v11i2.517
Teddlie, C., & Tashakkori, A. (2009). Foundations of mixed methods
research: Integrating quantitative and qualitative approaches in the social
and behavioral sciences . Sage Publications.
Van Hees, V., Moyson, T., & Roeyers, H. (2015). Higher education
experiences of students with autism spectrum disorder: Challenges, bene ﬁts
and support needs. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders ,45(6),
1673 –1688. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-014-2324-2
Waisman, T. C., Williams, Z. J., Cage, E., Santhanam, S. P., Magiati, I.,
Dwyer, P., Stockwell, K. M., Kofner, B., Brown, H., Davidson, D., Herrell,
J., Shore, S. M., Caudel, D., Gurbuz, E., & Gillespie-Lynch, K. (2023).
Learning from the experts: Evaluating a participatory autism and universal
design training for university educators. Autism: An International Journal
of Research and Practise ,27(2), 356 –370. https://doi.org/10.1177/
13623613221097207
Walker, N. (2021). Neuroqueer heresies: Notes on the neurodiversity paradigm,
autistic empowerment, and postnormal possibilities . Autonomous Press.
Wilke, A. K., Evans, N. J., Varland, C. E., Brown, K. R., & Broido, E. M.
(2019). Access and integration: Perspectives of disabled students living on
campus. The Journal of College and University Student Housing ,46(1),
46–61.https://www.nxtbook.com/nxtbooks/acuho/journal_vol46no1/index
.php#/p/45
Williams, T., & Hagood, A. (2019). Disability, the silent Din diversity.
Library Trends ,67(3), 487 –496. https://doi.org/10.1353/lib.2019.0008
Received May 1, 2023
Revision received December 10, 2023
Accepted January 19, 2024 ▪VALUING NEURODIVERSITY ON CAMPUS 15