“I’m sure Dr Jekyll had misophonia”: A Reflexive Thematic Analysis (RTA) examining lived experience 
patterns in misophonia and the usefulness of Reddit as an online support network.  
 
Paris A Ash1, 2, Rachel Collum2, Rebecca Owens2 
1Bioscience Institute, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK  
2School of Psychology, University of Sunderland, Sunderland, UK  
 
Corresponding author’s email: P.Ash2@ncl.ac.uk  
 
Author contribution  
Paris Arizona Ash conceptualised and de signed  the project. Material preparation, data collection, and analysis 
was conducted by Paris Arizona Ash. The first draft of the manuscript was written as part of Paris Arizona Ash’s 
dissertation, and all authors commented on subsequent versions of the manuscr ipt. All authors read and approved 
the final version of the manuscript.  
 
Acknowledgments  
I would like to express my deepest gratitude to all individuals I have had the pleasure to work with during this 
project. As well as my colleagues that I worked closely with outside this project, Sukhbinder Kumar, Joel Berger, 
and Phillip Gander. All those  involved in this project provided me with extensive personal and professional 
guidance that has informed my scientific career. Furthermore, I would like to express thanks to my family, who 
without their love and support I would not be in the position I am  today.

“I’m sure Dr Jekyll had misophonia”: A Reflexive Thematic Analysis (RTA) examining lived experience 
patterns in misophonia and the usefulness of Reddit as an online support network.  
 
Abstract  
Misophonia, commonly referred to as the ‘hatred of sounds’ disorder (despite lack of official classification  in the 
diagnostic tools ), has largely been investigated with the purpose of establishing a mechanism responsible for the 
disorder. Perpetuating the emergence of two main gaps within the literature; i) lack of large -scale lived experience 
research, and ii) lack of investigation t owards the online support networks that are becoming increasingly utilised 
and available to misophonic individuals. To addre ss these gaps, this project utilised the r/misophonia subreddit as 
a data collection source to examine the presence of lived experience patterns in people with misophonia, and to 
assess the usefulness of online support networks. The dataset included 26 red dit posts (10 from the year 2021, and 
16 from the year 2022) which were randomly sampled using an application programming interface (API), and 
then analysed qualitatively using reflexive thematic analysis (RTA). Overall, the findings portrayed that 
misopho nic individuals share a plethora of lived experiences , and regarding the use of online support networks, 
such as the r/misophonia subreddit, these were represented as largely positive environments (via. Providing 
support, freedom of expression, and a place to vent). However, there were also negative implications of using 
online social networks, for example they can become environments of perpetuating negativity where discussions 
of self -harm, and suicide may take place.  
 
Keywords  
Misophonia, Lived experience, Support groups, Online support networks.  
 
Introduction  
Misophonia, the ‘hatred of sounds’ (Jastreboff & Jastreboff, 2002) is traditionally  characterised by its tendency  
to provoke unwanted negative emotional and/or behavioural responses to typical day -to-day sounds – these are 
termed “trigger sounds” ( Jastreboff & Jastreboff, 2002; Kumar et al., 2014 ). Individuals with misophonia are often 
regarded as sharing a common set of trigger sounds, such as those produced by people eating, drinking, chewing, 
and breathing (Edelstein et al., 2013; Wu et al., 2014). With the common response to these trigger sounds including 
anger, anxiety, irritation, and distress, combined with the overwhelming desire to escape the situation (Edelstein 
et al., 2013; Schröder et al., 2013). Due to the emotional/behavioural impact, and larg ely inescapable nature of 
trigger sounds, there is an established consensus within the literature that misophonia can have extremely 
debilitating effects on an individual’s quality of life – particularly their occupational, familial, and social life 
(Edels tein et al., 2013 ; Schröder et al., 2013 ). Jager et al., (2020) illustrated the impact of misophonia on an 
individual’s mental health, particularly the socially isolating consequences, which in severe cases of misophonia 
have been shown to result in suicide and/or suicide attempts. Coinciding with  Rouw and Erfanian’s, (2018) 
observations that up to 20% of individuals with misophonia have experience suicidal ideation.  
 
Despite the debilitating effects of misophonia, it is still a relatively unexplored disorder and does not have an 
official classification in either the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) or the 
International Classification of Disea ses (ICD). As there are no official diagnostic criteria, the ‘full extent’ to which

misophonia affects and individual’s life cannot accurately be presented to professionals, despite the fact it can be 
seen to have devastating consequences. There have been some attempts to provide some unofficial diagnostic 
criteria for misophonia (Dozier et al., 2017; Schröder et al., 2013 ), based largely on what is currently known about 
misophonia, and the disorders misophonia has been evidenced to co -occur and share comorbidities with. More 
recently, literature has begun to advocate for misophonia to be regarded as its own independent disorder 
(potentially discrete disorder), with Jager et al., (2020) continually describing misophonia as its own psychiatric 
disorder, advocating for further refinement of proposed  diagnostic criteria, to assist in establishing a more accurate 
diagnosis for individuals.  In relation to treatment, tinnitus retraining therapy (TRT; Jastreboff & Jastreboff, 2014 ), 
and cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT; Schröder et al., 2017)  are the ‘conventional treatments’ utilised for 
misophonia. Less conventional treatments, which are growing in recognition, include, relaxation and 
counterconditioning therapy (RCT ), and applied relaxation training  (Dozier, 2015) . Most highly appraised is CBT, 
Jager et al., (2021) demonstrated using a randomised control trial that CBT has both short -term and long -term 
efficacy when treating misophonic individuals.  Potgieter et al., (2019) highlighted that the current treatments for 
misophonia are strong fou ndations for future literature wanting to establish diagnostic tools/methods, and trial 
treatments.  
 
To further inform diagnostic and treatment approaches, research should continue to expand and develop the 
understanding of misophonia.  To date, a large majority of the literature has focused on investigating the causal 
mechanism/s facilitating the disorder, with the ‘auditory processing framework’ in particular dominating the field, 
regarding misophonia as a disorder of sound processing  (Jastreboff & Jastreboff, 2002; Kumar et al., 2014).  This 
framework proposes that trigger sounds cause impaired processing  in the auditory and emotional parts of the brain, 
subsequently driving the negative emotional response exhibited after a trigger event (Kumar et al., 2014, 2017). 
Ash et al., (2023), highlighted the ‘detached’ nature of this framework, specifically its lack of acknowledgement 
of contextual factors – particularly as misophonia has been demonstrated to be a highly socially impacting disorder 
(Edelstein et al., 2013; Schr öder et al., 2013). Coinciding with Dozier et al., (2017) proposal that misophonia 
should  be explored from a multi -sensory perspective. There are a plethora of studies illustrating that contextual 
factors do indeed affect how the brain processes information, such as, social, and non -social signal cues (Molapour 
et al., 2021). A newer emerging perspective attempting to explain misophonia is the ’motor basis for misophonia’, 
primarily proposed by Kumar et al., (2021).  This perspective suggests that misophonic distress may potentially 
link to the action of triggers (and therefore the people that p roduce the trigger sounds) as opposed to the sound 
itself, which they suggest has been misinterpreted as the main trigger source – illustrating the re to be a  social 
element involved in explaining misophonia  (Ash et al., 2023; Kumar et al., 2021) .  
 
Numerous small -scale case studies, typically involving individual case descriptions or a series of case reports, 
have also been used to develop and inform an understanding of misophonia (Dozier, 2015; Dozier & Morrison, 
2017 ). Historically, case study literature has been perceived as lacking rigour and objectivity in comparison to 
other research methods, however, regarding new research areas the use of case studies has been praised as being 
well-suited and useful for exploratory  purposes (Eisenhardt, 1989).  Gilson, (2012) highlighted that health -related 
research fields in particular lack an appreciation for case study approaches, when in actuality  case studies are 
necessary for allowing more in depth and multi -faceted examinations of real -life complex issues. Although lived

experience research has been produced in relation to misophonia typically through using small -sale case studies, 
which while good and rich in information, these experiences are not widely generalisable and/or explored amongst 
a plethora of individuals with  misophonia.  In support of this, Enzler et al., (2021) highlighted that the ‘true’ 
understanding of misophonia from a lived experience standpoint is largely unexplored to date by the literature, 
further implicating that without examining the subjective exp eriences of individuals (on a larger scale), this will 
in turn hinder the progression of psychiatric tools, treatments, causal research, and overall understanding of 
misophonia.  Furthermore, Vázquez et al., (2023) stressed the importance of including lived experience at all stages 
of research development, as they argue that patients can offer ‘specialist expertise’ about their disorder, that most 
researchers cannot, due to them li ving with their disorders daily. This prominently relates to the movement of 
patient and public involvement (PPI) in the design and conduct of health research, as PPI has been demonstrated 
to increase the value, integrity, and overall quality of literature (Biggane et al., 2019).  
 
With the increasing examination of misophonia from a social perspective and the apparent importance of 
examining lived experiences, it is essential to discuss the growing development/utilisation of online forums 
designed to help people with misophonia cope and educate themselves about their disorder. Some prominent 
forums include ‘Allergic to Sound’  (https://allergictosound.com ) which is an online resource developed for people 
living with sensory processing disorder (SPD), misophonia, and misokinesia (‘hatred of movements’; Jaswal et 
al., 2021), and the r/misophonia subreddit forum  (https://www.reddit.com/r/misophonia/ ) which is an online 
support network exclusively for misophonia. Online social networks consist of a set of interconnected individuals 
who interact using computer -based technologies as opposed to face -to-face interactions (American Psychological 
Association , n.d.; APA). As misophonia can have detrimental effects on an individual’s ability to engage socially 
(Edelstein et al., 2013; Schröder et al., 2013), these online social network tools in theory may allow for individuals 
with misophonia to express themsel ves socially . Naslund et al., (2020), highlights that it is not uncommon for 
people with mental health conditions to turn towards online platforms in search for online peer -to-peer 
connections where they can share their experiences and gain advice. There i s overwhelming evidence that online 
support networks provide positive and supportive environments that instil a sense of belonging within individuals 
(Naslund et al., 2016). However, research also illustrates that there can be considerable risks of engagin g in online 
support networks, perhaps most prominent is the risk of creating environments of perpetuating negativity, or 
promoting unhealthy coping mechanisms, such as self -harm (Ziebland & Wyke, 2012). Contrastingly, Highton -
Williamson and Giacco , (2015) indicates that these potential risks may not apply as heavily to people with mental 
health issues as their review found limited evidence for extreme negative engagement.  
 
In retrospect, there a ppears to be  two apparent gaps in misophonia literature: firstly, the lack of large -scale lived 
experience literature, and secondly, the lack of research examining the social networks available to those with 
misophonia. To address these gaps, this project aims to util ise one of, if not, the largest online support networks 
currently being used exclusively for misophonia, this is the r/misophonia subreddit. The researcher decided to 
utilise the r/misophonia subreddit as a source for data  collection as it could arguably provide the ‘raw’ lived 
experience of misophonia, untampered by researcher involvement and therefore maintaining high ecological 
validity. Reddit defines itself as a home for thousands of communities which promote endless c ommunication and 
authentic human interaction. The r/misophonia subreddit was created on the 9th of March 2011, and currently has

62.5k members (as of March 30th, 2023) subscribed to its page. In comparison, the misophonia Facebook support 
network is a closed forum created on the 16th of January 2012, and only has 24.9k members (as of March 30th, 
2023). Thus, illustrating the growth of this platform and its involvement in recording the experiences and 
supporting people with misophonia. Through using the r/misophonia subreddit, this research will examine the 
presence of lived experience patterns between those with misophonia, and the u sefulness of online support 
networks, such as Reddit, therefore addressing these gaps and incorporating PPI , through showcasing  of 
individuals ’ raw lived experiences  at the core of misophonia research.  
 
Method  
Participants  
This dataset was comprised of 26 Reddit posts (10 posts from the year 2021, and 16 from the year 2022) that were 
randomly sampled from the r/misophonia subreddit using an application programming interface (API). Initially, 
100 posts (50 from the year 2021,  and 50 from the year 2022) were collected using the API, though this was 
reduced when applying the exclusion criteria, which was: posts explicitly indicating that the user was under the 
age of 18 -years -old (for example, “I am a 16 -year-old boy with misoph onia” ); and if the post URLs had expired. 
URL expiration typically occurs if the Reddit posts have been removed by the user directly or removed by a 
subreddit moderator, due to violating the r/misophonia subreddit’s rules (see Appendix A). Application of the 
exclusion criteria resulted in 74 posts from the original 100 collected being removed from the analysis. 
Demographic details could not be obtained for this project, due to Reddit being a platform which prioritises its 
users anonymity, and thus has a lar gely anonymous user base.  
 
Materials  
Application Programming Interface (API) – An API is a library of coding functions that allow for a website or 
application to be interacted with. In this project, the API interacted with the subreddit r/misophonia (website) to 
extract Reddit post URLs and d irectly transfer them into an excel file, where they could then be cleaned in 
accordance with the exclusion criteria, and then subjected to analysis.  
 
Methodological approach  
As this project was exploratory in nature, focusing on exploring individuals’ lived experience of misophonia, it 
was organised around three guiding questions: 1. Are there patterns of lived experience between users? 2. How 
can lived experiences in the r/mi sophonia subreddit be utilised to inform the existing literature surrounding 
misophonia? and 3. What is the r/misophonia subreddit being used for?  
 
The posts in this project largely indicate that they have been created by people that have misophonia themselves, 
however posts on this subreddit can be made by anyone that interacts with misophonia to some degree in their 
lives (for example, an individual  may be using the subreddit for a family member with misophonia).  
 
A Reflexive Thematic Analysis (RTA) was used to analyse the data. This is theoretically a flexible method used 
for developing, analysing, and interpreting patterns across a qualitative dataset, and therefore was deemed 
appropriated for use in this project (Braun & Clarke, 2006). The data was analysed using a critical realist

framework, which acknowledges that whilst all users will have differing experiences of the world, they all have 
situated experience of misophonia and using the r/misophonia subreddit platform. The researcher was a 21 -year-
old white cis -gendered woman who d oes not have misophonia but has been a member of the r/misophonia 
subreddit for approximately two years for previous research purposes.  
 
Procedure  
Due to the nature of this project, consent did not need to be obtained, as Reddit data is public domain and according 
to Reddit’s privacy policy users are aware that their posts may be accessed by external sources  
(https://www.reddit.com/policies/privacy -policy ). However, out of consideration, an information sheet (see 
Appendix B) was sent directly to the moderators of the r/misophonia subreddit informing them that the project 
would be taking place and what it entailed. The r/misophonia subreddit moderators respo nded to this information 
sheet, expressing that they were happy for the study to be conducted (thus illustrating a form of consent; see 
Appendix C). This study was granted ethical approval by the Institution’s Research  Ethics Committee (see 
Appendix D).  
 
After receiving a response from the moderators, an API was coded using the programming language Python 
(2009), to extract 100 posts from (specifically their URLs) from the r/misophonia subreddit and store them into a 
singular excel file where they could be  systematically reviewed before including them in the dataset for analysis.  
The API was not coded to exclude any specific topics from the r/misophonia subreddit, the only coded criteria 
was that the posts would be from the years 2021 and 2022, this was to ensure that the dataset was a true 
representation of current topics/issues that were important to individuals with misophonia. The r/misophonia 
subreddit however does have some page rules (see Appendix A), advising users to avoid discussing certain topics,  
such as, suicide, shaming, venting, rudeness etc. Once the URLs were stored into an excel file, systematically 
each URL was opened individually to ensure they had not expired. After cleaning the excel file, 26 Reddit post 
URLs remained, the content of the se posts was then screenshot and transferred into a word document where they 
could be anonymised ready for analysis . 
 
In relation to anonymity issues, Adams (2022) illustrated that one of the major ethical concerns of using data from 
Reddit was that reverse engine searching on ‘Google’ (the copy and pasting of statements into google) could be 
used to obtain the original Reddit post URLs, thus no longer maintain user anonymity. Therefore, to address this 
ethical concern, the feature examples (sentences and words) used to illustrate information in relation to the themes 
in this project have been re -worded only for the purpos e of the write -up – with the original features being used in 
the data analysis stages. Importantly, these re -worded features have been reviewed externally by the project 
supervisor to ensure the meaning of the original features has been maintained, and the refore is still an accurate 
representation of the r/misophonia subreddit and its users. As well as this, the re -words were then typed into 
Google using “r/misophonia [insert quote]”  and if the original URL no longer showed on the first page of Google 
links , the re -word was considered effective and could then be included in the write -up of the project . 
 
 
Data Analysis

For data analysis, this RTA utilised Braun and Clarke’s (2006) six steps of thematic analysis framework. Braun 
and Clarke (2006) highlight that for a thematic analysis to be considered ‘good’ it must maintain transparency to 
its readers, thus the detailed process of each six step is provided below to ensure transparency.  
 
Step 1: Familiarising yourself with your data.  
Once data collection was completed, the researcher spent some time away from the data and revisited it again 
later (specifically one month). This was done to ensure that the Reddit posts were examined using an impartial 
perspective. To familiarise themselv es with the data, the researcher conducted multiple read throughs before 
beginning the analysis. The first read through consisted of the first half (Reddit posts 1 -13) of Reddit posts being 
read and then the second half (Reddit posts 14 -26) – without makin g notes. The second read through oppositely 
consisted of the second half (Reddit posts 14 -26) being read first and then the first half (Reddit posts 1 -13) – again 
without making notes. This was done to ensure that equal attention was applied to all the pos ts, which research 
has stated to be a crucial step when examining qualitative research, as it promotes the use of a standardised 
methodology (Braun & Clarke, 2006; Nowell et al., 2017) . This process was then repeated, this time with the 
researcher making short notes in the margins, these notes demonstrate the researcher’s initial thoughts about the 
data and demonstrate reflexivity.  
 
Step 2: Generating initial codes.  
Next, initial codes were generated by systematically reading the posts and extracting (copy and pasting into a 
separate word document) features, which at this stage in the analysis appeared relevant to the research topic of 
examining the lived experience of misophonia.  During this step, the researcher also began to look for initial 
patterns amongst the features of the Reddit posts.  An example of some features which were coded into the same 
initial code within the current dataset is, “I did some research on that earlier and didn’t turn up too many articles.”, 
“I’ve done some resear ch, and this is what I have gathered.”, and “I’ve spent the last four hours looking at scholarly 
sources and research of experts of misophonia,” are all features which have a pattern of individuals with 
misophonia mentioning seeking to educate themselves f urther about misophonia, thus these features were coded 
under the code ‘Education’.  By the end of step 2, there were 45 initial codes.  
 
Step 3: Searching for themes.  
Once the initial codes were finalised, the next step was to sort the codes into candidate themes  (as defined by 
Braun & Clarke, (2006) ), that were all independent of each other, but similarly related to the projects research 
aims. This was done by cutting out the initial codes and physically mapping them onto a cork board, sectioning 
each area of the cork board for a new candidate theme.  The candidate themes and the corresponding initial codes 
are listed in Appendix E, there were 19 candidate themes in total.  
 
Step 4: Reviewing themes.  
The candidate themes were then examined individually to determine whether they appropriately addressed the 
three research questions; 1. Are there patterns of lived experience between users? 2. How can lived experiences 
in the r/misophonia subreddit be utilised to inform the existing literature surrounding misophonia? and 3. What is 
the r/misophonia subreddit being used for?  This was done in two parts; part one examined the codes and decided

if they were logically related to each theme and then part two examined the full original dataset of 26 Reddit posts 
looking for whether the themes could be effectively applied to the dataset. This review concluded that whilst all 
candidate themes were rel evant there had to be a reduction in the number of themes, therefore this resulted in the 
collation of many candidate themes. The review of these themes formed a final four themes with six subthemes 
in total.  
 
Step 5: Defining and naming themes.  
The aim of this step is to capture the ‘essence’ of what each theme and its corresponding subthemes represent, 
through defining and naming them appropriately. Braun and Clarke (2006) suggested that these names need to be 
concise, punchy, and immediately demonstrate to readers what that theme is about.  See ‘Findings’ section for the 
names and definitions of the themes.  
 
Step 6: Producing the report.  
This step involves the production and write up of the RTA report, see ‘Results’ section.  
 
Results  
An RTA of 26 Reddit posts from the r/misophonia subreddit  revealed four main themes; 1. Characteristics of 
misophonia (containing three subthemes), 2. Effects on relationships (containing three subthemes), 3. Traumatic 
experiences (containing no subthemes), and 4. The use for Reddit (containing no subthemes).  These main themes 
and their subsequent subthemes are displayed in Table 1 below. All themes were generated with the aim to explore 
and address the potential lived experience patterns of misophonia and the usefulness of reddit as a support 
network.  Each main theme and subtheme are discussed in turn, providing quotes to support.  
 
Table 1. Table of themes  
Main Theme  Subtheme  
Theme 1: Characteristics of misophonia  1.1 Triggers  
1.2 Responses  
1.3 Solutions  
Theme 2: Effects on relationships  2.1 Relationship with others  
2.2 Relationship with self  
2.3 Relationship with academia/research  
Theme 3: Traumatic experience  N/A 
Theme 4: The use for Reddit  N/A 
 
Theme 1: Characteristics of misophonia  
This main theme encapsulated the various discussions that occurred between individuals (users) on the 
r/misophonia subreddit, in which they shared information about their personal misophonia characteristics , such 
as “I get paralyzed with anxiety ”, “My biggest trigger is my mam sniffing”, and “My worst trigger is loud noises”. 
These discussions wholly centred around three topics; one topic being the types of triggers users experienced 
misophonic distress to, another topic being the responses users elicited t o their triggers , and the third being the

methods/techniques individuals implemented to help them cope with their misophonia. Thus, the three subthemes 
were generated, 1.1 Triggers, 1.2 Responses, and 1.3 Solutions. Notably, it appeared second nature for users on 
the r/misophonia subreddit to disc uss personal details about their misophonia characteristics with each other, and 
there were many instances in which users directly prompted these types of discussions through the use of 
questioning. For example, “Does anyone experience trigger sounds when they aren’t actually happening?”, “Do 
doorbells trigger anyone?”,  “Anyone else experience this?”,  “Anyone else have thoughts on trigger formation?”, 
and “Does anyone relate to this also?” . The apparent use of questioning illustrates that the r/misophonia is a 
platform where individuals with misophonia feel comfortable to express and voice their various characteristics. 
Furthermore, it suggests that the r/misophonia subreddit is an online platform misophonic individuals utilise to 
seek out other people with misophonia that share similar characteristics – highlighting a desire for relatability 
amongst use rs. 
 
1.1 Triggers  
This subtheme comprised the types of triggers that users on the r/misophonia subreddit associated as 
characteristics of misophonia and personally reported experiencing. Many of the trigger sounds presented in the 
dataset were consistent with the common trigger sounds highlighted in the current misophonia literature – with 
eating related triggers being the most prevalent  in the dataset . Some reoccurring triggers were as follows , “Very 
loud chewers”, “Reflux issues”, “Sticky mouth sounds”, “S and T sounds are  too harsh”, “I get bothered by all 
stimuli”, “Bass sounds”, “Rhythmic ticking”, “Slurping and smacking” , and the list goes on. In relation to lived 
experience, these triggers demonstrate that although people with misophonia may have differing individualised 
sound sensitivities, for example some individuals may perceive repetitive tapping related sounds as more 
triggering/intense than nasal related sounds, there is still a common set of trigger sounds that individuals with 
misophonia are likely to experience  as characteristics of their misophonia – these trigger sounds being largely 
consistent with those presented in the literature.  Thus, illustrating the first pattern of lived experience, that pattern 
being that people with misophonia likely share the lived experience of enduring similar characteristics of 
misophonia – specifically triggers in this instance.  
 
Further to presenting triggers that were consistent with the literature , the dataset also brought forth new triggers 
which have largely been unexplored by misophonia research to date. Most prominently, users discussed 
experiencing auditory hallucinations of their typical triggers – sometimes referred to as “ghost triggers” by users. 
One user stated “sometimes ghost sounds will get stuck in my head… they repeat like an echo each time triggering 
me again. It can last a few minutes or a couple of hours”, with another user adding “I can hallucinate sounds 
through my headphones when they aren’t even happening at all” , and another following up with “Triggers replay 
in my mind anywhere from 30 seconds to 15 -30 minutes” . Parallel to these experiences, individuals with 
misophonia described being fearful of appearing “crazy”  due to experiencing auditory hallucination as a 
characteristic of their misophonia , with statements such as “I feel like normal people will think I’m going crazy 
for hallucinating”  being direct evidence of this. Additionally, this statement illustrates that people with 
misophonia do not regard themselves as "normal people".  In relation to what the r/misophonia subreddit is being 
used for, the nature of the users conversations here arguably demonstrates  that the r/misophonia subreddit is

somewhere that individuals with misophonia can express themselves freely, without the need to apply a filter, and 
without fear of judgement – specifically a fear of being deemed “crazy ”. 
 
Another trigger that became an apparent pattern in the dataset was visual triggers, which although have been 
briefly discussed in the misophonia literature, there is no clear indication of the relationship between misophonia 
and visual information. Instead, visual triggers have been more closely associated with misokinesia. Evidence of 
the presence of visual triggers within the dataset include, “Visual triggers only add to my misophonic distress” , 
“I try so hard, but my visual triggers are just too much to deal with” , and “My trigger intensifies when I can see 
the action of that trigger” . Visual triggers appeared to be a great concern for many misophonic individuals, which 
begs the question as to why research has not investigated this element of misophonia more closely. Especially as 
the involvement of visual information would largely sugge st that misophonia is not solely a disorder of suffering 
from sounds. These new trigger findings (both auditory hallucinations and visual triggers) within this subtheme 
advocate for further exploration of misophonia characteristics, especially if research is to begin establishing an 
accurate symptomology for the diagnostic criteria.  
 
1.2 Responses  
Moving on, this next subtheme investigated the emotional and/or behavioural reactions that users reported 
experiencing in response to their triggers. Users within the dataset consistently portrayed their emotional and/or 
behavioural responses as negative, for example “I am enraged every time I hear triggers”, “I just want to scream 
what is wrong with you”, “That shit is paralyzing!”, “I have to leave immediately or I WILL lash out”, “It just 
feels so inescapable”, and “Intense frustration, anger, and tensio n”. These findings propose that individuals with 
misophonia largely share a similar set of negative emotional/behavioural response characteristics – presenting 
another pattern of lived experience.  
 
A particular statement that stood out in the dataset, due to many users resonating with it , through confirming 
comments, such as “yes I get this!” and ‘upvotes’ , was as follows “Eyes glow red. Intense rage… I’m sure Dr 
Jekyll had misophonia. Sound was the potion… he’d listen then BOOM! Mr Hyde” , referring to the novel the 
‘Strange case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde’ (Stevenson, 1886).  The intention of this novel was to illustrate the duality 
of human nature, particularly through the utilisation of Freud’s (1923)  psychoanalytical structural theory of the 
id, ego, and superego. The character Dr Jekyll is supposed to represent the ego; conscious and rational, acting in 
accordance with the rules of society  (Singh & Chakrabarti, 2008) . Whereas Mr Hyde’s character is designed to 
represent the id; fuelled by his aggressive instincts, with no moral and lack of regard for social norms  (Singh & 
Chakrabarti, 2008) . A conflict between good and bad  (Yildirim, 2020) . Interestingly, this is how many users on 
the r/misophonia subreddit felt best described their response to triggers, as a conflict between good and evil – their 
id and ego – with their id response often winning, for instance  “I just want to punch the person and run away 
haha ” and “I get wildly angry at the person ”. Towards the end of the novel, it is revealed that Dr Jekyll and Mr 
Hyde are in fact the same person, with Dr Jekyll taking a potion which allows him to transform into Mr Hyde. It 
could be deduced that like in the novel, Dr Jekyll slowly loses himself to Mr Hyde (eventually resulting in Dr 
Jekyll’s suicide to stop Mr Hyde), and therefore does this mean tha t individuals with misophonia share this lived 
experience pattern of feeling like they are losing themselves slowly due to their misophonia .

1.3 Solutions  
This subtheme referred to the methods/techniques that users on the r/misophonia subreddit used to best equip 
themselves to cope with their misophonia, with many of these methods being shared as advice/tips between users. 
Some common coping mechanisms detailed throughout the dataset were as follows, “I wear various  types of 
headphone brands”, “Cover my ears with my hands/fingers”, “Remove myself from the situation by going for a 
walk or to another room”, “Take care of your mental health to cope better”, “Use a box fan it is such a necessity”,  
and “White noise… brown noise… pink noise… playing through my headphones” . This sharing of coping 
mechanisms that occurs amongst users on the r/misophonia subreddit, displays that there is an established level 
of support that the subreddit provides to its users. A s well as a shared set of common coping mechanisms (which 
are consistent with the literature) that people with misophonia are likely to engage in to reduce their misophonic 
distress.  
 
A coping mechanism of notable importance that was presented within the dataset was mimicry, as illustrated by 
the following statements “I mimic my mother’s sounds to cope. It helps me feel in control of the situation and 
does an overall good job of bringing down my heart rate. But it probably isn’t the healthiest way to cope, and I 
wouldn’t recommend it as it can be a hard habit to break” , “Mimicking helps, but I would avoid it as people can 
take it really personal” , and “Others think I am crazy and are hos tile towards me when I mimic” . Which is a 
coping behaviour consistent with recent literature which highlighted mimicry to be highly prevalent amongst 
misophonic individuals (Ash et al., 2023). However, a lthough mimicking is being utilised amongst users, it is 
interestingly a behaviour they “would not recommend” , as it is a “bad habit” , and an “unhealthy way to cope”  – 
illustrating that people with misophonia regard mimicry as a maladaptive behaviour. Further to mimicry, users 
also discussed engaging in othe r maladaptive coping mechanisms, for example “Try a primal scream and thrash 
about” , “Mild self -harm to bare it” , “I just want to punch the person and run away haha” , and “I want to jump 
out a window” . Thus, establishing another lived experience pattern that individuals with misophonia are likely to 
engage in maladaptive behaviours to cope. It is essential to note that when referring to the r/misophonia subreddit 
roles, under the ‘No Violence’ rule it states that suicide/suicidal ideation should not be discussed under any 
circumstance and p rovides users with the contact detai ls for a suicide prevention hotline . Meaning  that the 
presence of these suicidal and self -harm statements  within the dataset reflect negatively on the r/misophonia 
subreddit, as it highlights that the subreddit riles are easily violated and therefore the platform is not accurately 
protecting its userbase from exposure to destructive behaviours and thoughts li ke it arguably promises.  
 
Finally, users also shared what they believed to be ‘long -term solutions’ for misophonia on the subreddit. Notably, 
the two main solutions presented were again extremely destructive; one being permanent isolation and the second 
being to become deaf (rangin g from non -permanent self -deafening techniques to permanent deafness). Some 
examples of the desire for isolation were as follows, “The best and only universal solution to misophonia is 
ultimately to isolate” , “I live in a fucking room 24 hours a day… only leaving for the bathroom” , “I have to 
isolate from everything, so I don’t freak out over sound”  and “I’m going to move into the middle of the woods, so 
I don’t have to hear sound” . Alongside this, users also praised the isolating consequences of the coronavirus  
(Covid -19) pandemic, for example “it was a wonderful time”  and “Everything was remote, and when we met up

in person we wore masks, so no one ate, and it was bliss” . Secondly, the desire for deafness is exhibited by the 
following statements, “It is almost enough to wish I were deaf. How can something make me suffer like this?”  
and “I’ve got my headphones on… hoping the volume will make me deaf” . Overall, this subtheme illustrates that 
whilst some of the coping mechanisms for misophonia are  expected and consistent with the literature (such as, 
“Remove myself from the situation …” and “Cover my ears …”), many of the solutions and/or coping mechanisms 
for misophonia are maladaptive/destructive behaviours , and therefore, as this is a prevalent lived experience 
pattern, indicates the importance of research working towards more constructive methods of coping and further 
assessing  the appropriateness of these online support networks, such as Reddit, which arguably promote and/or 
do not protect their users from being exposed to maladaptive/destructive behaviour discussions.  
 
Theme 2: Effects on relationships  
This main theme examined the effects of misophonia on an individual’s relationships, there were three subthemes 
included within this main theme: 2.1 Relationship with others, 2.2 Relationship with self, and 2.3 Relationship 
with academia/research. Some gen eral examples are, “My dad is beginning to resent me due to my misophonia, 
and that hurts me so much” , “I told my mom, she took it personal, and even became very angry with me” , “Crying 
in the bathroom at work is an everyday thing for me” , “The professiona l handling my diagnosis was not well -
versed in misophonia”  and “Research is new and shaky” . In relation to the lived experience patterns indicated 
within this main theme, there was an established consensus amongst users that misophonia has had an overall 
negative effect on their various relationships – with lack of understanding displayed by othe rs (both in a personal 
and academic situation) being a reoccurring complaint from users. In retrospect, this main theme largely 
represented that due to the lack of understanding users received in their personal lives, the r/misophonia subreddit 
was somewhere they could come to freely express themselves, with there being an established level of trust and 
understanding exhibited amongst the r/misophonia subreddit userbase.  
 
2.1 Relationship with others  
This subtheme focused solely on investigating the effects of misophonia on an individual’s personal relationships, 
specifically their familial and occupational relationships (as these were the most prevalent within the dataset). 
Examining familial relation ships first, there was an established consensus amongst users that misophonia had 
negatively impacted their relationships with family/partners, for example “I make my partner tense and stressed 
because I am dramatic about noises that they don’t even notice ”, “My dad is beginning to resent me due to my 
misophonia, and that hurts me so much” , and “My mother has COPD… I love her, but sometimes it is painful to 
be around her” . With users also discussing having experienced a diminished quality of life due to their poor 
familial relationships, as evidenced by the following statement “I wish our diminished quality of life caused by 
our shitty familial relationships could be fixed” . Regarding patterns of lived experience, these findings suggest 
that the majority of individual’s with misophonia have likely experienced a breakdown in their personal 
relationships and potentially  feel that they  lack the ability to foster positive/meaningful relationships.  
 
In relation to users’ occupational relationships, there was again a largely negative portrayal of the effects of 
misophonia on these relationships, for example “It is like working in your absolute worst nightmare” , “Crying in 
the bathroom at work is an everyday thing for me” , and “Since the mask mandate has been lifted and work feels

like my own personal hell, our meetings have food and drink for the teams. I just absolutely cannot do it anymore… 
it’s a multidisciplinary team though so I don’t know what accommodations they can make” . This is consistent 
with t he perspective that personal relationships  are affected by misophonia. However, it is important to discuss 
that there was an instance in which a user described that their fellow colleges have made some active attempts to 
make the work environment more misophonia -friendly. For exampl e, “The two co -workers I’ve became friends 
with eat in the back of the room and I am forever grateful to them”. These findings display contradictory evidence 
to the perspective that people with misophonia are unable to foster good relationships, as when th ere is some level 
of understanding displayed towards the misophonic individual (as shown by the “two co -workers”) there is greater 
possibility for good relationships to form. Thus, highlighting that a potential factor that facilitates the rates of 
which mi sophonia can impact an individual’s relationships is the levels of understanding that people with 
misophonia are met with by others.  
 
Users on the r/misophonia subreddit largely discussed having received low levels of understandings from others 
in their personal lives – especially “loved ones” , such as family members and partners. For example, “My mother 
took it personal and became very angry with me and started making fun of me, that isn’t understanding!” , “No 
matter how much I asked them to stop, no one cared” , and “I asked them not to bring their glass water bottle full 
of ice in my car… it causes anxiety for me… and they just got so m ad and said they weren’t going to come 
anymore” . There were many users that attributed the lack of understating that they received from others as being 
due to “pure ignorance” , with some prominent examples in the dataset being “People are ignorant of their noise 
impact because quite frankly it is not a constant battle for them. It must be pure ignorance” , and “It is easily 
stopped if a person wanted to stop” . In contrast to this perspective, there was another section of users on the 
r/misophonia subreddit that were more empathetic, and attributed the lack of understanding displayed by others 
to the fact that misophonia is a relatively new and difficult disord er to understand currently. For example, “It’s 
difficult to convince people that misophonia is a  legitimate problem and I’m not just being a brat”  – thus, 
presenting an expressed need from users for the diagnostic legitimisation of misophonia. Regarding lived 
experience patterns of misophonia, these findings suggest that people with misophonia are largely met with little 
understanding towards their disorder, and this in turn facilitates their negative relationships.  
 
2.2 Relationship with self  
This subtheme examined the effects of misophonia on users’ perceptions of themselves. Typically, when users 
would refer to themselves in the dataset they would use self -deprecating language, such as “My misophonia leaves 
me feeling guilty and intolerable” , “Just having misophonia makes me feel like a selfish person” , “The guilt piles 
onto me because the only people I snap at are the ones I hold dearest” , and “Misophonia is like a constant 
reminder that I am a burden to everyone I love” . Subsequently, propos ing the narrative that people with 
misophonia see themselves as a “burden” , “intolerable” , “selfish” , as well as exhibiting a level of “guilt”  just 
for merely having the disorder.  These findings within the dataset present that people with misophonia may share 
the lived experience of having a negative self -image (low self -esteem and negative self -regard) as a result of their 
misophonia, as well as undergoing reoccurring feelings of g uilt and selfishness for effecting both the lives of those 
around them as we ll as their own. In relation to the r/misophonia subreddit, these findings demonstrate that the

r/misophonia subreddit is a place where users can ruminate on their negative relationship with themselves – 
perhaps again forming an environment of perpetuating negativity.  
 
2.3 Relationship with academia/research  
This subtheme focused solely on investigating how users felt towards the research that academics have produced 
about misophonia, as well as their personal experiences when engaging with professionals. A prominent finding 
within the dataset was that users o ften questioned the competence of both professionals and research, as 
exemplified by the following “The professional handling my diagnosis was not well -versed in misophonia”, 
“Research is new and shaky”,  “Misophonia is so confusing, especially since there is very little reputable scientific 
literature about it”, and “I hope misophonia awareness increases in the future so we can develop better 
treatments” . These findings demonstrate that users exhibit a lack of trust towards professionals, as well as 
regarding current misophonia research as underdeveloped in comparison to other fields of research ( “new and 
shaky”  and “very little reputable scientific literature” ). In relation to users’ expectations for future research, there 
was a reoccurring hope that litera ture would focus on developing new treatment methods and work towards further 
promoting misophonia awareness. Regarding, users experiences when seeking help from professionals, users 
often detailed that their issues were met with dismissive remarks, for ex ample one user wrote “I mentioned 
misophonia to my ps ychiatrist and he brushed it off reefing to it as a ‘pet peeve’… so I no longer press further… 
I couldn’t talk about the fact that I have a sound related meltdown every day”, and another reported that 
“Professionals did very little testing on my sound sensitivities… focusing more on my social interaction, repetitive 
behaviours, tactile sensitivities etc” . These negative experiences reinforce the lack of trust between professionals 
and users, demonstrating users’ inability to express their ‘true concerns’ to professionals – due to fear of 
judgement and/or lack of regard.  
 
Further to this, users displayed a strong desire to educate themselves about misophonia, using self -education 
techniques, as exemplified by the following “I’ve spent the last four hours looking at scholarly sources and 
research of experts of misophonia”, “I’ve done some research, and this is what I have gathered”, and “If you 
research comorbidity and misophonia it may turn up a few articles to explain” . Demonstrating that whilst 
misophonia research is regarded as somewhat underdeveloped, users are still abl e to utilise the research to develop 
a greater understand of misophonia.  
 
Interestingly, a prominent discussion that occurred between users on the r/misophonia subreddit centred around a 
BBC iPlayer short film about misophonia that was produced by someone that had misophonia themselves. This 
short film received an overwhelming a mount of support, some examples being “This made me so emotional”, “I 
finally feel represented and understood”, and “This film nailed what misophonia is” . The intention of this short 
film was to portray to a lay audience what misophonia is and the daily st ruggles that people go through when 
suffering from this disorder – using both research and the producers own personal experiences of misophonia to 
do so. As users want academia to increase misophonia awareness ( for example, “I hope misophonia awareness 
increases” ), and the short film was intended to display misophonia to a lay audience, this perhaps explains the 
overwhelming positive reactions displayed within the dataset to the short film. As well as presenting a potential

solution to improving misophonic individual’s relationships with academia, through the utilisation of lay audience 
techniques.  
 
Theme 3: Traumatic experience  
This main theme encapsulated the primary factor that users of the r/misophonia subreddit attributed to being the 
cause of their misophonia and/or where their misophonia originated from. This factor being traumatic experiences 
– typically traumatic experien ces that occurred during an individual’s childhood. For example, “Triggers 
definitely have their origins in trauma”, “My triggers are related to sounds that occurred during my abuse”, 
“When my dad would walk towards my room during childhood, I knew to expe ct a punishment… so when my 
partner now enters a room when I don’t expect it I feel myself get worked up, without realising why”, “[heavily 
detailed trauma redacted] I gradually learnt to dread dinner time, there would be verbal tirades, made obvious 
by my  parents silence, eating, and nose blowing… now I will hate mouth and nasal sounds forever”, and “All of 
my triggers can be pin pointed to a stressful time in my life” . To note, some of the specific details of users traumatic 
experiences have been redacted  as they included too many identifying characteristics.  It appeared ‘second nature’ 
within the dataset for users to discuss their traumatic experiences on the r/misophonia subreddit, again illustrated 
through direct questioning, such as “Do people worry about having repressed trauma (childhood mainly) that has 
caused their misophonia?”, and “I have trauma, does anyone else relate?” . Thus, presenting the r/misophonia 
subreddit as a place where individuals with misophonia feel comfortable to express themselve s – even as far as 
discussing personal traumas. In terms of lived experience patterns, these findings suggest that people with 
misophonia may share the lived experience of undergoing a trauma at some point in their lives (potentially their 
childhood), and typically regard these traumas as the causal factors and/or origins of their misophonia.  
 
Theme 4: The use for Reddit  
This main theme focused solely on answering the question ‘what is the r/misophonia subreddit being used for?’. 
There was a common consensus amongst users that the r/misophonia subreddit was a place where users could feel 
understood (which has been demonstr ated previously as something they lack in their personal lives), for example 
“It is hard to be understood when suffering from misophonia… I think that’s why people come to the subreddit 
and try to be nice and supportive” . Regarding users’ feelings towards the r/misophonia subreddit, there was an 
overwhelming amount of praise expressed by users, for example “It is helpful reading your experiences because 
it’s validating. Best of luck, my friends”, “Thank you for all the advice. I am so relieved I found this community; 
everyone has been so helpful and supportive!”, “I was having a breakdown and found this subr eddit. It is such a 
relief to know I am not alone”, and “I need to say thank you. I find comfort in forums like reddit as they help me 
feel I’m no longer  alone” . These findings illustrate that users typically utilise the subreddit to receive, 
“validation”, “help”, “advice”, and a reminder that they are not suffering “alone”  – essentially to receive 
support. In addition to this, users could also be seen as using r/misophonia subreddit as a place to vent, as 
exemplified through the following “Every once and a while it helps me to vent”, and “This is somewhere I can 
vent my frustration” . Furthermore, r/misophonia subreddit is arguably aware of its purpose to provide support and 
a place for users to vent as one of the permanent threads on the platform (that is consistently updated), is the 
“Weekly Venting/Support Thread” . In retrospect, the r/misophonia subreddit represents itself and is considered 
by users throughout the dataset as a safe space for people with misophonia.

General Discussion  
Ultimately , the aim of this project was to utilise the r/misophonia subreddit as a data collection source to examine 
the presence of lived experience patterns in people with misophonia, and to assess the usefulness of online support 
networks, such as Reddit. In rela tion to lived experience, the results demonstrated that misophonic individuals 
share a variety of lived experience patterns with one another, with many of these experiences confirming findings 
currently highlighted within the literature – as well  as presenting new areas of interest for research. Firstly, theme 
1 (‘Characteristics of misophonia’ ) highlighted that people with misophonia  largely endure a shared set of 
common misophonia characteristics (Edelstein et al., 2013; Schröder et al., 2013; Wu et al., 2014).  Next, theme 2 
(‘Effects on relationships’ ) illustrated that misophonic individuals often had the shared lived experience of 
misophonia negatively impacting their relationships (both with others, themselves, and professionals) – regularly 
being met with a ‘lack of understanding’ towards their misophonia, and consequently resulting in a self -reported 
diminished quality of life (Edelstein et al., 2013; Schröder et al., 2013).  Theme 3 (‘Traumatic experience’ ) 
presented that misophonic users commonly attributed their misophonia to a traumatic experience . Finally, theme 
4 (‘The use for Reddit’ ) established that misophonic individuals shared the desir e to be understood  and this is what 
pushed them to online support networks such as the r/misophonia subreddit . 
 
From a service user perspective, when examining the usefulness of the r/misophonia subreddit as an online support 
network, the results are overwhelmingly positive. Users consistently regarded the r/misophonia subreddit as a 
place where they felt comfortable to express themselves freely, seek advice/support from other users with 
misophonia, and ultimately vent about their problems – without the fear of judgement.  As well as this, the results 
also identified that users predominantly engaged in the r/misophoni a subreddit as they were often met with high 
levels of understanding from others, which is something those with misophonia reported lacking in their personal 
lives (as demonstrated throughout theme 2). Due to this, these findings suggest that online suppor t networks, such 
as Reddit, may be useful for people with misophonia as they arguably equip users with the ability to combat the 
socially isolating consequences of misophonia (Jager et al., 2020). Therefore, coinciding with previous literature, 
outside of misophonia research, which represents that online support networks are positive environments, 
especially for individuals suffering from mental health issues (Naslund et al., 2016), that allow for individuals to 
foster healthy peer -to-peer connections and d evelop a sense of belonging in their lives (Naslund et al., 2020) – 
which is essential as this is something people with misophonia have reported lacking in their personal lives (again 
illustrated within theme 2). Overall, suggesting that online support net works are useful for individuals with 
misophonia.  
 
Contrastingly, outside of the service user perspective, it is important to acknowledge that it was common for 
misophonic individuals to utilise  the r/misophonia subreddit as a place to vent and discuss maladaptive and 
destructive coping mechanisms  (such as, self -harm, direct aggression, suicide, etc; as presented in theme 1). 
According to Prescott et al., (2017), being able to vent online about issues (specifically mental health related 
issues) can provide users of online support networks with feel ings of r elief. However, from a long -term usage 
perspective, Zieband and Wyke (2012)  present that online support networks that harbour these persistent negative 
orientated discussions can have detrimental effects on the long -term well -being of users, as oftentimes the

maladaptive behaviours (such as, self -harm) discussed on online support networks are later ‘picked up’ by other 
users.  Meaning that being able to vent and discuss negative topics on the r/misophonia subreddit although may 
feel positive to users could have long -term detrimental effects unforeseen to the users. Another issue highlighted 
in the dataset is that despite the r/ misophonia subreddit having presumably banned these destructive topics, 
according to the subreddits rules (see Appendix A) , they still appear within the dataset and therefore implicates 
that the r/misophonia subreddit may potentially lack proper moderation  as these posts are evidently ‘slipping 
through the cracks’.  Thus, the use of online support networks for misophonia is questionable as they arguably 
unintentionally promote and/or advocate for destructive behaviours. Perhaps to combat these issues and maintain 
the positive value that these online support networks provide to users further moderation of the r/misophonia 
subreddit should be implemented, or perhaps increa sing moderation transparency (Jhaver et al., 2019).  
 
Progressively, this project provides an overall large -scale lived experience of what it is like to have misophonia – 
highlighting various patterns within the dataset. Arguably, addressing Enzler et al’s., (2021) concerns of the ‘true 
understanding’ of misophonia from a lived experience perspective being largely neglected by research. It is 
important to recognise that when investigating misophonic individual’s subjective experiences on the 
r/misophonia subreddit, not only did the results reinforce previous f indings within misophonia literature, but they 
also presented new areas of interest for research, such as auditory hallucinations, visual triggers, the desire for 
deafness, and mimicking behaviours . Coinciding with Vázquez et al., (2023) who suggested that incorporating 
lived experience into research allows for academics to be presented with service -user ‘specialist expertise’, 
consequently highlighting areas of interest that may not have previously been highlighted due to researchers 
largely lacking these ‘specialist expertise’. In relation to the usefulness of online support networks, this 
demonstrates that as well as online support networks, such as Reddit, being useful for providing users with 
support, researchers could also potentially utilise these onl ine support networks to generate new research questions 
etc. 
 
Further to users discussing their misophonia experiences and presenting new areas of interest to academics, people 
on the r/misophonia subreddit also demonstrated a shared need to theorise, using their own personal knowledge 
(and sometimes research), about  the potential reasons for some of their misophonia characteristics. Theorisation 
from users typically occurred when discussing the unexplored characteristics , and although many of the users’ 
theories make logical sense, for example visual triggers potenti ally being facilitated by a relationship between 
misophonia and misokinesia (Jaswal et al., 2021).  O’Sulivan et al., (2022) demonstrated that social media is one 
of if not the largest contributors to the spread of misinformation, specifically in relation to health -related subjects.  
Subsequently, Pennycook et al., (2021) illustrated that it is relatively easy for online users to spread and engage 
with misinformation unknowingly, as approximately 50% of participants in their study did so. Meaning that whilst 
on one hand these online support networks, such as Reddit, may be useful for identifying new areas of research 
in misophonia, they may also be susceptible to becoming sources for spreading misinformation about misophonia 
(primarily unintentionally).  
 
Evaluating the strengths and limitations of this project, a prominent strength was that this project maintained high 
ecological validity. According to the APA, ecological validity is defined as the extent to which the results of a

research project can be regarded as representative to the conditions of the wider world. Arguably, by utilising the 
r/misophonia subreddit platform this project was able to capture the ‘raw’ lived experience of misophonia, 
untampered with by researcher inv olvement. As theme 2 presented, people with misophonia on this subreddit 
displayed a lack of trust towards academics and professionals. Guillemin et al., (2018) stressed the importance of 
developing trust with participants when conducting qualitative resea rch methods (especially for interviews), as 
without an established level of trust the researcher runs the risk of dampening the fruitfulness/quality of the results. 
This proposes that establishing a level of trust with misophonic individuals may have been difficult to achieve 
due to their potentially already established lack of trust towards professionals (as highlighted in theme 2). 
However, now that research is aware of this lack of trust it may be appropriate for future research to work towards 
building a stronger trusting relationship with misophonic individuals. To do so, semi -structured interviewing 
techniques could be utilised to address, firstly, the limitation that this project could not get users to elaborate upon 
specific points, and secondly, inc orporates greater PPI (which misophonia research lacks) . 
 
Another limitation of this project was that there was a noticeable lack of demographic details collected, such as 
age, gender, sexuality, race etc. As Reddit is a platform which prioritises its users anonymity demographic details 
could not be obtained in t his project. Hammer, (2011) illustrated that demographic details can be an integral aspect 
within research, as these details can have important implications when it comes to interpreting results. An example 
of how demographic details may have potentially i nfluenced some of the interpretations within this project is that 
if the r/misophonia subreddit was predominantly made up of one dominant gender, for example males, that would 
then completely change the tone for theme 4 which describes help -seeking behavio urs and a desire to be 
understood, this is because research shows that males and females engage in help -seeking behaviours differently 
(Liddon et al., 2018) – meaning that with demographic details the themes of this dataset may have been completely 
differe nt. Therefore, this portrays that in future large -scale lived experience studies, an attempt should be made to 
collect demographic details where possible.  
 
Finally, it is essential to note that although this project examines one of, if not the largest, online support networks 
available to misophonic individuals, and thus the lived experience findings are largely generalisable to the wider 
misophonic populatio n. The findings related to the usefulness of online support networks can largely only be 
applied to the r/misophonia subreddit (and the Reddit platform). Perhaps future misophonia research could utilise 
several online misophonia support groups, for example  the r/misophonia subreddit, the ‘Allergic to Sound’ 
forums, and the closed Facebook ‘Misophonia Support Group’ to investigate patterns of lived experience and the 
usefulness of online support networks.  Doing so would arguably allow for there to be greater generalisability of 
the results (cross -platform generalisability) and would also allow for researchers to identify if there were any 
comparisons between the different online support networks available t o misophonic individuals – perhaps also 
assessing whi ch support network was most effective in addressing misophonic individual’s concerns etc.  
 
To conclude, it is apparent that those with misophonia share a plethora of lived experiences with one another, both 
confirming previous literature findings (Edelstein et al., 2013 ; Schröder et al., 2013; Wu et al., 2014), and 
suggesting new characteristics for research to investigate. In terms of the usefulness of Reddit as a support 
network, from a service user perspective these forums were regarded with great positivity, allowing f or individuals

to freely express themselves, seek advice/support, and ultimately vent about their problems – coinciding with 
previous literature in support of online support networks (Naslund et al., 2016, 2020). As well as providing 
academics with a deeper understanding  of misophonia. There were also some negative consequences of these 
online support networks such as, the chance for them to become environments of perpetuating negativity (Ziebland 
& Wyke, 2012).  Future research should continue to build from these findings  and work towards developing an 
official diagnostic criterion for misophonia, ensuring lived experience is incorporated throughout to ensure 
misophonic individual’s needs are being met by research.  Arguably, this project establishes the beginning for 
large -scale lived experience research in misophonia, incorporating both PPI, and attributing a greater 
understanding to the research question “what does it ‘truly’ mean to have misophonia?” – as this is something 
researchers are still unsure of. This project is  merely a snippet of the lived experience research that is yet to follow.  
 
Declarations  
Compliance with Ethical Statement  
All authors certify that they have no affiliation and/or involvement with any organisations or entity with any 
financial and/or non -financial interest in the subject matter or materials discussed within this manuscript and thus 
have no competing interests to declare. Informed consent was obtained by the moderators of the r/misophonia 
subreddit allowing researchers to use an API to gather posts from the subreddit. The authors affirm that informed 
consent was also obtained by the moderators regarding publishi ng the data from the subreddit . 
 
Ethics approval  
This study was performed in line with the British Psychological Society (BPS) Code of Human Research Ethics 
and was granted ethical approval by the University of Sunderland’s Ethics Committee (see Appendix C ; Date 
09/11/2022; No. 014934 ).  
 
Data Availability  
The data list of rewords that support the findings of this study are available upon request from the corresponding 
author. The raw data set however  is not publicly  available due to the data containing information that could 
compromise the privacy of participants.

References  
Adams, N. N. (2022). ‘Scraping’ Reddit posts for academic research? Addressing some blurred lines of consent  
in growing internet -based research trend during the time of Covid -19. International Journal of Social 
Research Methodology , 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1080/13645579.2022.2111816  
American Psychological Association (n.d.). Online Social Network. APA Dictionary. Retrieved March 30, 
2023, from, https://dictionary.apa.org/online -social -network  
Ash, P. A., Benzaqu én, E., Gander, P. E., Berger, J. I., & Kumar, S. (2023). Mimicry in misophonia: A large‐
scale survey of prevalence and relationship with trigger sounds. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 1 –12. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/jclp.23605  
Biggane, A. M., Olsen, M., & Williamson, P. R. (2019). PPI in research: a reflection from early stage 
researchers. Research Involvement and Engagement , 5, 1–9. 
Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2006). Qualitative Research in Psychology Using thematic analysis in psychology 
Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative Research in Psychology , 3(2), 77 –101.  
Dozier, T. H. (2015). Counterconditioning treatment for misophonia. Clinical Case Studies , 14(5), 374 –387. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/1534650114566924  
Dozier, T. H., Lopez, M., & Pearson, C. (2017). Proposed diagnostic criteria for misophonia: A multisensory 
conditioned aversive reflex disorder. Frontiers in Psychology , 8(NOV), 2015 –2017. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2017.01975  
Dozier, T. H., & Morrison, K. L. (2017). Phenomenology of misophonia: initial physical and emotional 
responses. The American Journal of Psychology , 130(4), 431 –438. 
Edelstein, M., Brang, D., Rouw, R., & Ramachandran, V. S. (2013). Misophonia: Physiological investigations 
and case descriptions. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience , 7(JUN), 1 –11. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2013.00296  
Eisenhardt, K. M. (1989). Building theories from case study research. Academy of Management Review , 14(4), 
532–550. 
Enzler, F., Loriot, C., Fournier, P., & Noreña, A. J. (2021). A psychoacoustic test for misophonia assessment. 
Scientific Reports , 11(1), 1 –14. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598 -021-90355 -8 
Freud, S. (2019). The ego and the id.  Simon and Schuster.  
Gilson, L. (2012). The case study approach. Health Policy and Systems Research. Geneva: Alliance for Health 
Policy and Systems Research, World Health Organisation , 161–165. 
Guillemin, M., Barnard, E., Allen, A., Stewart, P., Walker, H., Rosenthal, D., & Gillam, L. (2018). Do research  
participants trust researchers or their institution?. Journal of Empirical Research on Human Research 
Ethics, 13 (3), 285 -294. 
Hammer, C. S. (2011). The importance of participant demographics. American Journal of Speech -Language  
Pathology, 20 (4), 261.  
Highton -Williamson, E., Priebe, S., & Giacco, D. (2015). Online social networking in people with psychosis: a 
systematic review. International Journal of Social Psychiatry , 61(1), 92 –101. 
Jager, I., de Koning, P., Bost, T., Denys, D., & Vulink, N. (2020). Misophonia: Phenomenology, comorbidity 
and demographics in a large sample. PLoS ONE , 15(4), 1 –16. 
Jager, I. J., Vulink, N. C. C., Bergfeld, I. O., van Loon, A. J. J. M., & Denys, D. A. J. P. (2021). Cognitive

behavioral therapy for misophonia: A randomized clinical trial. Depression and Anxiety, 38 (7), 708 –718. 
Jastreboff, M. M., & Jastreboff, P. J. (2002). Decreased sound tolerance and tinnitus retraining therapy (TRT).   
Australian and New Zealand Journal of Audiology , 24(2), 74 –84. 
https://doi.org/10.1375/audi.24.2.74.31105  
Jastreboff, P. J., & Jastreboff, M. M. (2014). Treatments for decreased sound tolerance (hyperacusis and 
misophonia). Seminars in Hearing , 35(2), 105 –120. https://doi.org/10.1055/s -0034 -1372527  
Jaswal, S. M., De Bleser, A. K. F., & Handy, T. C. (2021). Misokinesia is a sensitivity to seeing others fidget 
that is prevalent in the general population. Scientific Reports , 11(1), 17204. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598 -021-96430 -4 
Jhaver, S., Bruckman , A., & Gilbert, E. (2019). Does transparency in moderation really matter? User behavior  
after content removal explanations on reddit. Proceedings of the ACM on Human -Computer Interaction, 
3(CSCW), 1 -27. 
Kumar, S., Hancock, O., Cope, T., Sedley, W., Winston, J., & Griffiths, T. D. (2014). Misophonia: a Disorder of  
Emotion Processing of Sounds. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery & Psychiatry , 85(8), e3 –e3. 
https://doi.org/10.1136/jnnp -2014 -308883.38  
Kumar, S, Tansley -Hancock, O., Sedley, W., Winston, J. S., Callaghan, M. F., Allen, M., Cope, T. E., Gander, 
P. E., Bamiou, D. E., & Griffiths, T. D. (2017). The Brain Basis for Misophonia. Current Biology , 27(4), 
527–533. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2016.12.048  
Kumar, S, Dheerendra, P., Erfanian, M., Benzaquén, E., Sedley, W., Gander, P. E., Lad, M., Bamiou, D. E., & 
Griffiths, T. D. (2021). The motor basis for misophonia. Journal of Neuroscience , 41(26), 5762 –5770. 
https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0261 -21.2021  
Liddon, L., Kingerlee, R., & Barry, J. A. (2018). Gender differences in preferences for psychological treatment, 
coping strategies, and triggers to help‐seeking. British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 57 (1), 42 -58. 
Molapour, T., Hagan, C. C., Silston, B., Wu, H., Ramstead, M., Friston, K., & Mobbs, D. (2021). Seven 
computations of the social brain. Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience , 16(8), 745 –760. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/scan/nsab024  
Naslund, J. A., Aschbrenner, K. A., Marsch, L. A., & Bartels, S. J. (2016). The future of mental health care: 
peer-to-peer support and social media. Epidemiology and Psychiatric Sciences , 25(2), 113 –122. 
Naslund, J. A., Bondre, A., Torous, J., & Aschbrenner, K. A. (2020). Social media and mental health: benefits, 
risks, and opportunities for research and practice. Journal of Technology in Behavioral Science , 5, 245 –
257. 
Nowell, L. S., Norris, J. M., White, D. E., & Moules, N. J. (2017). Thematic Analysis: Striving to Meet the 
Trustworthiness Criteria. International Journal of Qualitative Methods, 16 (1), 1 –13. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/1609406917733847  
O'Sullivan, N. J., Nason, G., Manecksha, R. P., & O'Kelly, F. (2022). The unintentional spread of misinformation  
on 'TikTok'; A paediatric urological perspective. Journal of pediatric urology, 18 (3), 371 –375. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpurol.2022.03.001  
Pennycook, G., Epstein, Z., Mosleh, M., Arechar, A. A., Eckles, D., & Rand, D. G. (2021). Shifting attention to  
accuracy can reduce misinformation online. Nature, 592 (7855), 590 –595. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586 -
021-03344 -2

Potgieter, I., MacDonald, C., Partridge, L., Cima, R., Sheldrake, J., & Hoare, D. J. (2019). Misophonia: A 
scoping review of research. Journal of Clinical Psychology , 75(7), 1203 –1218.  
Prescott, J., Hanley, T., & Ujhelyi, K. (2017). Peer communication in online mental health forums for young  
people: directional and nondirectional support. JMIR mental health, 4 (3), e6921.  
Rouw, R., & Erfanian, M. (2018). A Large -Scale Study of Misophonia. Journal of Clinical Psychology , 74(3), 
453–479. https://doi.org/10.1002/jclp.22500  
Schröder, A., Vulink, N., & Denys, D. (2013). Misophonia: diagnostic criteria for a new psychiatric disorder. 
PloS One , 8(1), e54706 –e54706. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0054706  
Schröder, A. E., Vulink, N. C., van Loon, A. J., & Denys, D. A. (2017). Cognitive behavioral therapy is 
effective in misophonia: An open trial. Journal of Affective Disorders , 217(November 2016), 289 –294. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2017.04.017  
Singh, S. M., & Chakrabarti, S. (2008). A study in dualism: The strange case of Dr. Jekyll and  Mr. Hyde. Indian  
Journal of psychiatry, 50(3), 221.  
Stevenson, R. L. (1886). Strange case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde and other tales . OUP Oxford.  
Vázquez, E., Kim, M., & Santaella, M. E. (2023). Lived experience experts: a name created by us for us. In 
Expert Review of Hematology  (Vol. 16, Issue sup1, pp. 7 –11). Taylor & Francis.  
Wu, M. S., Lewin, A. B., Murphy, T. K., & Storch, E. A. (2014). Misophonia: Incidence, phenomenology, and 
clinical correlates in an undergraduate student sample. Journal of Clinical Psychology , 70(10), 994 –1007. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/jclp.22098  
Yildirim, H. N. (2020). The Evil Side of Human Nature in The Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and  Mr. Hyde. Journal  
of English Language and Literature Club, 2 (2), 9 -11. 
Ziebland, S. U. E., & Wyke, S. (2012). Health and illness in a connected  world: how might sharing experiences 
on the internet affect people’s health? The Milbank Quarterly , 90(2), 219 –249.

Appendicies  
Appendix A – r/misophonia Subreddit Rules  
 
Appendix B – Moderator Consent  
 
Appendix C – Ethical Approval

Appendix A

Appendix B

Appendix C