Citation: Bodo, C.R.; Salcudean, A.;
Nirestean, A.; Lukacs, E.; Lica, M.M.;
Muntean, D.L.; Anculia, R.C.;
Popovici, R.A.; Neda Stepan, O.;
Enătescu, V .R.; et al. Association
between Chronic
Misophonia-Induced Stress and
Gastrointestinal Pathology in
Children—A Hypothesis. Children
2024 ,11, 699. https://doi.org/
10.3390/children11060699
Academic Editor: Maria Oana S ăsăran
Received: 24 April 2024
Revised: 30 May 2024
Accepted: 6 June 2024
Published: 7 June 2024
Copyright: ©2024 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
children
Review
Association between Chronic Misophonia-Induced Stress and
Gastrointestinal Pathology in Children—A Hypothesis
Cristina Raluca Bodo1, Andreea Salcudean1,*, Aurel Nirestean2
, Emese Lukacs2, Maria Melania Lica1
,
Daniela Lucia Muntean3, Ramona Camelia Anculia4, Ramona Amina Popovici5, Oana Neda Stepan6,
Virgil Radu En ătescu6
and Elena Gabriela Strete2
1Department of Ethics and Social Sciences, George Emil Palade University of Medicine and Pharmacy,
Sciences and Technology of T ârgu Mures ,, 540136 T ârgu Mures ,, Romania; cristina.bodo@umfst.ro (C.R.B.);
melaniacozma76@gmail.com (M.M.L.)
2Department of Psychiatry, George Emil Palade University of Medicine and Pharmacy,
Sciences and Technology of T ârgu Mures ,, 540136 T ârgu Mures ,, Romania; aurel.nirestean@umfst.ro (A.N.);
emese.lukacs@umfst.ro (E.L.); elena.buicu@umfst.ro (E.G.S.)
3Department of Analytical Chemistry and Drug Analysis, Faculty of Pharmacy, George Emil Palade University
of Medicine and Pharmacy, Sciences and Technology of T ârgu Mures ,, 540136 T ârgu Mures ,, Romania;
daniela.muntean@umfst.ro
4Victor Babes University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 300041 Timisoara, Romania; ramonaanculia@gmail.com
5Department of Dental Preventive Medicine, Victor Babes University of Medicine and Pharmacy,
300041 Timisoara, Romania; ramona.popovici@umft.ro
6Department VIII-Neurosciences, Discipline of Psychiatry, Victor Babes University of Medicine and Pharmacy,
300041 Timisoara, Romania; oana.neda-stepan@umft.ro (O.N.S.); enatescu.virgil@umft.ro (V .R.E.)
*Correspondence: andreea.salcudean@umfst.ro
Abstract: Misophonia is a neurophysiological disorder with behavioral implications, is complex and
multifactorial in origin, and is characterized by an atypical and disproportionate emotional response
to specific sounds or associated visual stimuli. Triggers include human-generated sounds, mainly
sounds related to feeding and breathing processes, and repetitive mechanical sounds. In response to
the triggering stimulus, the patient experiences immediate, high-intensity, disproportionate physical
and emotional reactions that affect their quality of life and social functioning. The symptoms of
misophonia can occur at any age, but onset in childhood or adolescence is most common. Affected
children live in a constant state of anxiety, suffer continuous physical and emotional discomfort,
and are thus exposed to significant chronic stress. Chronic stress, especially during childhood,
has consequences on the main biological systems through the dysregulation of the hypothalamic–
pituitary–adrenal axis, including the gastrointestinal tract. Here, we provide arguments for a positive
correlation between misophonic pathology and gastrointestinal symptoms, and this hypothesis may
be the starting point for further longitudinal studies that could investigate the correlations between
these childhood vulnerabilities caused by misophonia and their effect on the gastrointestinal system.
Further research to study this hypothesis is essential to ensure correct and timely diagnosis and
optimal psychological and pharmacological support.
Keywords: misophonia; pediatric; chronic stress; gastrointestinal disorders; interdisciplinarity
1. Introduction
Misophonia is a neurophysiological disorder with behavioral implications, is complex
and multifactorial in origin, and is characterized by an atypical and disproportionate emo-
tional response to specific stimuli [ 1,2]. Misophonia was described in the early 2000s and
has continuously gained clinical and scientific recognition in various medical specialties, yet
it is not yet distinctly defined in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
(DSM V) as a psychiatric disorder [2,3].
Children 2024 ,11, 699. https://doi.org/10.3390/children11060699 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/children

Children 2024 ,11, 699 2 of 13
In response to the triggering stimuli, which can be very diverse, such as human-
generated sounds, sounds related to the eating and breathing processes, repetitive mechan-
ical sounds, or foot movement; or visual stimuli normally associated with the auditory
trigger—for example, watching people eat—the patient experiences immediate, high-
intensity, disproportionate physical and emotional reactions [ 1–3]. This reaction that begins
with irritation or disgust immediately escalates to overwhelming experiences of anger and
panic [ 4–6]. The extreme, irrational reaction is even associated with feelings of hatred and
rage. The reaction is involuntary, with affected individuals stating that they have no control
over it, despite understanding its inappropriateness. Moreover, affected individuals have
difficulty in distracting their attention from the stimulus [ 2]. Misophonia is considered a
conditioned response to the triggering stimulus [7].
Although the expression of symptoms varies, with mild to severe impairments, miso-
phonia syndrome has a major impact on the quality of life of patients, who develop
avoidant, maladaptive behavior, affecting their social life and academic and professional
performance [8,9].
Misophonia has been addressed both as an auditory disorder and as a psychiatric
disorder. One of the reasons considered for the reluctance to define misophonia as a
psychiatric disorder has been the risk of the stigmatization of those suffering from this
disorder [ 10]. However, misophonia cannot be classified as a hearing disorder either
because, to date, no association has been found between any hearing impairment and
misophonia [10].
Research on misophonia has been growing in recent years, with the first consensus on
its definition published in 2022 and presented by Swedo et al. (2022) [ 2]. This consensus
represents a step forward in the acceptance of this pathology as a distinct pathology, with
clearly established definition criteria. Due to its valuable contribution in the approach
of this pathology diagnosis, we present here the main proposed criteria for misophonia,
as follows:
Definition of misophonia: a disorder of impaired tolerance to specific sounds or
stimuli known as “triggers”, which are experienced as unpleasant and distressing and
evoke negative responses on the emotional, physiological, and behavioral levels; these are
responses not seen in other people.
Misophonic response: responses are not corelated with the auditory stimuli intensity,
but with a specific pattern or meaning for the affected person.
Misophonic triggers: Triggering stimuli are repetitive and primarily include those pro-
duced by humans [ 2]. Once a trigger is detected, people with misophonia cannot distract
their attention from the stimulus. People are aware that their reactions are out of propor-
tion. The symptoms of misophonia usually appear in childhood or early adolescence [ 2].
Auditory triggers are the most common and are represented by sounds associated with the
oral/nasal area including eating, chewing, lip smacking, coughing, gagging, swallowing,
breathing, sniffing, and also non-oral/nasal sounds such as clicking, typing, tapping, shuf-
fling, footsteps, clock ticking [ 2]. Watching a person eat has also been reported as a visual
trigger [2].
Misophonic reaction: Reactions to the specific stimulus are defined as the negative af-
fective reactions of anger, irritation, disgust, anxiety, and rage. An arousal of the autonomic
system causing muscle tension, increased heart rate and sweating, strong behavioral reac-
tions, agitation, and aggression towards the stimulant takes place. Aggression expressed as
verbal or physical outbursts is seen more in children than in adults [2].
Coping mechanism: affected individuals may exhibit behaviors designed to mitigate
their reactions such as avoiding situations that could lead to exposure, escaping from
triggering stimuli, attempting to interrupt triggering stimuli, and reproducing triggering
stimuli [2].
Factors: The factors that determine the intensity of the reaction are linked to the
context in which the trigger is encountered; the degree of control perceived by the person

Children 2024 ,11, 699 3 of 13
over the sound’s source; and, very importantly, the interpersonal relationship with that
source. Self-generated stimuli do not usually evoke aversive responses [2].
Impairment: Functional impairment is caused by significant distress that interferes
with daily life, leading to mental health problems. Functional impairments span from mild
to severe, consisting of difficulty concentrating, an inability to perform professional tasks,
and social rejection, leading to impaired functioning in roles, strained social relationships,
and social isolation [2].
Association with other comorbidities: misophonia can occur in people having or
lacking normal hearing thresholds, in conjunction or not with tinnitus, hyperacusis, neuro-
logical or psychiatric conditions such as affective disorders, obsessive compulsive disorders,
personality disorders, attention deficit hyperactivity, and autism spectrum disorders [2].
To make the diagnosis of misophonia, its symptoms should not be better explained by
any other concomitant disorder [2].
2. Etiology of Misophonic Syndrome
The etiology and long-term course of misophonia are not fully known at present. As
etiological hypotheses, the existence of traumatic events, a genetic predisposition, and the
comorbidity of depression and anxiety have been proposed [1].
Most often, an acute and sudden first appearance is described in childhood or early
adolescence, may follow an early triggering event, and may be associated with distressing
childhood memories of sounds made by family members, especially during meals. First,
the affected person notices sounds made by other people and becomes hypersensitive to
them [1,11].
2.1. The Genetic Predisposition Hypothesis with Misophonia
The family focus, both in terms of the family as an environmental factor and as a
provider of genetic material, is that in over 50% of diagnosed cases, misophonia was
discovered in at least one other member of the patient’s family. Studies showing families
with different members who meet the diagnostic criteria, or have a family history of the
same symptomatology, bring into question the role of the genetic background as well as
the role of upbringing and learned behavior within the family [ 12]. Although there are no
twin studies for this pathology, and no genetic studies have been performed to identify the
hereditary component [1], some data suggest a substantial impact of genetic factors [13].
The genetic predisposition hypothesis stems from the observation that obsessive
compulsive personality disorder, a genetically predisposed disorder, also predisposes
individuals to the development of misophonia, and explains the 50% comorbidity rate
between the two disorders [11].
There is still little knowledge of how prevalence may differ between biological sexes,
but most studies shows that gender is not significantly associated with the misophonic
syndrome severity [1,14,15].
2.2. The Hypothesis of Neurobiological Alterations
The hypothesis of neurobiological alterations examines the abnormal emotional re-
sponse of misophonic patients exposed to the trigger from the perspective of the auditory
processing mechanism, which might be different in these patients. The association of the
inappropriate reaction with a single type of sound suggests that this may be due to a
potential anatomical alteration, which could be in the cortical areas responsible for infor-
mation processing [ 1], or the limbic and autonomic nervous systems [ 1], or as a result of
hyperconnectivity between the auditory and limbic systems [ 16]. Somatic symptoms such
as high blood pressure and heart rate, physical pain, sweating, and shortness of breath
following the exposure to a triggering stimulus are evidence of autonomic nervous system
activation [17].
The increased physiological response produces significant distress in affected pa-
tients [ 8] and has a positive correlation with the intensity of patient-reported aversion,

Children 2024 ,11, 699 4 of 13
suggesting that individuals with misophonia have the same type of reaction to aversive
stimuli as the control group, but experience more intense discomfort [17].
Schröder et al. also showed that audiovisual stimuli elicit reactions that occur during
exposure to hostile stimuli, which, in addition to affective reactions of anger, disgust, and
sadness, also lead to physiological activation with increased activity in the right insula,
right superior temporal cortex, and right anterior cingulate cortex, thus demonstrating that
they have an exaggerated response to specific stimuli but without permanent functional
impairment [18,19].
Another study presented deviant neural activation in the auditory processing system,
although the EEG methodology used only allowed for recordings of activity in the cortical
areas, having limited anatomical specificity, whereas the misophonic response is likely to
involve multiple limbic structures [20,21].
A motor perspective was presented by Kumar et al., who considered that the mirror
neuron system linked to orofacial movements and the auditory and visual cortex is at
the foundation of this disorder. According to this author, in this pathology, increased
connectivity between the orofacial motor areas and auditory cortex in response to all types
of sounds may be observed [21].
Because misophonia is not yet accepted as a distinct psychiatric disorder, identify-
ing the neurobiological mechanisms involved in its development could help consolidate
misophonia as a distinct pathology and as a psychiatric syndrome in its own right. To
date, however, the neurobiological mechanisms of misophonia have been explored very
little [19].
2.3. The Behavioral Theory of Misophonia
In addition to the genetic predisposition hypothesis and the neurological mechanism
hypothesis, behavioral mode hypotheses have also been proposed.
Siepsiak et al. (2023) showed that misophonia in pediatric patients is related to
increased psychopathology, but a link between misophonic syndrome and lower social and
emotional skills, autism spectrum disorders, and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder
cannot be shown. Also, these authors offered a characterization of misophonia as an
internalizing rather than an externalizing disorder [13].
A possible positive association with autism spectrum disorders requires further analy-
sis considering that a higher prevalence of misophonic symptomatology was found among
patients with autism spectrum disorders [ 22] and autistic traits were found to be elevated
in misophonic patients compared to controls [ 23]. In a large online clinical sample of adult
misophonic patients [ 5], 3% were diagnosed with comorbid autism spectrum disorder, and
3.6% with self-reported misophonia were diagnosed with autism [ 24], a prevalence nearly
double that of the general population [ 25,26]. On the contrary, other studies showed no
link between misophonic syndrome and autism spectrum disorders [13].
The best known and most accepted behavioral theory of the etiology of misophonia is
that it develops through a process of conditioning through an experience, in which a reflex
reaction to a predictable stimulus is acquired and repeated, resulting in the association of a
stimulus with a negative emotional state.
Thus, misophonia is thought to involve a conditioned response provoked by human
audio-visual triggers, with symptoms resulting from increased reactivity in the context of
the hypervigilance and sensitization of the auditory cortex [19].
One expert opinion presents several psychological profiles of children who develop
misophonia, dividing them into two categories. Both categories are described as having
specific symptoms in the feeding process (closely related to meals), which is the primary
process of the pathology (most of the triggering sounds are made by the oral area associated
with the chewing process). The first category is represented by the obedient and sensitive
child. This child is caring, cooperative, and emotional and may not show outward signs
of discomfort, but when family members show discomfort, this discomfort is associated
with sound. Once the child develops misophonia, he or she becomes demanding of the

Children 2024 ,11, 699 5 of 13
stimulus and will have specific emotional outbursts. The second category is the strong-
willed, volatile child who often has conflicts with a parent or sibling, associating the anger
and discomfort felt with the sound, which later becomes the triggering stimulus [27].
We conclude by saying that, at this time, there is no consensus regarding the etiology
of misophonia and the mechanisms of the occurrence of its maladaptive behaviors; the
authors consider that the lack of generally accepted diagnostic criteria has been the main
limitation of the studies conducted with this purpose [28].
3. Childhood Clinical Presentation of Misophonic Syndrome and Assessment
of Symptoms
The symptoms of misophonia occur at any age. Retrospective studies conducted
on adults with misophonia suggest a childhood onset (45%) or adolescent onset (30%),
15% reported life-long presentation, with only 9% reporting that their symptoms began in
adulthood [24,29].
The mean age of onset of misophonia was reported to be 12.5 years [ 11,30,31], with
some children meeting criteria as early as 3 years of age. For very young children, it can be
difficult to diagnose and differentiate misophonia from other forms of low sound tolerance,
as these children are not able to verbalize their needs and discomfort [ 13]. One specific case
has been reported in a 2-year-old child [ 14]. This suggests that misophonia symptoms may
start earlier than previously thought [ 13,29,32]. However, little attention has been paid
to misophonia and its consequences in children and adolescents, although the condition
usually begins in childhood [33].
On the other hand, the average age at which misophonia is diagnosed is 37–39 years [ 11],
which is also when patients receive medical attention for the disorder [34].
Misophonia thus becomes a chronic disorder affecting patients for more than 30 years,
mainly because their suffering is not usually properly diagnosed and treated [12].
The primary or most triggering stimulus was a family member for 50% of the children
included in a study by Siepsiak et al. (2023). [ 13].These results support the hypothesis that
sounds generated by family members are important triggers. This can be explained by the
fact that most children spend most of their time within the family; therefore, the disturbing
triggers occur in close proximity to them [13,35,36].
A major study of young patients published in 2023 lists the most frequent triggers
of misophonia in children as eating (96%), throat sounds (66%), breathing (84%), and
tapping (54%). In response, avoidant behavior, annoyance, irritation, verbal aggression,
and an impact on family were generally valid. The severity of misophonia was associated
with internalizing symptoms with high rates of comorbidity and externalizing behaviors
reported by children [4,37].
The misophonic syndrome in children and adolescents can manifest in various ways
and intensities and will not necessarily involve externalized verbal or physical aggres-
sion. Therefore, screening for self-harm, somatic symptoms, and other related symptoms,
should be an important part of the diagnostic process, especially the patients where these
externalized behaviors are not obvious [38,39].
The differences in the clinical misophonia presentation in children have also been
described by Siepsiak et al. (2023) [ 13]. In children with misophonia, migraine headaches
and severe headaches were reported more than in the control group. They also reported a
higher rate of somatic complaints, this correlation being attributed to greater exposure to
stress, weaker emotional regulation skills, or emotional suppression [13].
It has been hypothesized that the emotional distress and psychophysiological arousal
in misophonia exceed young children’s abilities to respond to a hostile trigger in socially
acceptable ways. Guzick et al. (2023) also described verbal and physical aggression in
children and adolescents with misophonia [ 4]. Verbal and physical aggression is considered
to be common in misophonia, particularly in children aged 7–12 years, with only 7%
reported in adolescent groups. The adolescents evaluated reported self-harm while exposed

Children 2024 ,11, 699 6 of 13
to trigger sounds. The conclusion presented is that externalized behaviors related to stimuli
decrease with age, probably due to increased self-awareness and inhibitory control [4].
The overwhelming majority of sufferers reported that their symptoms became progres-
sively worse with age. The natural course of the disorder is symptom worsening in 45–58%
of cases, stable evolution (25%), and, rarely, spontaneous remission (16.7%) [ 12,17]. With
age, misophonia-related distress does not decrease, it is only managed in a better, more
socially acceptable manner, but in a self-destructive, dysfunctional way [ 4]. There is limited
research on misophonia across the lifespan, especially among children and adolescents [ 4].
A milestone in understanding pediatric misophonia is a proper diagnosis, the accurate
measurement of symptoms, and an assessment of their impact on daily life and mental
and social health [ 33]. Even for patients at an early age, for the pediatric population, there
are some solid psychometric assessment tools using misophonia measurement scales, as
shown in Table 1.
Table 1. Summary of validation scales available for pediatric use for misophonia.
Scale Description
MAQ [33]The scale assesses the negative effects of misophonia in everyday life, a
multidimensional measure with four identical scales, with one version for
children and one for parents: interference, pessimism, non-recognition, and
current distress. The MAQ can also be used to detect the negative
consequences of misophonia.
A-MISO-S [33]This scale is a unidimensional measure of the overall severity of pediatric
misophonia and is based on the Yale–Brown Obsessive Compulsive Disorder
Scale. It assesses stress, time, control, interference, resistance, and avoidance.
Misophonia Impact Questionnaire (MIQ) [40]This is a promising questionnaire for assessing the impact of misophonia in
adolescents, but is completed by a parent.
Sussex Misophonia Scale for Adolescents [6]This scale is a tool for measuring misophonia in adolescents, based on the
Sussex Misophonia Scale for Adults. The scale is ideally suited for adaptation
in adolescents by using psycholinguistic data to ensure
child-appropriate language.
Misophonia Scale Amsterdam—Youth [4,41]This scale is an adaptation of the adult self-assessment questionnaire AMISO-S
and the revised AMISOS-R, but it is specifically adjusted for the particularities
of Dutch children.
4. Somatic Implications in Children with Misophonia
Misophonia in children is a vulnerability factor that induces a chronic state of stress
that will contribute to later somatic health problems. Children who have misophonia, due
to their high level of anxiety, are focused on identifying and listening to any triggering
stimulus and avoiding situations, people, and foods that they anticipate will cause discom-
fort associated with the unpleasant stimulus [ 17]. Patients thus suffer ongoing physical
and emotional discomfort and social maladjustment, contributing to chronic stress and a
reduced quality of life [17].
Medical health problems arising from the internalizing process can be affective, includ-
ing generalized anxiety, panic attacks, and depressed mood; cognitive, including difficulty
concentrating and over-focusing on triggers; obsessive, including prevalent or even para-
noid ideation about guilt towards themselves and others, as well as avoidance behaviors
and coping mechanisms [ 42–44]; and somatic, among which digestive tract disorders are
relevant [42,43].
Very few studies have examined somatic effects in misophonic pathology, effects
produced by continuous stress, high anxiety, and difficulties with eating properly. A
study published in 2022 investigated the possible complications of this pathology and
comorbidities in the pediatric population.
A self-assessment questionnaire was used to evaluate a range of medical health prob-
lems in children with misophonia and their families, including neurodevelopmental impair-

Children 2024 ,11, 699 7 of 13
ment, neurocognitive disorders, gastrointestinal disorders, sensory processing difficulties,
and heart and kidney conditions [ 45]. Acid reflux, migraines, and auditory pathology
such as tinnitus and hyperacusis had a significantly positive association with misophonia
severity [ 45]. In an observational study conducted in 2013–2017 on adult subjects with
misophonic symptoms, somatic examination results (general screening and hearing tests)
showed that irritable bowel syndrome was among the most common somatic diagnoses,
along with migraine, asthma, and back pain. During physical examination, no neurological
disorders were determined, but mild comorbid somatic disorders were regularly found [ 5].
5. Consequences of Chronic Stress Exposure in Misophonia
The medical term stress, first defined by endocrinologist Hans Hugo Bruno Selye,
represents the adaptive response of organisms to adverse endogenous or exogenous, psy-
chological or physical, and real or perceived stressors [46].
5.1. Stress and the Hypothalamic–Pituitary–Adrenal Axis
The hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis is the efferent stress axis that interrelates the
adaptive responses of the human body to stressors and is a part of the limbic system, the
area predominantly involved in emotional responses and memory [47].
The acute stress response is modulated by physiological alterations in the nervous
and endocrine system, but eventually, the equilibrium returns to the basal state. On the
other hand, chronic stress, especially during childhood, leads to the long-term activation
of the stress pathways, and has detrimental psychological consequences for all major bio-
logical systems, including the cardiovascular, nervous, endocrine, metabolic, and immune
systems [ 48,49]. Numerous studies have approached the mechanisms connecting early life
stress to these systems and have analyzed the relationship between the gut microbiome
and stress, specifically in early life [50–52].
Chronic psychological stress is considered to be associated with the deregulation of
the hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal axis. Environmental stress, such as that induced by
misophonia, activates the system through the secretion of corticotropin-releasing factor
from the hypothalamus, followed by the secretion of adrenocorticotropic hormone from the
pituitary gland, which will lead to the release of cortisol from the adrenal glands. Cortisol,
the main stress hormone, affects all body structures via the blood circulation, allowing the
brain to influence the activities of somatic systems including the gastrointestinal system [ 53].
Also, corticotropin-releasing factor receptors and their ligands can be modulated by
stress and are expressed in both the gut and the brain [ 54], can influence the secretion of
the mucosal barrier and enteric peristalsis, and plays an important role in gastrointestinal
disorders [55–57].
It is known that the gut–brain axis involves two-way communication, joining the
central nervous system and the enteric system, and connecting the emotional and cognitive
brain areas to peripheral gut functioning [ 53]. There is clinical evidence of gut–brain axis
interactions resulting from the association of dysbiosis with central nervous disorders,
particularly in autism spectrum disorders, anxiety–depressive disorders, and functional
gastrointestinal disorders. One example of this kind of relationship is irritable bowel
syndrome [53].
5.2. The Microbiome-Specific Signatures
The majority of preclinical studies investigating the microbiota gut–brain axis have
been focused on animal model studies and have suggested that the gut microbiome plays
a role in the development of the stress response [ 58]. There are studies that have shown
that the neurotransmitter GABA, which is involved in anxiety and depressive disorders, is
secreted by Lactobacillus and Bifidobacterium [ 59]. The probiotic Lactobacillus rhamnosus
has been shown to decrease anxiety behaviors in stress tasks and modify the functioning
of GABA receptors in mice [ 60]. The level of tryptophan, the serotonin precursor, plays a
role in depression, and can be elevated by Bifidobacterium ingestion [ 61]. The influence

Children 2024 ,11, 699 8 of 13
of the brain on the microbiota structure and function by altering intestinal permeability
has also been shown in laboratory animals by allowing bacterial antigens to infiltrate the
epithelium and to stimulate the immune response [62].
There is evidence extracted from animal models that suggests that early stress can
impact on the long-term stress reactivity and gut microbiome [ 63] and that exposure to
early stressors is associated with a significant decrease in the diversity of the microbiota [ 64].
Local and general changes in gastrointestinal functionality can influence the delivery of
nutrients, prebiotics, and dietary fiber [62].
5.3. The Role of Serotonin and Catecholamines
An additional vector of the process is serotonin, with its important role in influencing
affect, its involvement in pain control, in the central nervous system, and in the periphery
through descending inhibition [ 65], and its influence on digestion, where it plays an impor-
tant role in gastrointestinal signaling as a paracrine messenger used by enterochromaffin
cells [66].
Stress activates the sympathetic autonomic system, contributing to the increased pro-
duction of adrenal hormones. Catecholamines mediate the increase in central and periph-
eral inflammatory cytokines [ 67]. In addition, the vagus nerve, and its anti-inflammatory
effects, are decreased by stress, contributing to an increased inflammatory response and,
consequently, gut inflammation [68,69].
Stress and anxiety, through the mechanism outlined above, can be top triggers for
many gastrointestinal pathologies, especially in children [ 70]. By correlating misophonia-
induced stress and its effect on the gastrointestinal system with the mechanisms presented,
we propose a model to justify the occurrence of gastrointestinal pathology in the pediatric
population suffering from misophonia. This is shown in Figure 1.
Children 2024 , 11, x FOR PEER REVIEW  9 of 14 
 
  
Figure 1. Proposed model for the development of gastrointestinal pathology in misophonic syn-
drome.  
6. Therapeutic Approach  
Although our understanding of misophonia is increasing, and the associated chronic 
distress is being accept ed more by clinicians, there is limited knowledge about effective 
treatment s that can be  offered to patients [5, 31,71,72]. 
As the field advances and a better understanding of the pathology is gained, more 
treatment options will become available, but it is not yet known which therapies are the 
most effective or which are acceptable for parents and their children with misophonia  and 
associated somatic distress.  
Understanding patient preferences has important clinical implications. Patient in-
volvement in the treatment approach, including treatment beliefs and affordability, con-
tributes to treatment acceptance and initiation and clearly leads to better adherence and 
patient outcomes [ 73,74]. In the child and adolescent population, understanding the treat-
ment preferences of both the parent and child are equally important, given that the treat-
ment decision is shared equally by the clinician, parent, and child [ 75,76]. 
After a thorough study of the adverse effects of stress on digestive pathology , the 
improvement of the mental status seems to be the main goal of treatment and is expected 
to even outpace the healing process of the lining of the gastrointestinal system [ 56,77,78]. 
Reducing psychological stress is important for symptom alleviation and increasing 
the quality of life. Thus, the new field of psychogastroenterology focuses on the applica-
tion of psychothera py as an integra l part of digestive disease management [ 56,78]. 
The field of psychogastroenterology has made major progress in identifying psycho-
social risk factors for adverse outcomes in people with gastrointestinal disease. These fac-
tors include anxiety, depression, an d maladaptive behaviors [ 79]. Based on the biopsycho-
social model [ 80], the integration of psychological approaches into the understanding and 
treatment of gastrointestinal disorders has become a standard of care. The most com-
monly applied psychological tre atment is cognitive  behavioral therapy, with strong evi-
dence of its effectiveness in treating children and adults suffering from irritable bowel 
Figure 1. Proposed model for the development of gastrointestinal pathology in misophonic syndrome.

Children 2024 ,11, 699 9 of 13
6. Therapeutic Approach
Although our understanding of misophonia is increasing, and the associated chronic
distress is being accepted more by clinicians, there is limited knowledge about effective
treatments that can be offered to patients [5,31,71,72].
As the field advances and a better understanding of the pathology is gained, more
treatment options will become available, but it is not yet known which therapies are the
most effective or which are acceptable for parents and their children with misophonia and
associated somatic distress.
Understanding patient preferences has important clinical implications. Patient involve-
ment in the treatment approach, including treatment beliefs and affordability, contributes
to treatment acceptance and initiation and clearly leads to better adherence and patient
outcomes [ 73,74]. In the child and adolescent population, understanding the treatment
preferences of both the parent and child are equally important, given that the treatment
decision is shared equally by the clinician, parent, and child [75,76].
After a thorough study of the adverse effects of stress on digestive pathology, the
improvement of the mental status seems to be the main goal of treatment and is expected
to even outpace the healing process of the lining of the gastrointestinal system [56,77,78].
Reducing psychological stress is important for symptom alleviation and increasing
the quality of life. Thus, the new field of psychogastroenterology focuses on the application
of psychotherapy as an integral part of digestive disease management [56,78].
The field of psychogastroenterology has made major progress in identifying psy-
chosocial risk factors for adverse outcomes in people with gastrointestinal disease. These
factors include anxiety, depression, and maladaptive behaviors [ 79]. Based on the biopsy-
chosocial model [ 80], the integration of psychological approaches into the understanding
and treatment of gastrointestinal disorders has become a standard of care. The most
commonly applied psychological treatment is cognitive behavioral therapy, with strong
evidence of its effectiveness in treating children and adults suffering from irritable bowel
syndrome and inflammatory bowel disease [ 81–83]. It may also be proposed in the setting
of misophonic pathology.
The effectiveness and mechanism by which psychological treatments work in gas-
trointestinal disorders are not fully understood. Cognitive behavioral therapy for digestive
pathology focuses on reducing psychological distress and increasing the quality of life.
There is a growing awareness that psychological trauma impacts gastrointestinal function-
ing [84].
In a recent systematic review, Glynn et al. [ 85] identified that the cumulative preva-
lence of trauma in gastrointestinal cohorts was 36%. Given the influence of trauma on
gastrointestinal disease, Jagielski et al. examined whether patients with a history of trauma
were more likely to respond to psychological interventions [ 86]. An optimal effect of psy-
chological interventions has also been identified in other somatic pathologies, such as type
1 diabetes in children [87].
These findings underline the importance of identifying early misophonic pathology,
identifying associated somatic distress, and providing them and their parents with well-
planned and -executed interventions that can prevent or mitigate potential medical and
social effects as well as their chronicity [13].
7. Conclusions
Systematic data on the clinical presentation of this pathology in children and adoles-
cents are of paramount importance, as developing an early understanding of the condition
is the basis for appropriate treatment.
The early detection of misophonia and effective interventions can mitigate the long-
term adverse effects of misophonic syndrome on mental health, somatic health, and so-
cial life.
In this paper, we evaluate the hypothesized correlation between misophonia and the
chronic stress induced by it in children and its effect on the proper functioning of the

Children 2024 ,11, 699 10 of 13
digestive tract, attempting to provide a framework for understanding misophonia based
on widely accepted physiological processes.
Although the information presented here only consists of preliminary arguments
justifying a possible positive correlation between gastrointestinal symptoms such as acid
reflux, irritable bowel syndrome, and functional abdominal pain; the pattern of misophonic
pathology; the setting of its manifestation; its close relationship with nutrition; and the act
of eating, we believe that this hypothesis could be the starting point for further studies that
can further elucidate how misophonia affects the somatic well-being of affected children.
However, longitudinal studies are needed to investigate the correct correlations be-
tween these early life vulnerabilities such as misophonia, anxiety, and mental health, and
their effect on somatic status, including the gastrointestinal system. Further research to
validate or invalidate this hypothesis is essential to ensure correct and timely diagnosis
and optimal psychological and pharmacological support.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, C.R.B., A.S., E.G.S. and M.M.L.; methodology, C.R.B., A.S.,
E.G.S., E.L. and O.N.S.; validation, A.S., E.G.S., D.L.M. and A.N.; investigation, R.A.P ., O.N.S., A.S.
and E.L.; drafting—preparation of original draft, C.R.B., A.S., R.C.A. and E.L.; drafting—revising and
editing, V .R.E., A.S., E.G.S. and M.M.L.; supervision, V .R.E., D.L.M., E.G.S. and A.N. All authors have
read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This study did not receive external funding.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
References
1. Ferrer-Torres, A.; Gim énez-Llort, L. Misophonia: A Systematic Review of Current and Future Trends in This Emerging Clinical
Field. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022 ,19, 6790. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2. Swedo, S.E.; Baguley, D.M.; Denys, D.; Dixon, L.J.; Erfanian, M.; Fioretti, A.; Jastreboff, P .J.; Kumar, S.; Rosenthal, M.Z.; Rouw,
R.; et al. Consensus Definition of Misophonia: A Delphi Study. Front. Neurosci. 2022 ,16, 841816. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3. Jastreboff, M.M.; Jastreboff, P .J. Decreased Sound Tolerance and Tinnitus Retraining Therapy (TRT). Aust. N. Z. J. Audiol. 2002 ,24,
74–84. [CrossRef]
4. Guzick, A.G.; Cervin, M.; Smith, E.E.A.; Clinger, J.; Draper, I.; Goodman, W.K.; Lijffijt, M.; Murphy, N.; Lewin, A.B.; Schneider,
S.C.; et al. Clinical characteristics, impairment, and psychiatric morbidity in 102 youth with misophonia. J. Affect. Disord. 2023 ,
324, 395–402. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5. Jager, I.; de Koning, P .; Bost, T.; Denys, D.; Vulink, N. Misophonia: Phenomenology, comorbidity and demographics in a large
sample. PLoS ONE 2020 ,15, e0231390. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
6. Rinaldi, L.J.; Smees, R.; Ward, J.; Simner, J. Poorer Well-Being in Children with Misophonia: Evidence from the Sussex Misophonia
Scale for Adolescents. Front. Psychol. 2022 ,13, 808379. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
7. Dozier, T.H. Counterconditioning treatment for Misophonia. Clin. Case Stud. 2015 ,14, 374–387. [CrossRef]
8. Brout, J.J.; Edelstein, M.; Erfanian, M.; Mannino, M.; Miller, L.J.; Rouw, R.; Kumar, S.; Rosenthal, M.Z. Investigating Misophonia:
A Review of the Empirical Literature, Clinical Implications, and a Research Agenda. Front. Neurosci. 2018 ,12, 36. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
9. Siepsiak, M.; Dragan, W. Misophonia—A review of research results and theoretical concepts. Psychiatr. Pol. 2019 ,53, 447–458.
[CrossRef]
10. Taylor, S. Misophonia: A new mental disorder? Med. Hypotheses 2017 ,103, 109–117. [CrossRef]
11. Schröder, A.; Vulink, N.; Denys, D. Misophonia: Diagnostic Criteria for a New Psychiatric Disorder. PLoS ONE 2013 ,8, e54706.
[CrossRef]
12. Sanchez, T.G.; Silva FE, D. Familial misophonia or selective sound sensitivity syndrome: Evidence for autosomal dominant
inheritance? Braz. J. Otorhinolaryngol. 2018 ,84, 553–559. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13. Siepsiak, M.; Turek, A.; Michałowska, M.; Gambin, M.; Dragan, W.Ł. Misophonia in Children and Adolescents: Age Differences,
Risk Factors, Psychiatric and Psychological Correlates. A Pilot Study with Mothers’ Involvement. In Child Psychiatry & Human
Development ; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2023. [CrossRef]
14. Savard, M.A.; Sares, A.G.; Coffey EB, J.; Deroche ML, D. Specificity of Affective Responses in Misophonia Depends on Trigger
Identification. Front. Neurosci. 2022 ,16, 879583. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15. Jakubovski, E.; Müller, A.; Kley, H.; de Zwaan, M.; Müller-Vahl, K. Prevalence and clinical correlates of misophonia symptoms in
the general population of Germany. Front. Psychiatry 2022 ,13, 1012424. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16. Silva FE, D.; Sanchez, T.G. Evaluation of selective attention in patients with misophonia. Braz. J. Otorhinolaryngol. 2019 ,85,
303–309. [CrossRef]

Children 2024 ,11, 699 11 of 13
17. Edelstein, M.; Brang, D.; Rouw, R.; Ramachandran, V .S. Misophonia: Physiological investigations and case descriptions. Front.
Hum. Neurosci. 2013 ,7, 296. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
18. Schröder, A.; Giorgi, R.S.; Van Wingen, G.; Vulink, N.; Denys, D. P . 1. i. 015 Impulsive aggression in misophonia: Results from a
functional magnetic resonance imaging study. Eur. Neuropsychopharmacol. 2015 ,25, S307–S308. [CrossRef]
19. Schröder, A.; van Wingen, G.; Eijsker, N.; San Giorgi, R.; Vulink, N.C.; Turbyne, C.; Denys, D. Misophonia is associated with
altered brain activity in the auditory cortex and salience network. Sci. Rep. 2019 ,9, 7542. [CrossRef]
20. Cavanna, A.E.; Seri, S. Misophonia: Current perspectives. Neuropsychiatr. Dis. Treat. 2015 ,11, 2117–2123. [CrossRef]
21. Kumar, S.; Dheerendra, P .; Erfanian, M.; Benzaqu én, E.; Sedley, W.; Gander, P .E.; Lad, M.; Bamiou, D.E.; Griffiths, T.D. The Motor
Basis for Misophonia. J. Neurosci. 2021 ,41, 5762–5770. [CrossRef]
22. Naguy, A.; Al-Humoud, A.M.; Pridmore, S.; Abuzeid, M.Y.; Singh, A.; Elsori, D. Low-Dose Risperidone for an Autistic Child with
Comorbid ARFID and Misophonia. Psychopharmacol. Bull. 2022 ,52, 91–94. [PubMed]
23. Rinaldi, L.J.; Simner, J.; Koursarou, S.; Ward, J. Autistic traits, emotion regulation, and sensory sensitivities in children and adults
with Misophonia. J. Autism Dev. Disord. 2023 ,53, 1162–1174. [CrossRef]
24. Claiborn, J.M.; Dozier, T.H.; Hart, S.L.; Lee, J. Self-Identified Misophonia Phenomenology, Impact, and Clinical Correlates. Psychol.
Thought 2020 ,13, 349–375. [CrossRef]
25. Dietz, P .M.; Rose, C.E.; McArthur, D.; Maenner, M. National and State Estimates of Adults with Autism Spectrum Disorder.
J. Autism Dev. Disord. 2020 ,50, 4258–4266. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
26. Williams, Z.J.; He, J.L.; Cascio, C.J.; Woynaroski, T.G. A Review of Decreased Sound Tolerance in Autism: Definitions, Phe-
nomenology, and Potential Mechanisms. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 2021 ,121, 1–17. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
27. Misophonia Institute. How Children Develop Misophonia—Institute of Misophonia. 3 August 2017. Available online: https:
//misophoniainstitute.org/how-children-develop-misophonia/ (accessed on 2 April 2024).
28. Schröder, A.; Van Wingen, G.; Vulink, N.C.; Denys, D. Commentary: The Brain Basis for Misophonia. Front. Behav. Neurosci. 2017 ,
11, 111. [CrossRef]
29. Rouw, R.; Erfanian, M. A large-scale study of misophonia. J Clin Psychol. 2018 ,74, 453–479. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
30. Schröder, A.; Vulink, N.; Van Loon, A.J.; Denys, D. Cognitive-behavioral therapy is effective in misophonia: An open study.
J. Affect. Disord. 2017 ,217, 289–294. [CrossRef]
31. Lewin, A.B.; Dickinson, S.; Kudryk, K.; Karlovich, A.R.; Harmon, S.L.; Phillips, D.A.; Tonarely, N.A.; Gruen, R.; Small, B.;
Ehrenreich-May, J. Transdiagnostic cognitive-behavioral therapy for misophonia in youth: Methods for a clinical trial and four
pilot cases. J. Affect. Disord. 2021 ,291, 400–408. [CrossRef]
32. Erfanian, M.; Kartsonaki, C.; Keshavarz, A. Mysophonia and comorbid psychiatric symptoms: A preliminary study of clinical
findings. North J. Psychiatry 2019 ,73, 219–228. [CrossRef]
33. Cervin, M.; Guzick, A.G.; Clinger, J.; Smith EE, A.A.; Draper, I.A.; Goodman, W.K.; Lijffijt, M.; Murphy, N.; Rast, C.E.; Schneider,
S.C.; et al. Measuring misophonia in youth: A psychometric evaluation of child and parent measures. J. Affect. Disord. 2023 ,338,
180–186. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
34. Quek, T.; Ho, C.; Choo, C.; Nguyen, L.; Tran, B.; Ho, R. Misophonia in Singaporean Psychiatric Patients: A Cross-Sectional Study.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018 ,15, 1410. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
35. Ösz, B.-E.; Jîtc ă, G.; S ălcudean, A.; Rusz, C.M.; Vari, C.-E. Benzydamine-An Affordable Over-the-Counter Drug with Psychoactive
Properties-From Chemical Structure to Possible Pharmacological Properties. Pharmaceuticals 2023 ,16, 566. [CrossRef]
36. Răchită, A.I.C.; Strete, G.E.; S ălcudean, A.; Ghiga, D.V .; Hu t,anu, A.; Muntean, L.M.; Suciu, L.M.; M ărginean, C. The Relationship
between Psychological Suffering, Value of Maternal Cortisol during Third Trimester of Pregnancy and Breastfeeding Initiation.
Medicina 2023 ,59, 339. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
37. Răchit, A.; Strete, G.E.; Suciu, L.M.; Ghiga, D.V .; S ălcudean, A.; M ărginean, C. Psychological Stress Perceived by Pregnant Women
in the Last Trimester of Pregnancy. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022 ,19, 8315. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
38. Lica, M.M.; Papai, A.; Salcudean, A.; Crainic, M.; Covaciu, C.G.; Mihai, A. Assessment of Psychopathology in Adolescents with
Insulin-Dependent Diabetes (IDD) and the Impact on Treatment Management. Children 2021 ,8, 414. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
39. Kalinovic, R.; Pascariu, A.; Vlad, G.; Nitusca, D.; S ălcudean, A.; Sirbu, I.O.; Marian, C.; Enatescu, V .R. Involvement of the
Expression of G Protein-Coupled Receptors in Schizophrenia. Pharmaceuticals 2024 ,17, 85. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
40. Aazh, H.; Moore, B.C.J.; Scaglione, T.; Remmert, N. Psychometric Evaluation of the Misophonia Impact Questionnaire (MIQ)
Using a Clinical Population of Patients Seeking Help for Tinnitus, Hyperacusis and/or Misophonia. J. Am. Acad. Audiol. 2023;
Online ahead of print . [CrossRef]
41. Rappoldt, L.R.; Van Der Pol, M.M.; De Wit, C.; Slaghekke, S.; Houben, C.; Sondaar, T.; Kan, K.J.; Van Steensel, F.J.A.; Denys, D.;
Vulink, N.C.C.; et al. Effectiveness of an innovative treatment protocol for misophonia in children and adolescents: Design of a
randomized controlled trial. Contemp. Clin. Trials Commun. 2023 ,33, 101105. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
42. Sălcudean, A.; Nan, A.G.; Bodo, C.R.; Cosma, M.C.; Strete, E.G.; Lica, M.M. Association between Childhood Onset Inflammatory
Bowel Disease and Psychiatric Comorbidities in Adulthood. Diagnostics 2023 ,13, 1868. [CrossRef]
43. Bagrowska, P .; Pionke-Ubych, R.; Gaw˛ eda, Ł. Do they make these sounds to hurt me? The mediating role of emotion regulation,
anxiety and hostile attributions in the relationship between misophonia and paranoia-like thoughts. Schizophr. Res. 2022 ,250,
137–142. [CrossRef]

Children 2024 ,11, 699 12 of 13
44. Guetta, R.E.; Cassiello-Robbins, C.; Trumbull, J.; Anand, D.; Rosenthal, M.Z. Examining emotional functioning in misophonia:
The role of affective instability and difficulties with emotion regulation. PLoS ONE 2022 ,17, e0263230. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
45. Rosenthal, M.Z.; McMahon, K.; Greenleaf, A.S.; Cassiello-Robbins, C.; Guetta, R.; Trumbull, J.; Anand, D.; Frazer-Abel, E.S.; Kelley,
L. Misophonia phenotyping: Psychiatric disorders and medical health correlates. Front. Psychol. 2022 ,13, 941898. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
46. Chrousos, G.P . The Concepts of Stress and Stress System Disorders: Overview of Physical and Behavioral Homeostasis. JAMA
1992 ,267, 1244. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
47. Tsigos, C.; Chrousos, G.P . Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis, neuroendocrine factors and stress. J. Psychosom. Res. 2002 ,53,
865–871. [CrossRef]
48. Lupien, S.J.; Maheu, F.; Tu, M.; Fiocco, A.; Schramek, T.E. The effects of stress and stress hormones on human cognition:
Implications for the field of brain and cognition. Brain Cogn. 2007 ,65, 209–237. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
49. McEwen, B.S. Physiology and neurobiology of stress and adaptation: Central role of the brain. Physiol. Rev. 2007 ,87, 873–904.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
50. Mariani, N.; Borsini, A.; Cecil, C.A.M.; Felix, J.F.; Sebert, S.; Cattaneo, A.; Walton, E.; Milaneschi, Y.; Cochrane, G.; Amid, C.; et al.
Identifying causative mechanisms linking early-life stress to psycho-cardio-metabolic multi-morbidity: The EarlyCause project.
PLoS ONE 2021 ,16, e0245475. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
51. Coley EJ, L.; Mayer, E.A.; Osadchiy, V .; Chen, Z.; Subramanyam, V .; Zhang, Y.; Hsiao, E.Y.; Gao, K.; Bhatt, R.; Dong, T.; et al.
Early life adversity predicts brain-gut alterations associated with increased stress and mood. Neurobiol. Stress 2021 ,15, 100348.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
52. Agusti, A.; Lamers, F.; Tamayo, M.; Benito-Amat, C.; Molina-Mendoza, G.V .; Penninx BW, J.H.; Sanz, Y. The Gut Microbiome in
Early Life Stress: A Systematic Review. Nutrients 2023 ,15, 2566. [CrossRef]
53. Carabotti, M.; Scirocco, A.; Maselli, M.A.; Severi, C. The gut-brain axis: Interactions between enteric microbiota, central and
enteric nervous systems. Ann. Gastroenterol. 2015 ,28, 203–209.
54. Larauche, M.; Kiank, C.; Tache, Y. Corticotropin releasing factor signaling in colon and ileum: Regulation by stress and
pathophysiological implications. J. Physiol. Pharmacol. Off. J. Pol. Physiol. Soc. 2009 ,60(Suppl. S7), 33–46.
55. Tache, Y.; Larauche, M.; Yuan, P .-Q.; Million, M. Brain and Gut CRF Signaling: Biological Actions and Role in the Gastrointestinal
Tract. Curr. Mol. Pharmacol. 2018 ,11, 51–71. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
56. Sun, Y.; Li, L.; Xie, R.; Wang, B.; Jiang, K.; Cao, H. Stress Triggers Flare of Inflammatory Bowel Disease in Children and Adults.
Front. Pediatr. 2019 ,7, 432. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
57. Rubio, C.A.; Huang, C.B. Quantification of the sulphomucin-producing cell population of the colonic mucosa during protracted
stress in rats. In Vivo 1992 ,6, 81–84. [PubMed]
58. Nowakowski, M.E.; McCabe, R.; Rowa, K.; Pellizzari, J.; Surette, M.; Moayyedi, P .; Anglin, R. The gut microbiome: Potential
innovations for the understanding and treatment of psychopathology. Can. Psychol./Psychol. Can. 2016 ,57, 67–75. [CrossRef]
59. Schousboe, A.; Waagepetersen, H.S. GABA: Homeostatic pharmacological aspects. In GABA and the Basal Ganglia: From Molecules
to Systems ; Tepper, J.M., Abercombie, E.D., Bolam, J.P ., Eds.; Elsevier Science: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2007; pp. 9–19.
[CrossRef]
60. Bravo, J.A.; Forsythe, P .; Chew, M.V .; Escaravage, E.; Savignac, H.M.; Dinan, T.G.; Bienenstock, J.; Cryan, J.F. Ingestion of
Lactobacillus strain regulates emotional behavior and central GABA receptor expression in a mouse via the vagus nerve. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2011 ,108, 16050–16055. [CrossRef]
61. Desbonnet, L.; Garrett, L.; Clarke, G.; Bienenstock, J.; Dinan, T.G. The probiotic Bifidobacteria infantis: An assessment of potential
antidepressant properties in the rat. J. Psychiatr. Res. 2008 ,43, 164–174. [CrossRef]
62. Demaude, J.; Salvador-Cartier, C.; Fioramonti, J.; Ferrier, L.; Bueno, L. Phenotypic changes in colonocytes following acute stress
or activation of mast cells in mice: Implications for delayed epithelial barrier dysfunction. Gut2006 ,55, 655–661. [CrossRef]
63. O’Mahony, S.M.; Marchesi, J.R.; Scully, P .; Codling, C.; Ceolho, A.M.; Quigley, E.M.; Cryan, J.F.; Dinan, T.G. Early life stress alters
behavior, immunity, and microbiota in rats: Implications for irritable bowel syndrome and psychiatric illnesses. Biol. Psychiatry
2009 ,65, 263–267. [CrossRef]
64. Bailey, M.T.; Dowd, S.E.; Galley, J.D.; Hufnagle, A.R.; Allen, R.G.; Lyte, M. Exposure to a social stressor alters the structure of the
intestinal microbiota: Implications for stressor-induced immunomodulation. Brain Behav. Immun. 2011 ,25, 397–407. [CrossRef]
65. Bardin, L. The complex role of serotonin and 5-HT receptors in chronic pain. Behav. Pharmacol. 2011 ,22, 390–404. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
66. Gershon, M.D.; Tack, J. The Serotonin Signaling System: From Basic Understanding to Drug Development for Functional GI
Disorders. Gastroenterology 2007 ,132, 397–414. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
67. Johnson, J.D.; Campisi, J.; Sharkey, C.M.; Kennedy, S.L.; Nickerson, M.; Greenwood, B.N.; Fleshner, M. Catecholamines mediate
stress-induced increases in peripheral and central inflammatory cytokines. Neuroscience 2005 ,135, 1295–1307. [CrossRef]
68. De Jonge, W.J.; Van Der Zanden, E.P .; The, F.O.; Bijlsma, M.F.; Van Westerloo, D.J.; Bennink, R.J.; Berthoud, H.-R.; Uematsu, S.;
Akira, S.; Van Den Wijngaard, R.M.; et al. Stimulation of the vagus nerve attenuates macrophage activation by activating the
Jak2-STAT3 signaling pathway. Nat. Immunol. 2005 ,6, 844–851. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Children 2024 ,11, 699 13 of 13
69. Meregnani, J.; Clarençon, D.; Vivier, M.; Peinnequin, A.; Mouret, C.; Sinniger, V .; Picq, C.; Job, A.; Canini, F.; Jacquier-Sarlin,
M.; et al. Anti-inflammatory effect of vagus nerve stimulation in a rat model of inflammatory bowel disease. Auton. Neurosci.
2011 ,160, 82–89. [CrossRef]
70. Puckett-Perez, S.; Gresl, B. Psychological treatment for pediatric functional abdominal pain disorders. Curr. Opin. Pediatr. 2022 ,
34, 516–520. [CrossRef]
71. Bernstein, R.E.; Angell, K.L.; Dehle, C.M. A brief course of cognitive behavioural therapy for the treatment of misophonia: A case
example. Cogn. Behav. Ther. 2013 ,6, e10. [CrossRef]
72. Jager, I.; Vulink, N.; De Roos, C.; Denys, D. EMDR therapy for misophonia: A pilot study of case series. Eur. J. Psychotraumatology
2021 ,12, 1968613. [CrossRef]
73. Patel, N.U.; Moore, B.A.; Craver, R.F.; Feldman, S.R. Ethical considerations in adherence research. Patient Prefer. Adherence 2016 ,
10, 2429–2435. [CrossRef]
74. Proctor, E.; Silmere, H.; Raghavan, R.; Hovmand, P .; Aarons, G.; Bunger, A.; Griffey, R.; Hensley, M. Outcomes for Implementation
Research: Conceptual Distinctions, Measurement Challenges, and Research Agenda. Adm. Policy Ment. Health Ment. Health Serv.
Res. 2011 ,38, 65–76. [CrossRef]
75. Lewin, A.B.; McGuire, J.F.; Murphy, T.K.; Storch, E.A. Editorial Perspective: The importance of considering parent’s preferences
when planning treatment for their children—The case of childhood obsessive-compulsive disorder. J. Child Psychol. Psychiatry
2014 ,55, 1314–1316. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
76. Smith EE, A.; Guzick, A.G.; Draper, I.A.; Clinger, J.; Schneider, S.C.; Goodman, W.K.; Brout, J.J.; Lijffijt, M.; Storch, E.A. Perceptions
of various treatment approaches for adults and children with misophonia. J. Affect. Disord. 2022 ,316, 76–82. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
77. Wine, E.; Critch, J.; Hussey, S.; Navas-L ópez, V .M.; Matary, W.L. (Eds.) Pediatric Inflammatory Bowel Diseases: Looking to the Future ;
Frontiers Media SA: Lausanne, Switzerland, 2020. [CrossRef]
78. Keefer, L.; Palsson, O.S.; Pandolfino, J.E. Best Practice Update: Incorporating Psychogastroenterology Into Management of
Digestive Disorders. Gastroenterology 2018 ,154, 1249–1257. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
79. Drossman, D.A.; Leserman, J.; Li, Z.; Keefe, F.; Hu, Y.J.; Toomey, T.C. Effects of coping on health outcome among women with
gastrointestinal disorders. Psychosom. Med. 2000 ,62, 309–317. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
80. Drossman, D.A. Presidential address: Gastrointestinal illness and the biopsychosocial model. Psychosom. Med. 1998 ,60, 258–267.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
81. Van Tilburg MA, L.; Drossman, D.A.; Knowles, S.R. Psychogastroenterology: The brain-gut axis and its psychological applications.
J. Psychosom. Res. 2022 ,152, 110684. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
82. Gracie, D.J.; Irvine, A.J.; Sood, R.; Mikocka-Walus, A.; Hamlin, P .J.; Ford, A.C. Effect of psychological therapy on disease activity,
psychological comorbidity, and quality of life in inflammatory bowel disease: A systematic review and meta-analysis. The lancet.
Gastroenterol. Hepatol. 2017 ,2, 189–199. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
83. Ford, A.C.; Lacy, B.E.; Harris, L.A.; Quigley EM, M.; Moayyedi, P . Effect of Antidepressants and Psychological Therapies in
Irritable Bowel Syndrome: An Updated Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Am. J. Gastroenterol. 2019 ,114, 21–39. [CrossRef]
84. Drossman, D.A. Abuse, trauma, and GI illness: Is there a link? Am. J. Gastroenterol. 2011 ,106, 14–25. [CrossRef]
85. Glynn, H.; Möller, S.P .; Wilding, H.; Apputhurai, P .; Moore, G.; Knowles, S.R. Prevalence and Impact of Post-traumatic Stress
Disorder in Gastrointestinal Conditions: A Systematic Review. Dig. Dis. Sci. 2021 ,66, 4109–4119. [CrossRef]
86. Jagielski, C.H.; Chey, W.D.; Riehl, M.E. Influence of trauma on clinical outcomes, quality of life and healthcare resource utilization
following psychogastroenterology intervention. J. Psychosom. Res. 2021 ,146, 110481. [CrossRef]
87. Salcudean, A.; Lica, M.M. The Role of Systemic Family Psychotherapy in Glycemic Control for Children with Type 1 Diabetes.
Children 2024 ,11, 104. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.