For any issues with this document, please contact your library.

____________________________________________________________________________________

Title: Journal of human behavior in the social environment.

ArticleTitle: 'My struggles are largely sensory processing:' The sensory world of autistic people

ArticleAuthor: Brake

Pages: 1-23

OCLC - 49968301; ISSN - 10911359; LCN - 2002214286;

Publisher: 2024-07-24

Source: LibKeyNomad

Copyright: CCG

____________________________________________________________________________________

## NOTICE CONCERNING COPYRIGHT RESTRICTIONS:

The copyright law of the United States [Title 17, United StatesCode] governs the making of photocopies or other reproductions of copyrighted materials.

Under certain conditions specified in the law, libraries and archives are authorized to furnish a photocopy or other reproduction. One of these specific conditions is that the photocopy is not to be "used for any purpose other than private study, scholarship, or research." If a user makes a request for, or later uses, a photocopy or reproduction for purposes in excess of "fair use," that user may be liable for copyright infringement.

This institution reserves the right to refuse to accept a copying order if, in its judgment, fulfillment of that order would involve violation of copyright law.

## Journal of Human Behavior in the Social Environment

ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/whum20

## 'My struggles are largely sensory processing:' The sensory world of autistic people

## Jad Brake

To cite this article: Jad Brake (24 Jul 2024): 'My struggles are largely sensory processing:' The sensory world of autistic people, Journal of Human Behavior in the Social Environment, DOI: 10.1080/10911359.2024.2382108

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/10911359.2024.2382108

Published online: 24 Jul 2024.

Submit your article to this journal

View related articles

View Crossmark data

## 'My struggles are largely sensory processing:' The sensory world of autistic people

## Jad Brake

The W. Maurice Young Centre for Applied Ethics, The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada

## ABSTRACT

## KEYWORDS

This  article  delved  into  the  sensory  experiences  of  autistic  adults, drawing  on  ethnographic  fieldwork  conducted  in  British  Columbia, Canada.  Thematic  analysis  of  qualitative  data  revealed  how  unusual perceptual  sensitivities  impact  the  emotional  well-being  of  autistic people,  complicating  their  social  interactions  and  relationships  and contributing  to  social  isolation.  However,  autistic  individuals  adopt diverse  sensory  and  social  coping  strategies,  and  constantly  adapt their previous sensory and social experiences to particular social and physical  environments. This  enables them to deal  with their  sensory challenges while interacting and socializing with others and engaging in  social  relationships.  These  ongoing  adaptative processes also produce  distinctive  sociability  patterns  and  perceptions  among  autistic people,  reflecting  both  the  stress  associated  with  social  interaction and the intense desire for  it.  Accordingly,  this  study  highlighted  the need for greater awareness of sensory phenomena and of social and physical environments to understand the daily and life experiences of autistics individuals.

Autism; sensory; sociability; adults; social relationships

## Introduction

The  Diagnostic  and  Statistical  Manual  of  Mental  Disorders  (DSM-5)  defines  autism  as a spectrum of developmental disorders. According to the DSM-5, the autism condition is characterized  by  deficits  in  social  communication  and  narrow  and  repetitive  patterns  of behaviors and interests. The inclusion of atypical sensory sensitivity as a criterion in the autism definition, introduced more recently, underscores the growing recognition of the pivotal role sensory issues play in understanding autism (American Psychiatric Association, 2013).

Unusual sensory sensitivities and responses are not uncommon in autism (Grapel et al., 2015; Schauder &amp; Bennetto, 2016; Smith &amp; Sharp, 2013; Tavassoli et al., 2014, 2018) and they have been reported in research since Kanner's study in (Kanner, 1943) as well as in autistic persons' autobiographical accounts (Causton-Theoharis et al., 2009; Grandin, 1992; O'Neill  &amp;  Jones,  1997;  Prince-Hughes,  2004;  Yergeau,  2013).  These  atypical  perceptual experiences are usually demonstrated by hyper and/or hyposensitivity to different sensory stimuli (Ben Sasson et al., 2008; Smith &amp; Sharp, 2013) and have been observed in different -sensory domains such as the auditory domain (sounds), tactile domain (touch), gustatory

domain (taste), olfactory domain (smells), and visual domain (lights) (Butera et al., 2020; O'Neill &amp; Jones, 1997; Smith &amp; Sharp, 2013).

This  article drew  on  my  14 months  of  ethnographic  fieldwork  (June  2019  to August 2020) conducted for my PhD research project in British Columbia (BC), Canada, which examined friendships among 21 autistic adults. The data illuminated sensory experiences of the participants and their perceptions of how sensory issues affect their daily and social life. In fact, descriptions of how participants felt in certain social environments and circumstances  and  their  emotional  and  physical  sensations  and  reactions  to  them  was a  central  theme  that  continued  to  emerge  in  the  interviews  and  conversations  with  the research  participants  about  their  friendships  and  social  relationships  was.  During  my ethnographic  study,  I  paid  close  attention  to  the  sensory,  embodied  aspects  of  autistic people's lives which, as we will see, constitute a necessary basis to understand communication, social interaction, and sociability in autism.

By examining sensory experiences, this study contributed to viewing autism as a complex corporeal  and  social  experience  rather  than  as  a  purely  neurodevelopmental  disorder. Illuminating  how  bodily-and  particularly  sensory-aspects,  affect  autistic  individuals' daily,  emotional,  and  social  lives,  this  work  answered  Solomon's  (2010,  p.  252)  call  for ethnographic and social inquiry on autism that explores personal narratives on 'sensory, and perceptual experiences of autism.'

The majority of participants in this study favored the term 'autistic person/individual/ people' over 'person with autism' or 'on the spectrum.' Some participants had no specific preferences or objections regarding terminology. Therefore, in this paper, I used the terms 'autistic  person/individual/people'  to  respect  the  preferences  of  those  who  identify  as autistic individuals.

## Unusual sensory experiences in autism

Sensory symptoms are described in the DSM-5 as 'hyper- or hyporeactivity to sensory input or  unusual  interest  in  sensory  aspects  of  the  environment'  (American  Psychiatric Association,  2013,  p.  50).  Emotional  and  bodily  reactions  to  sensory  inputs  range  from negative  feelings  of  discomfort,  distress,  anxiety,  and  sometimes  even  physical  pain  to positive feelings of enjoyment, fascination, and pleasure (Ben Sasson et al., 2008; Chamak -et al., 2008; Jones et al., 2003; O'Neill &amp; Jones, 1997; Robertson &amp; Simmons, 2015; Smith &amp; Sharp, 2013). Sensory processing difficulties can continue to be significant in adulthood and across the lifespan (Crane et al., 2009; Horder et al., 2014; Tavassoli et al., 2014).

Previous studies that investigated sensory aspects and experiences among autistic individuals consistently demonstrated the profound impact of sensory challenges on their daily lives,  social  interactions,  and  overall  well-being.  Unusual  sensory  sensitivities  in  autism were  associated  with  poor  social  communication  (Glod  et  al.,  2015;  Lane  et  al.,  2010), language pragmatic difficulties (Geils &amp; Knoetze, 2008), depression and anxiety (Smith &amp; Sharp,  2013),  loneliness  and  social  isolation  (Smith  &amp;  Sharp,  2013;  Syu  &amp;  Lin,  2018), behavioral problems and emotional challenges (Baker et al., 2008), and even sleep difficulties  (Mazurek  &amp;  Petroski,  2015).  Perceptual  difficulties  were  also  found  to  impact  the cognitive abilities and skills of autistic people and negatively affect their academic achievements and performance (Ben-Sasson et al.,  2007;  Butera  et  al.,  2020;  Clince  et  al.,  2016; Howe &amp; Stagg, 2016; Weiner &amp; Grenier, 2020). Some also suggested that sensory processing

difficulties are associated with aggressive behavior in autistic adults (Van Den Boogert et al., 2021) and children (Bitsika et al., 2017; Mazurek et al., 2013).

However, research on the impact sensory aspects have on autistic individuals' social life and  social  behavior  has  increased  only  in  recent  years  (Belek,  2019;  Clince  et  al.,  2016; Hilton et al., 2007; Smith &amp; Sharp, 2013; Thye et al., 2018), and with more focus on children and less on adults (Crane et al., 2009; Gonthier et al., 2016). Belek (2019) discussed bodily and sensory aspects of the experience of autism. He explained how autistic people tend to narrate  and  describe  their  autism  and  condition  in  relation  to  bodily  sensations  and particularly  how  they  use  terms  such  as  'meltdowns,'  'shutdowns,'  and  'overload'  to convey  experiences  of  distress.  Clince  et  al.  (2016)  demonstrated  the  ways  sensory  considerations shape autistic people's decisions about their leisure and social activities. Bagby et  al.  (2012)  highlighted  one  of  the  negative  social  outcomes  of  perceptual  sensitivities: difficulty  engaging  in  familial  and  communal  activities.  Kuhaneck  and  Britner  (2013) explained how sensory processing issues impose on autistic children's ability to engage in and practice social play. Smith and Sharp (2013) examined sensory experiences in autistic adults. They found that for autistic individuals, sensory input could be a source of either distress  or  fascination  and  pleasure.  Further,  the  authors  showed  that  some  of  these strategies that autistic individuals use to deal with their over- and/or under-sensitivity to sensory inputs, such as social avoidance, often lead to reduced social interaction and even isolation. Robertson and Simmons (2015) conducted a focus group with six autistic adults and examined their perceptual experiences. In this study, participants described exposure to intense sensory stimuli as a distressing, tiring, and painful experience. To reduce distress, control  over  the  sensory  stimulus  was  the  most  common  coping  strategy  reported  by participants in Robertson's and Simmons' study (e.g., avoiding being touched or wearing earplugs). At the same time, participants reported feelings of pleasure and fascination when interacting with certain sensory stimuli, a feeling that autistic individuals often seek, Smith and Sharp also found.

Despite  these  recent  research  attempts,  little  is  known  about  the  impact  of  sensory experience  on  autistic  individuals'  social  life  and  sociability  patterns.  Hence,  this  study, which illuminated the ways sensory processing and sensitivities affect sociability and social relationships among autistic adults, filled a gap in autism research.

## Materials and methods

## Goal of the study

Data for this study were collected within a broader ethnographic research project exploring the life and social experiences of autistic adults. This qualitative study specifically aimed to investigate the sensory experiences of autistic individuals and their perceptions of how their unique  perceptual  sensitivities  impact  their  daily  lives,  social  behavior  and  interactions, sociability, and overall emotional and physical well-being.

## Participants

This study included 13 autistic participants: females, males, and participants who defined themselves  as  non-binary.  The  ages  of  the  participants  ranged  between  20-60.  All  the

participants in the current study are autistic adults who live in the Lower Mainland area of BC, Canada (see Table 1). All participants were officially diagnosed with autism, except one participant (Erik) who identified as autistic person without clinical diagnosis.

All  the  participants  in  the  present  study  have  adequate  communication  skills  and  an ability  for  self-expression.  In  addition  to  engaging  in  interpersonal  relationships  such  as romantic relationships or marriage, more than half of the participants are employed and hold  jobs,  either  full  or  part  time  (eight  participants  are  unemployed),  hold  a  postsecondary  diploma  or  a  university  degree,  or  were  university  or  college  students  at  the time of study participation (as mentioned in Table 1). Thus, the selection of the participants in  this  study  reflects  a  purposeful  sampling  (Bogdan  &amp;  Biklen,  1998)  and  therefore  the participants and findings do not represent all autistic people and the full range of personalities, abilities, perceptions, and experiences among this group. Nevertheless, this study's population  provided  me  with  the  opportunity  to  investigate  matters  concerning  sensory experiences  within  the  context  of  autism.  The  results  and  conclusions  drawn  from  this research could potentially provide new perspective and insights for future research aimed to explore sensory issues among other autistic groups.

## Recruitment and ethics

Participants  were  enrolled  via  advertisements  placed  in  autism-related  social  institutions and clinics in British Columbia. Additionally, flyers were posted on various autism-related websites, including ACT-Autism Community Training and REACHBC. A snowball sampling method also facilitated the recruitment of participants who learned about the study through word-of-mouth from previous participants.

Ethical approval was obtained from the authors affiliated university prior to recruitment and data collection. All participants provided signed informed consent forms, which were written in clear and accessible language. Participants received these forms well in advance and had up to two weeks to review them thoroughly before deciding to participate.

## Data collection

The data gathering  consisted  of  participant  observation;  semi-structured  interviews;  and two focus group sessions using Zoom. After all face-to-face research  activities  were  suspended due to the COVID-19 pandemic, officially declared on March 2020 by the World Health  Organization,  I  conducted  all  individual  interviews  through  telephone  and  video calls. Indeed, the new life conditions that the pandemic demanded allowed me to 'create a  flexible  methodology'  and  to  build  a  hybrid  ethnographic  experience  that  combined online and offline spaces (Johnson, 2022, p. 774).

The  interviews  and  focus  groups,  each  lasting  between  1  to  1.5 hours,  followed a  phenomenological  approach  (Creswell,  2013)  to  gather  rich  data  and  achieve  a  deep understanding  of  autistic  individuals'  perceptions  and  descriptions  of  their  experiences. Indeed, the interview and focus group sessions, primarily focused on the daily and social experiences  of  autistic  individuals,  with  a  specific  emphasis  on  friendship  and  social relationships.  However,  as  mentioned  earlier,  a  recurring  subject  in  these  conversations was participants' descriptions of their feelings in various social and physical environments and  how these  sensations  affected  their  behavior  and  interaction  with  others.  Given  the

## Table 1. Participants' demographic characteristics.

Age

| Age at Autism Diagnosis After age of 30   | Under age of 5    | After age of 20   | No official autism   | diagnosis After age of 30   | After age of 20   | During high school After age of 40    | After age of 30          | Under age of 5 After age of 20         | After age of 30   | After age of 20           |
|-------------------------------------------|-------------------|-------------------|----------------------|-----------------------------|-------------------|---------------------------------------|--------------------------|----------------------------------------|-------------------|---------------------------|
| Marital Status Married                    | Has a partner     | Single            | Married              | Single                      | Single            | Single Married (has 4                 | children) Married (has 2 | children) Single Has a partner         | Single            | Has a partner             |
| Employment Unemployed                     | Employed          | Unemployed        | Employed             | Unemployed                  | Employed          | Employed Employed                     | Employed                 | Employed Unemployed                    | Employed          | Unemployed                |
| Education Level Bachelor's degree         | Undergrad student | Bachelor's degree | Undergrad student    | Missing data                | Bachelor's degree | Online courses Bachelor's degree      | Bachelor's degree        | High school graduate Undergrad student | Bachelor's degree | Post-secondary diploma    |
| Place of Birth France                     | Canada            | Canada            | Canada               | Missing data                | Canada            | Canada Canada                         | Canada                   | Canada Singapore                       | Canada            | Data missing              |
| Location Metro                            | Vancouver Metro   | Vancouver Metro   | Vancouver Metro      | Vancouver Metro             | Vancouver Metro   | Vancouver Fraser Valley Fraser Valley | Fraser Valley            | Fraser Valley Metro                    | Vancouver Metro   | Vancouver Metro Vancouver |
| Gender Range                              | 25-29             | 25-29             | 30-39                | Above 50                    | 40-49             | 25-29 Above 50                        | 30-39                    | 20-24 25-29                            | Above 50          | Female 25-29              |
| Self-Identified Female                    | Male              | Female            | Transgender          | Transgender                 | Female            | Female Female                         | Female                   | Male Queer                             | Male              |                           |
| Pseudonym Alice                           | Andrew            | Emily             | Erik                 | Frank                       | Helen             | Jennifer Jolie                        | Linda                    | Neil Olivia                            | Tony              | Victoria                  |

importance  of  this  subject,  questions  specifically  addressing  sensory  experiences  were included.

Further,  from  the  very  beginning  of  my  fieldwork,  I  became  aware  that  the  interviews included rich  data  and  insights  that  I  obtained  beyond  the  talk/words  that  my  participants exchanged with me; thus, each face-to-face interview constituted a rich site for observation. While conversing and interacting with the participants, I observed and became aware of how the external physical environment of the meeting, my physical body, and my behavior affected the interview process and the whole research encounter. On many occasions, I noticed that the  lack  of  a  suitable  environment  negatively  affected  the  ability  of  autistic  individuals  to participate  effectively  in  conversations  with  me.  For  instance,  I  observed  how  other  'background' noises and loud sounds, such as the sound of the coffee grinder inside cafés, affected some participants' ability to focus on the conversation and to communicate with me. These intrusions explain why, when I met participants at cafés or other locations, it was important for  them  to  choose  a  small  and  quiet  space  with  as  few  distractions  as  possible.  Therefore, during data collection, I paid special attention to the physical environment of the study.

## Data analysis

The analysis that I developed in this study is based primarily on the qualitative data that I gathered in interviews and focus groups. I transcribed all audio recordings of the interviews and the focus groups and imported them into NVivo 12 software, which I used to organize  and  code  the  data.  For  my  analysis  and  interpretation  of  the  data,  I  used  the qualitative thematic analysis approach, defined as 'a method for identifying, analyzing and reporting patterns (themes) within data' (Braun &amp; Clarke, 2006, p. 79). During a process of repeated  reading  of  the  transcripts,  I  familiarized  myself  with  the  data  before  the  initial codes were identified and generated. All initial codes were then combined and organized into themes. Further, my analysis of the data went beyond the semantic or descriptive level, and also involved exploration and interpretation of underlying concepts and meanings in participants' accounts, achieving a what Braun and Clarke (2006, p. 84) described as 'latent' level of thematic analysis.

## Results

The  findings  were  organized  into  three  main  themes: Senses  and  the  body :  presenting participants' sensory experiences and physical sensations and these experiences and sensations' impact on their daily functioning and emotional state. Senses and the environment : discussing participants' strategies and ways of coping with their sensory challenges. Senses and  sociability :  describing  how  sensory  aspects  affect  autistic  individuals'  social  lives, particularly their friendship relationships.

## 'Why I'm sitting in this place:' senses and the body

## Sensitivity to sound and light

Erik  is  a  30-year-old  married  transgender  person  who  uses  the  pronouns  'they/theirs.' After  we  decided  to  meet,  Erik  wrote  in  their  e-mail:  'Please  note  that  I  have

misophonia and so I ask that you not eat or chew gum during the meeting.' I met Erik in a small quiet local café. While I was carefully slurping my hot tea trying to make no 'oral  noise,'  Erik  explained  how  misophonia,  and  sensitivity  to  certain  sounds  more generally,  not  only  bother  them  but  even  prevent  them  from  doing  the  activities  they love  the  most:

. . . if I can change things, then at a movie theater there should be no food and no gum, and you cannot chew at movies.

## Erik added:

Like, think of turning volume down in shows and I will be able to go. I love waterfalls but they are too loud, I cannot do it.

Other participants reported similar experiences with noise and its interference with communication. I met Frank (also uses the pronouns 'they/theirs') in a café located very close to the building where they live. Frank's struggle with keeping track of the conversation was readily apparent, especially when trying to ignore the very crowded and noisy street right across from the café. After chatting for few minutes at the café, Frank said that the place is very  noisy  for  them,  so  we  decided  to  relocate  to  a  small  yard  in  the  entrance  of  their building to continue our conversation. On our way, Frank continued to share with me how noise negatively affects them, especially their ability to communicate with people:

I  mean, my conversation should stop, I have to wait until the noise passes or in some cases I have learnt to tune it out, so that I can talk when there is noise and the other person can hear, so. . .

My observation and encounter with Frank at the Café' and their description of how noise affects  them,  helped  me  understand  that  what  would  be  simple  conversations  for  the average person were very challenging for Frank due to their sensitivities.

Other social spaces such as classroom activities, that depend on conversation, can prove particularly challenging for autistic people. Andrew reflected on his current experience as an undergraduate student and mentioned classrooms as an example of the type of stressful and challenging environment that he encounters on daily basis:

In classes, in particular when there is group work in the class, you know, you've got everybody talking in one room at the same time, I am trying to hear what people are saying but hear others in other groups who are talking at the same time, so that is a bit more challenging.

As a response to my question of what makes certain sounds annoying or 'noisy' and how it feels  for  him,  Andrew  differentiated  between  organized  and  unorganized  sounds  and pointed out the importance of 'sound (and light) quality' as main factors that determine, in his view, his physical and emotional reactions to different auditory and visual stimuli:

. . . . It is kind of ironic, I go to a dance pub full of loud music until late at night, but a bunch of people in a room can be bothersome to me . . . I think it is also not just the level of the sound but the quality of it. If there is a bunch of people talking all at once, if I am hearing those people at the same time this is basically noise and there is nothing correlating all the sounds together. But if it is music, if it is good music, then that is fine.

At the same time, Andrew also emphasized how his over-sensitivity can be positive and even  very  helpful  in  his  occupation  as  a  professional  sound  and  light  technician.  For

8

example, Andrew described how he 'uses' his physical sensation of discomfort as evidence for an impairment in sound that should be fixed:

Like, me being sensitive to sound or light can be really stressful at times, but it can also be really helpful and allows me to do my job well. So, if I hear something that is not sounding right and it makes me physically uncomfortable, it is my job to ensure the sound is good . . .

In  other  words,  this  example  not  only  showed  how  Andrew's  unusual  sensitivity  can  he 'useful' but also illustrated how Andrew was also able to adapt to his sensitivity to sound rather than constantly being disabled by it.

## Sensitivity to smell and touch

In  addition  to  sounds  and  light,  sensitivity  to  smell  and  touch  in  social  spaces  can  also produce  uncomfortable  overstimulation.  Alice  also  reported  perceptual  sensitivities  as Andrew  did,  and  expressed  how  she  usually  gets  overstimulated  and  overwhelmed  by noise and lights, she is also sensitive to certain smells. She also mentioned that when she feels anxious, she 'cannot stand noise or smells' and that these sensory stimuli can even make her 'aggressive.' Alice, who I met in a local café for an interview, also discussed with me how much sensory considerations are central in her experience, especially in her social life and practices:

Social  spaces  are  not  the  best.  You  cannot  find  places  without  music  going  on  or  without screaming. I enjoy cocktails and beers but noisy places . . . . If you ask me about my experience, I speak about the sensory parts.

Alice,  like  Andrew,  also  described  the  positive  sides  of  her  sensory  processing  and how  she  is  even  able  to  find  enjoyment  and  pleasure  in  visual  sensations:  'Being able  to  enjoy  the  lights.  Like  how  the  lights  changing  during  the  day  and  during  the seasons.'  More  than  that,  Alice  decided  to  share  with  me  her  marriage  story  to illustrate  the  'happy'  and  pleasurable  sides  of  unusual  sensory  sensitivity.  When I asked  her  why  and  how  she  chose  her  husband,  she  said,  'I  think  there  is something  in  his  smell,  like  he  smells  something  special,  something  about  the smell  . . .  '

Unusual sensitivities in the tactile domain were also reported by other participants in this research. A few months after I met Neil for an interview, I conducted an online focus group discussion with five autistic participants to discuss their experience of autism. Neil was one of the group members, and, in response to the question of how participants describe their experiences  of  sensory  processing,  he  explained  his  unusual  reactions  and  sensitivity  to certain lights by classifying lights according to their types and intensity. In his case, Neil believes,  hypersensitivity  to  lights  usually  results  in  physical  fatigue  and  reduced  general motivation:

I have a lot of sensory issues around lights, like all these new LED lights and blue lights take energy out of me. So . . . I find the world more challenging every day.

Neil, also reported unusual sensitivities in the tactile domain, particularly discomfort with being touched or hugged. Neil's description of his childhood experience demonstrated this sensory difficulty: 'As a child I didn't like being held,' Neil said when he described for me

his  diagnosis  experience  and  how  his  mother  'started  noticing  that  he  was  little  bit different,' to use his words.

Being touched and other sensory experiences generated negative emotional and physical reactions  among  some  participants  and  affected  their  daily  behavior  and  decisions.  For example, Emily was the first to respond to my question to the online focus group participants, asking them to describe sensory symptoms and how they affect their life experiences. Emily shared:

For me, I have a touch sensitivity, I wouldn't like it if a friend tried to hug me, and I think that sometimes it becomes awkward when you tell somebody 'I don't like to be hugged.'

## Jennifer, another group participant, added:

For me, my sensory issues are sensitivity to voices, like if they are too loud, I'll get completely overwhelmed. And I have some sensory issues of touch.

In addition to being touched, over-sensitivity to touching certain surfaces or objects was also  raised  by  some  participants.  Going  back  to  Neil,  for  example,  in  our  interview meeting he explained his feeling toward 'sticky surfaces' and his emotional reactions to them:

- . . . I don't like sticky surfaces or feeling and things like that. I find for some reason early in the morning everything feels sticky and overwhelming.

Other participants also had very specific sensitivities to touching surfaces with particular textures. In our video interview, Victoria provided a description of how the fear of getting touched turns Victoria's very basic daily activity of taking public transportation into a very challenging and stressful experience:

So, I have a lot of issues with touch. So, if someone touches me, or like something too soft, or like food texture . . . I cannot take transit if people sit close to me and I'm like 'please don't touch me.'

As participants' testimonies and the various quotes above clearly showed, sensory sensitivities and overstimulation can lead to anxiety and other negative emotions. At the same time, anxiety  and  depression  also  impact  individual's  sensory  processing  patterns  either  by increasing sensitivity or by 'numbing' it, both of which make processing different sensory inputs harder and more challenging. This was evident in the interview with Alice who, when anxious, 'cannot stand noise or smells' and becomes more 'aggressive,' and in the following quote from Neil's narrative on how depression weakens and debilitates his perceptual abilities. Neil stated:

I used to have very sensitive hearing. If I am feeling depressed, then all my senses are damped you know.

Participants'  descriptions  like  Neil's  and  their  stories  demonstrated  the  centrality  of hyper-  and/or  hypo-  sensitivity  to  sensory  stimulation  in  autistic  people's  daily  experiences.  Responding  and  adapting  to  these  sensory  challenges  is  the  daily  living  reality that  makes  autistic  individuals  'always  exhausted,'  as  some  described  it.  The  following quote  from  Linda's  personal  account  clearly  reflected  that  reality,  as  well  as  the

centrality  of  it  in  the  autism  condition,  a  condition  which  Linda  defined  as  'a  sensory experience of  the  world:'

I  think for me, like, I experience the world as autistic, and to me it's like an energy sensory experience and that is very different from a neurotypical experience.

In short, besides a few positive sensory experiences reported by some participants, sensory sensitivities in different domains mostly lead to negative emotions and bodily reactions that range from discomfort to being overwhelmed and anxious, to feeling physical tiredness and sometimes even pain. These emotional and physical conditions also make sensory processing more challenging for autistic people. The following section will discuss participants' strategies and ways of coping with their sensory challenges and environments.

## Senses and the environment: ways of coping

Participants identified a number of strategies and bodily techniques they employ to deal with their over/under sensitivities to sensory stimuli. To block or reduce the intensity of auditory stimuli, many mentioned using ear plugs and head/earphones. 'I wear ear plugs if I go anywhere that can be damaging (to sense of hearing) to reserve my ears for my work . . . ,'  Andrew  claimed.  For  Victoria,  ear  plugs  are  essential  for  her  daily  function:  'So,  I'm trying  to  minimize  (noise)  and  have  ear  plugs  and  stuff  to  still  be  able  to  go  (outside).' However,  decreasing  loud  and  'unorganized'  sounds  through  ear  plugs  is  not  the  only technique Victoria uses to cope with her hypersensitivity. Alternatively, covering her ears with headphones and listening to loud but 'organized' sounds, such as music, which blocks and replaces external 'noises,' is also reported as another useful strategy that she adopts frequently. Jennifer also differentiated between organized and unorganized sounds when she  described  a  similar  way  of  coping  with  oversensitivity  in  the  auditory  domain:  She claimed:

If I am in public then I have my earphones on, and I can make it louder cause I don't wanna hear anyone around me. . . . . Yeah, I cannot stand unorganized mess.

In  other  words,  to  regulate  and  control  auditory  stimuli,  Victoria  and  Jennifer  not  only attempt  to  decrease  loud  sounds  using  ear  plugs,  but  they  also  seek  loud  but  organized sounds (by listening to loud music) to eliminate external 'noise,' to calm themselves, and even to enjoy auditory sensations.

Still  exposure  to  and  coping  with  intense  sensory  stimuli  cannot  always  by  managed successfully. Lack of control over sensory stimuli often leads to negative emotions, such as extreme stress and anxiety, and triggers immediate bodily reactions manifested primarily by physical withdrawing. In our interview meeting, Tony touched on this matter. He described how being around 'lots of people shouting' makes him 'get overstimulated,' and how his lack  of  ability  to  control  his  feelings  and  reactions  makes  responses  such  as  leaving  or 'getting out' of the place the only solution available to him:

When I am in a setting with lots of people around me, people shouting like that, I can get overstimulated . . . After a while I just wanna get out of there.

Similarly,  Victoria's  reasonable  belief  that  crowded  places  could  increase  her  chance  of 'being touched' guides her to adopt the very common coping strategy of avoiding sensory

stimuli. Avoidance and even fear of outdoor spaces and activities that Victoria perceives as sources of inconvenient experiences and anxiety shape her daily schedule, since she must arrange  her  day  in  ways  that  help  her  to  order  to  avoid  crowded  environments,  as  she explained to me:

I'm quite content mostly being at home, I got all my stuff here, I got my cat, I got my boyfriend, just no one annoying me . . . but if I, like, want to go out I try to avoid crowded transit and try to schedule appointments at the middle of the day, so I don't have to take two hours to get home.

Avoidance is also a strategy used by Olivia (a queer person who uses the pronouns 'they/ theirs') who described their sensory avoidance strategy as deciding not to 'leave the house' as much as possible. This was their answer when I asked them about their leisure time and social activities:

I am very tired person. It is hard for me to leave the house. It is hard for me to go into a public place where there are lots of sounds and smells and colours, they are like overwhelming, so I just like to stay in a place that is quiet and safe and familiar.

Jolie is a mother of four children, two of whom are also autistic persons. After living with autism for many years, she believes that feeling anxiety and dealing with sensory stimuli on a  daily  basis  are  the  most  challenging  aspects  of  autism,  as  she  shared  in  the  group discussion. Reflecting back on her 42 years of life experience with autism, Helen reinforced Jolie's opinions by stating in the group discussion that 'when she gets older, it's just getting worse, and just worse.'

Following  Jolie  and  Helen,  Linda  also  drew  on  a  perspective  of  time  to  share  her experience with her sensory difficulties.  These  difficulties  have  never  disappeared,  Linda noted, but her ways of living with them have changed with age so that she is now able to 'balance her sensory needs.' Linda also described how she has been able to get rid of her habit of drinking alcohol, a coping tool that she used to adopt in the past to deal with her inability to control sensory overstimulation:

I just wanna say that when I look back, I was younger . . . I would drink a lot of alcohol to go to the club or things like a bar. Now I see it was actually a way of numbing some of my sensory stimulation,  cause  now  if  I  go  to  a  bar  I  would  get  overwhelmed  very  quickly  . . .  And  as I become a mother, I have to figure out how to balance my sensory needs . . .

## Jolie also replied to Linda and added:

'When I was at university and later, I used alcohol to help numb the sensory issues a little bit but also the social anxiety,' Jolie continued.

Linda replied: 'Yeah, for me it just made things easier . . . ' [Linda and Jolie laughed].

The use of alcohol to 'numb the sensory' and to deal with social anxiety was somewhat common and was reported by Victoria as well. Victoria also mentioned the use of alcohol in our one-on-one interview by stating that she finds 'drinking' very helpful when she 'hangs out with friends:' 'If I go out and I'm drinking I'm less sensitive.'

Erik also believed that living with their sensory symptoms and accepting them is better than fighting them. Like Linda, Erik compared their past with their present perception of sensory experiences to illustrate their journey of learning to live with and accepting their sensory needs:

Like, I cannot see movies in theaters. I cannot. I want to. I used to force myself when I was younger, because I did not understand why it is horrible for me and I thought it is my problem, and now I stopped forcing myself because it is a horrible experience. But it is also sad because I don't see movies.

Linda  ended  the  long  group  discussion  on  sensory  processing  in  autism  by  making  the argument that it is the 'modern world' that is to blame for creating challenging and more sensory-stimulating environments that make autistic individuals' experience more challenging. 'It has become harder for autistics to function in the modern world because there is so much sensory stimulation,' Linda explained her thinking about this to the group members. Alice even asserted that it is also her responsibility to 'educate people' and to make them be more patient toward autistic persons' needs in general, and more tolerant to their sensory needs in particular.

However, along with acknowledging non-autistics' and the public responsibility to create more sensory-friendly environments, or even blaming society for making autistic people's experience tougher, as Linda did, all of the participants tried to find practical ways to adapt to  and  even  create  their  own  environments.  Participants also  tried  to  stay  socially  active while dealing with their personal sensory needs on daily basis, and tried to find individual ways to reduce their suffering and distress. Erik, who still dreams of 'no food and no gums in theaters,' accepted and understood that 'a lot of people cannot sit [in a theater] for long without food;' and Victoria, who understood that 'expecting the whole world to be quiet' is 'not realistic,' are good examples of this pragmatic approach.

## Senses and sociability: friendship and social relationships

Participants described the impact of sensory challenges on their interpersonal relationships and social lives. Victoria shared in our online video conversation her struggle with certain sounds and smells that determines, to a large extent, where she is able to meet friends:

Like,  I  say  to  friends  let's  meet  in  my  house  or  their  house  and  then  . . .  but  like,  going  to restaurants and people are chewing, and it smells too bad.

In addition, Victoria's distress at being touched, as I understood later in our conversation, explains her 'desire' to stay at home most of the time: 'I mostly just hang out at home, play video games, talk with friends online and stuff,' she said.

The view of 'home' as a safe and comfortable environment and space to socialize with friends  was  raised  repeatedly  by  other  participants.  Erik,  for  example,  prefers  to  stay  at home as much as possible and even when they 'hanged out outside,' they always questioned their decision of leaving their home. 'And I ask myself why I am here, why I am like sitting in this crowded noisy place? Colouring in my color book when I could do it at home,' Erik wondered in our interview meeting.

Helen shared her thoughts with the focus group members on how she thinks her way of processing sounds and smells in particular not only impacts her decision where to meet friends  but  also  largely  rules  her  choices  on  the  kinds  of  people  to  interact  with.  Helen narrated:

If people talk really fast it's hard to understand them, or people who [smell bad] is a big issue for me . . . smelling certain things like perfumes or smells that they [people] have, this is a big

major thing for me that I struggle with . . . . So, people who are like that, I cannot be around them.

Helen's words received immediate support from Jolie who presented her perception of how  sound  sensitivity  not  only  makes  information  processing  and  communication challenging,  but  also  limits  autistic  individuals'  ability  as  well  as  opportunity  to  create new friendships:

In a noisy environment, I have trouble keeping up with the conversation and keeping track on the conversation and then being heard when my voice doesn't get heard very well, so it pretty much silences me in a loud environment like loud restaurant. So, if you are going to school and your class is going to a pub after, so that's not a place that you can really go and engage, then it certainly affects the ability of people that you are trying to make friendships with.

Andrew shared with the group his experience following Helen's and Jolie's comments on communication troubles caused by auditory processing difficulties:

Yeah, I definitely identify with loud conversations, a lot of people talking at once, like it's funny, I can go to raves and festivals and music concerts and be okay with that with ear plugs in, but people chatting at once hurts me more.

Jolie, while continuing to focus on the example of friendship, replied to Andrew and added her observations on how difficulties in information and sound processing interferes with communicating  with  others,  and  even  leads  to  a  feeling  of  exclusion  and  of  being  an outsider:

And I think it affects your ability to make friends as well, because if you are part of a group and everybody  else  seems  to  be  able  to  manage  it,  and  can  have  conversation  with  the  person besides them, and have their voice heard, but then you are having trouble hearing your voice and trouble keeping track of the conversation that you are supposed to. It also affects if people want  to  be  there,  because  someone  can  sit  there  but  cannot  be  part  of  the  conversation,  it doesn't do good things for the group.

Andrew  used  the  example  of  sensorial  intolerances  and  his  personal  interpretation  of how  they  influence  autistic  persons'  social  experiences,  to  share  with  the  group  his disagreement with the claim of autistic people's disinterest in friendships and desire for loneliness:

- . . . other social spaces may not be comfortable to [autistic] people. Like, I see that there are a lot of spaces that people go to that may be excessively loud and noisy or just too crowded with people, and people might just prefer hanging out with one or two people, . . . and people just say; 'oh, they prefer being alone,' . . . but I think it can often be misinterpreted that way when it's more just that it's challenging to make these connections and go out and be social.

The over-sensitivity to different sensory stimuli not only determines, to large extent, the kind of activities autistic individuals do/not do with friends or the social spaces they attend, but  it  also  shapes  their  friendships  choices  and  preferences.  Participants'  accounts  also supported the assumption that shared experiences and understandings of daily difficulties, including  sensory  ones,  are  key  factors  in  choosing  friends.  For  example,  Erik  tried  to explain why social interactions with neurotypicals are more challenging for them:

. . . they [neurotypicals] don't understand depression or anxiety and why we are exhausted all the fucking time. They don't understand that you cannot do things and they are always like . . .

'will go to such and such places' where it is really loud, . . . and where everybody will be eating and, misophonia.

Similarly, Olivia also expressed in our interview meeting their opinion on how intolerance and  lack  of  sensitivity  to  autistic  individuals'  sensorial  needs,  among  others,  makes befriending neurotypicals a less preferable choice:

They [neurotypicals] are just operating on a different level . . . other neurodivergent people will likely  not  wear  very  strong  perfume  . . .  And  this  is  just  to  accommodate  this  basic  understanding that a lot of neurodivergent people have adverse reactions to certain stimulus, or there is certain sensory things where it is like neurotypical people don't care, they just put on a bunch of perfume . . .

In our phone interview, Emily also mentioned employment, which she currently lacks, as an example of another life domain that can be highly affected by her struggle with unusual sensory responsiveness. She imagined a workplace with intense social interactions, such as a  small  company  where  everyone  knows  and  works  closely,  as  highly  challenging.  'It  is harder [to find a job] just because I need a job that matches to my needs. Like a job where there's not too much social interaction,' Emily stated.

As the various examples showed, sensory experiences shape autistic people's sociability and friendship patterns, such as who to interact with, where, and how. Tony's descriptions, for  instance,  added  and  provided  convincing  insights  on  how  avoiding  intense  sensory stimulation is also related to the number of friends autistic people have, or the number of friends they prefer to meet and interact with at the same time. Tony referred to crowded and noisy  environments  and  how  they  disturb  his  daily  social  interactions,  even  if  he  is surrounded only by a group of friends: 'When I am in a setting with lots of people around me, people shouting like that, I can get overstimulated.' 'And this affects your ability even to be with friends?,' I asked. He responded, 'Oh yeah, especially with a large number of friends.' Similar to Tony, Andrew also shared his view on how, due to sensory processing difficulties,  interaction  and  communication with a small number of people is more convenient,  another  example  that  sheds  light  of  why  some  autistic  individuals  may  prefer having  and  'hanging  out'  with  a  limited  number  of  friends.  Andrew  even  drew  on  the current example of the COVID-19 outbreak to illustrate the point he shared with the online group members that the pandemic has made the task of socializing and communicating with friends much easier:

I  actually  haven't  minded  COVID-19  restrictions  for  six  people  in  one  table  . . .  and  just hanging with a smaller group of people in general that makes it easier in a way . . .

To explain the impact of sensory issues on their interpersonal relationships and social lives, some participants also commented on how sensory considerations shrink autistic peoples' opportunities  for  establishing  romantic  relationships.  Neil  didn't  hesitate  to  express  his frustration  and  disappointment  to  the  group  discussion  members.  He  shared  his  long, unsuccessful journey to find a romantic partner. In his description of his personal experience, Neil referred to sensory aspects as the main reason that prevents him from being able to be present in those settings where, he supposed, people usually meet and get to know each other:

I am trying to start dating . . . it's very hard when you know somebody who is very extroverted and doesn't have sensory issues. Like, you don't like crowds, so, you know, I don't enjoy going

to party like Brittney Spears on a regular basis, or bars and stuff like that where people meet, so it has been challenging you know. I'm 24 years old and I haven't been on a date for years, it's upsetting.

In our one-on-one interview meeting, Neil was able to identify the reasons that can explain his ongoing 'failure' to find a romantic partner. These were always related to his attempt to avoid intense environments and interactions. Neil told me, while a small smile appeared on his sad face, 'I don't get out enough, so that is my problem. People are not going to meet me at my house, right?' Moreover, it appeared that Neil's close network of friends, who, as he reported,  are  all  autistic  persons  and  share  similar  life  experiences,  just  contributed  to perpetuating this condition. 'But also, there is not a lot of places where you can go if you don't really have social introverted friends, you know. All my friends [autistics] have the exact same problem as I do,' Neil desperately recounted.

Unlike Neil, Victoria has succeeded in establishing and maintaining a romantic relationship. However, concerns about her sensory challenges and how to deal with them still exist. These concerns explain her hesitant attitude toward the possibility of being a mother and raising children. 'I'm slightly worried about the fact that, like, I have a bad time with noise. But I was very against that [having kids] until kind of recently,' Victoria said to explain how romantic and marriage relationships can open new challenges for autistic people.

## Discussion

Confirming the  findings  from  previous  research,  the  current  study  showed  how  autistic individual experience difficulties in sensory processing, which are demonstrated by hypersensitivity  and  hyposensitivity  across  multiple  sensory  modalities  (Butera  et  al.,  2020; O'Neill &amp; Jones, 1997; Smith &amp; Sharp, 2013; Thye et al., 2018). As the data in this study also  demonstrated,  sensory  sensitivities  mostly  generate  negative  bodily  and  emotional reactions of discomfort, anxiety, physical tiredness and even pain, but also positive feelings of enjoyment, relaxation, and pleasure. The finding is consistent with other studies where similar physical and emotional descriptions and reactions were reported (Ben Sasson et al., -2008; Chamak et al., 2008; Jones et al., 2003; O'Neill &amp; Jones, 1997; Robertson &amp; Simmons, 2015; Smith &amp; Sharp, 2013). Further, in contrast to Kern et al. (2006) claim, for participants in the present study, perceptual difficulties did not decrease with age and remain significant in adulthood, or can even 'get worse' with time, as Helen put it.

Furthermore,  participants'  accounts  illustrated  how  unusual  sensitivities  to  sensory stimuli  produce  and  are  reproduced  by  intense  negative  emotions,  creating  a  loop  of sensory-emotion  influences.  For  example,  Alice  becomes  ' anxious  and  aggressive '  when confronting intense sensory stimuli, and when she is anxious she is unable to ' stand noise or smell .' Similarly, when Neil is depressed his senses are ' damped .' This observation is similar to the concept of the 'vicious cycle' discussed by Smith and Sharp (2013, p. 896) in which stress caused more perceptual sensitivities and vice versa.

Participants mentioned a number of techniques to regulate and control various stimuli, such as using ear plugs or earphones. By using headphones and listening to loud music, for instance, participants replace 'unorganized loud noise' with 'organized loud sound,' which not  only  blocks  external  noise  but  also  provides  pleasurable  sensations,  enjoyment,  and relaxation. In other words, to regulate and control auditory stimuli, autistic people often

seek  loud  but  organized  sounds  (by  listening  to  loud  music)  and  use  the  same  sense  of hearing  to  eliminate  external  'noise,'  to  calm  themselves,  and  even  to  enjoy  auditory sensation. Similar coping techniques were reported in Robertson and Simmons (2015) as well as Smith and Sharp (2013).

The current study demonstrated that sensitivity to sound and touch makes even basic daily activities highly challenging (such as taking a public transportation, in Victoria's case). These findings added more evidence to earlier research data that demonstrated how atypical sensory  sensitivities  negatively  affect  daily  functioning  of  autistic  people  (Suarez,  2012; Tavassoli  et  al.,  2014).  Moreover,  caution  and  worry  about  exposure  to  intense  sensory stimuli, the findings in this study showed, usually lead to avoidance of outdoor social spaces and activities. Thus, sensory considerations often prevent autistic persons from engaging in activities they might envision as enjoyable because social spaces and activities that fit their sensory  needs  tend  to  be  more  restricted.  Social  avoidance  of  over-stimulating  environments is a theme that was mentioned in other studies as well (Ashburner et al., 2013; Clince et al., 2016; Robertson &amp; Simmons, 2015; Smith &amp; Sharp, 2013).

Although social avoidance can be effective, it also entails reducing autistic individuals' opportunities to meet new people and form new relationships as well as limiting the time, spaces,  and  activities  that  they  can  share  and  enjoy  with  friends.  In  cases  of  high  overstimulation and lack of control over stimuli, participants adopted the strategy of physical withdrawal, an unpleasant experience that, most probably, escalates fear of social environments and encourages more isolation and less desire for social engagement. Social avoidance  or  withdrawal  as  leading  to  loneliness  was  also  reported  by  participants  in  prior research (Smith &amp; Sharp, 2013; Syu &amp; Lin, 2018).

The findings of the current study also helped explain common socialization and friendship patterns in autism and shed light on the interplay between sensory and social behavior. For instance, sensory considerations shape autistic people's decisions to join in activities and share spaces with friends. Avoidance of intense sensory environments and sensations, which participants commonly described as 'exhausting,' makes indoor spaces and activities with a limited number of friends a preferred choice for autistic individuals. Examples of engagement in actions that limit exposure to intense sensory stimuli include meeting with friends  at  home,  watching  movies,  or  playing  video  games.  These  preferences  represent autistic individuals' attempts to adjust friendship activities to personal sensory and communicative needs and environmental limitations. These sensory and communicative considerations might provide an explanation for the smaller number of friends often reported by autistic people-see reviews by (Bauminger-Zviely &amp; Kimhi, 2017; Petrina et al., 2014), as well as the preference for indoor spaces and on-on-one activities (Bauminger-Zviely &amp; Kimhi, 2017; Kuo et al., 2013; Sedgewick et al., 2016).

Drawing on the findings of this study, it can be assumed that friendship and socialization patterns  common  among  autistic  people,  such  as  a  preference  for  indoor  activities  for a  limited  time  with  a  small  number  of  friends,  do  not  reflect  a  real  desire  for  social introversion and loneliness. Rather, these preferences reflect autistic individuals' efforts to find  the  balance  between  dealing  with  their  sensory  challenges  and  struggles  on  the  one hand  and  enjoying  social  life  as  well  as  maintaining  their  intimate  relationships  on  the other.

Sensory  sensitivities  also  shape  autistic  persons'  friendships  preferences  of  the  type of  person  to  befriend  or  not  to  befriend.  For  example,  participants  frequently  voiced

a  preference  for  interacting  with  people  with  certain  smells  or  tone  of  voice  (Helen), or  a  preference  for  socializing  with  friends  who  share  similar  difficulties,  like  other neurodivergent  people.  As  appeared  from  the  data,  autistic  people  embody  their friendships  in  a  different  range  of  physical  activities  that  answer  their  physical  and emotional  needs,  and  which  make  them  feel  even  more  related  to  others  who  enact and  embody  friendship  in  similar  ways.  This  can  also  explain  preference  for  having neurodivergent friends who, as some participants believed, share similar experiences of difficulties  including  but  not  limited  to  sensory  challenges.  A  preference  for  interacting  with  and  befriending  autistic  or  neurodivergent  people  was  also  found  in  prior studies  in  which  autistic  adults  described  feeling  more  comfortable  interacting  with other  autistic  persons  (over  neurotypicals)  (Milton  &amp;  Sims,  2016;  Morrison  et  al., 2020).

Moreover, difficulties in auditory and information processing contribute to participants' feeling  of  social  exclusion  and  marginalization.  The  inability  to  track  with  a  group  conversation, to hear and be heard, as Jolie and Linda clearly demonstrated, complicate social communication and hinder the initiation of intimate relationships with others. The interaction of sensory difficulties with communication explains autistic individuals' emerging habitus of less talking and more doing (e.g., participation in structured activities, playing video or board games etc.). The way autistic people embody friendship by 'doing' things with others as opposed to 'talking' makes the whole interaction more comfortable and even pleasurable for many autistic individuals. This is supported by other studies that showed a preference among autistic people for participation in structured social activities because they require less verbal communication (Chan et al., 2023; Müller et al., 2008). This finding might help explain the limited reports of closeness, intimacy, and sharing talk in autistic individuals'  experiences  of  friendship  (Bauminger-Zviely  &amp;  Kimhi,  2017;  Petrina  et  al., 2014) and add evidence to previous research that suggested a link between unusual sensory sensitivities  and  communication  difficulties  in  autism  (Lane  et  al.,  2010;  Watson  et  al., 2011).

In Lai et al. (2011) research, female autistic adults displayed more sensory sensitivities and  symptoms  compared  to  males,  and  in  Walsh  et  al.  (2018)  report,  lower  visual  and auditory oversensitivity was reported by trans and non-binary autistic participants compared  to  those  who  identify  themselves  as  women  and  men.  In  the  current  study,  no significant gender differences were found in relation to sensory experiences and sensitivities. Due to the small number of participants in this study, future research will be needed to examine  the  influence  of  gender  on  autistic  individuals'  sensitivities  and  reactions  to sensory stimuli.

Contrary to old views on autism as a 'basic desire for aloneness' (Kanner, 1943, p. 249), the findings in this research reflected a real desire for social interaction and relationships in autism despite significant sensory impacts on autistic persons' ability to function or even exist in certain social spaces. Therefore, the current research supported previous findings that showed that autistic people desire and do have social relationships (Brownlow et al., 2015; Fernandes et al., 2016; Pecora et al., 2016; Ryan et al., 2021; Strunz et al., 2017; Turner et  al.,  2017).  However,  by  showing  how  sensory  and  environmental  aspects  affect  social interaction and socialization in autism, this study illuminated one more layer of difficulties that makes social interaction and the maintenance and formation of relationships in autism more challenging.

In short, this current study pointed to the importance of sensory aspects in autistic people's social experiences. It examined how autistic individuals experience sensory stimuli-auditory, visual,  and  tactile-and how their perception of these stimuli impacts their behavior, their interactions with others, and their everyday activities. By adopting diverse sensory, communicative, and social coping strategies, autistic people constantly adapt their previous sensory and social experiences to particular social and physical environments. This produces common sociability patterns and preferences among autistic people, which reflect the balance autistic individuals seek between the stress of social interaction and the desire for it.

Accordingly, this study highlighted the need for greater awareness of sensory phenomena in understanding autistic individuals' daily and life experiences. The continual medical, clinical,  and  educational  focus  on  the  mental  processes  and  cognitive  aspects  of  autistic people's lives had contributed to a neglect of the sensory and physical aspects that underpin communication and social interaction in autism. In the case of sociability and relationships, this  study illuminated the perceptual grounding of experience and of social relationships and how they construct sociability and friendship patterns among autistic people. By giving specific  attention  to  the  sensory  dimensions of  autistic  persons'  experience  and by  highlighting the need for an ethnography that is more attuned to these dimensions, this study addressed the need identified by Solomon (2010) for a deep examination of the perceptual aspects  of  autism.  By  illuminating  embodied  and  sensory  aspects,  this  study  suggested adopting  a  framework  that  views  autism  not  merely  as  a  mental  condition,  but  also  as a physical condition which is comprised of both bodily actions and dispositions.

## Implications

This  research  not  only  contributed  theoretically  but  can  also  have  significant  practical implications.  It  underscored  the  importance  of  considering  physical  and  environmental factors and their impacts on the daily and social lives of autistic individuals. Adopting this view could enhance the development of more effective services and supports for autistic individuals and their communities. Specifically, the findings can help designing intervention plans aimed at improving social interaction and reducing barriers, including sensory and environmental factors that contributed to meltdowns and stress in autistic individuals. Additionally, recognizing autistic individuals' desire for social interaction and focusing on external  influences  on  their  social  abilities  can  help  promote  a  more  inclusive  view  of autism,  potentially  reducing  stigma  and  the  widespread  misinterpretation  of  autistics  as asocial, and encouraging meaningful social engagement.

## Limitations and future research

This research has several limitations. First, the findings cannot be generalized to all autistic individuals, as the study included only those with adequate social and communication skills for self-expression. Future research should use alternative data collection methods to include other autistic groups, such as nonverbal individuals, to better understand sensory experiences across all autistic groups. Second, despite efforts to include diverse participants, the study did not fully represent all social groups from the recruitment area, particularly missing autistic participants  from  First  Nations  and  other  Indigenous  groups,  who  make  up  a  significant portion  of  BC's  population.  Third,  the  small  study  population  was  limited  to  the  Lower

Mainland  of  BC,  making  the  findings  specific  to  that  region.  Studies  examining  autistic experiences  in  different  cultures  and  areas  could  provide  valuable  cross-cultural  insights. Finally, the COVID-19 pandemic restricted face-to-face observations and interactions with participants. Future studies should include more observational data from in-person interactions in various settings and contexts. Longitudinal research is also needed to examine how sensory experiences and perceptions evolve with age and changing life circumstances.

## Acknowledgments

I  would  like  to  express  my  gratitude  to  all  the  participants  who  contributed  to  this  study.  Special thanks to Dr. William H. McKellin for his exceptional supervision during my PhD research, which greatly enhanced my understanding of the complex sensory experiences of autistic individuals.

## Disclosure statement

No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).

## Funding

This paper received no funding or grant from any funding agency.

## Ethics approval

The study was approved by Behavioural Research Ethics Board in the University of British Columbia. Application number H18-02689.

## References

American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.books.9780890425596

- Ashburner, J., Bennett, L., Rodger, S., &amp; Ziviani, J. (2013). Understanding the sensory experiences of young  people with autism spectrum  disorder: A  preliminary investigation. Australian Occupational Therapy Journal , 60 (3), 171-180. https://doi.org/10.1111/1440-1630.12025

Bagby, M. S., Dickie, V. A., &amp; Baranek, G. T. (2012). How sensory experiences of children with and without autism affect family occupations. The American Journal of Occupational Therapy , 66 (1), 78-86. https://doi.org/10.5014/ajot.2012.000604

Baker, A. E. Z., Lane, A., Angley, M. T., &amp; Young, R. L. (2008). The relationship between sensory processing patterns and behavioural responsiveness in autistic disorder: A pilot study. Journal of Autism &amp; Developmental Disorders , 38 (5), 867-875. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-007-0459-0

Bauminger-Zviely, N., &amp; Kimhi, Y. (2017). Friendship in autism spectrum disorder. In J. B. Leaf (Ed.), Handbook  of  social  skills  and  autism  spectrum  disorder (pp.  63-79).  Springer  International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-62995-7_5

Belek, B. (2019). Articulating sensory sensitivity: From bodies with autism to autistic bodies. Medical Anthropology , 38 (1), 30-43. https://doi.org/10.1080/01459740.2018.1460750

Ben Sasson, A., Cermak, S. A., Orsmond, G. I., Tager Flusberg, H., Kadlec, M. B., &amp; Carter, A. S. --(2008).  Sensory  clusters  of  toddlers  with  autism  spectrum  disorders:  Differences  in  affective symptoms. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry , 49 (8), 817-825. https://doi.org/10.1111/j. 1469-7610.2008.01899.x

- Ben-Sasson, A., Cermak, S. A., Orsmond, G. I., Tager-Flusberg, H., Carter, A. S., Kadlec, M. B., &amp; Dunn,  W.  (2007).  Extreme  sensory  modulation  behaviors  in  toddlers  with  autism  spectrum disorders. The  American  Journal  of  Occupational  Therapy , 61 (5),  584-592.  https://doi.org/10. 5014/ajot.61.5.584
- Bitsika, V., Sharpley, C. F., Sweeney, J. A., Andronicos, N. M., Agnew, L. L., &amp; Arnold, W. M. (2017). A  comparison  of  age,  cognitive,  hormonal,  symptomatic  and  mood  correlates  of  aggression towards others in boys with ASD. Research in Developmental Disabilities , 66 ,  44-54. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.ridd.2017.02.014
- Bogdan, R., &amp; Biklen, S. K. (1998). Qualitative research for education: An introduction to theory and methods . Allyn and Bacon, Inc.
- Braun,  V.,  &amp;  Clarke,  V.  (2006).  Using  thematic  analysis  in  psychology. Qualitative  Research  in Psychology , 3 (2), 77-101. https://doi.org/10.1191/1478088706qp063oa
- Brownlow,  C.,  Bertilsdotter  Rosqvist,  H.,  &amp;  O'Dell,  L.  (2015).  Exploring  the  potential  for  social networking among people with autism: Challenging dominant ideas of 'friendship. Scandinavian Journal of Disability Research , 17 (2), 188-193. https://doi.org/10.1080/15017419.2013.859174
- Butera, C., Ring, P., Sideris, J., Jayashankar, A., Kilroy, E., Harrison, L., Cermak, S., &amp; Aziz Zadeh, L. -(2020).  Impact  of  sensory  processing  on  school  performance  outcomes  in  high  functioning individuals with autism spectrum disorder. Mind Brain &amp; Education , 14 (3), 243-254. https://doi. org/10.1111/mbe.12242
- Causton-Theoharis,  J.,  Ashby,  C.,  &amp;  Cosier,  M.  (2009).  Islands  of  loneliness:  Exploring  social interaction through the autobiographies of individuals with autism. Intellectual &amp; Developmental Disabilities , 47 (2), 84-96. https://doi.org/10.1352/1934-9556-47.2.84
- Chamak, B., Bonniau, B., Jaunay, E.,  &amp;  Cohen,  D.  (2008).  What  can  we  learn  about  autism  from autistic  persons? Psychotherapy  &amp;  Psychosomatics , 77 (5),  271-279.  https://doi.org/10.1159/ 000140086
- Chan, D. V., Doran, J. D., &amp; Galobardi, O. D. (2023). Beyond friendship: The spectrum of social participation  of  autistic  adults. Journal  of  Autism  &amp;  Developmental  Disorders , 53 (1),  424-437. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-022-05441-1
- Clince,  M.,  Connolly,  L.,  &amp;  Nolan,  C.  (2016).  Comparing  and  exploring  the  sensory  processing patterns  of  higher  education  students  with  attention  deficit  hyperactivity  disorder  and  autism spectrum  disorder. The  American  Journal  of  Occupational  Therapy , 70 (2),  p70022500101p70022500109. https://doi.org/10.5014/ajot.2016.016816
- Crane,  L.,  Goddard,  L.,  &amp;  Pring,  L.  (2009).  Sensory  processing  in  adults  with  autism  spectrum disorders. Autism , 13 (3), 215-228. https://doi.org/10.1177/1362361309103794
- Creswell, J. W. (2013). Qualitative inquiry and research design: Choosing among five approaches (3rd ed.). SAGE.
- Fernandes,  L.  C.,  Gillberg,  C.  I.,  Cederlund,  M.,  Hagberg,  B.,  Gillberg,  C.,  &amp;  Billstedt,  E.  (2016). Aspects  of  sexuality  in  adolescents  and  adults  diagnosed  with  autism  spectrum  disorders  in childhood. Journal  of  Autism  &amp;  Developmental  Disorders , 46 (9),  3155-3165.  https://doi.org/10. 1007/s10803-016-2855-9
- Geils, C., &amp; Knoetze, J. (2008). Conversations with Barney: A conversation analysis of interactions with a child with autism. South African Journal of Psychology , 38 (1), 200-224. https://doi.org/10. 1177/008124630803800111
- Glod, M., Riby, D. M., Honey, E., &amp; Rodgers, J. (2015). Psychological correlates of sensory processing patterns  in  individuals  with  autism  spectrum  disorder:  A  systematic  review. Review  Journal  of Autism and Developmental Disorders , 2 (2), 199-221. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40489-015-0047-8
- Gonthier, C., Longuépée, L., &amp; Bouvard, M. (2016). Sensory processing in low-functioning adults with autism spectrum disorder: Distinct sensory profiles and their relationships with behavioral dysfunction. Journal of Autism &amp; Developmental Disorders , 46 (9), 3078-3089. https://doi.org/10. 1007/s10803-016-2850-1
- Grandin, T. (1992). An inside view of autism. In E. Schopler &amp; G. B. Mesibov (Eds.), High-functioning individuals with autism (pp. 105-126). Plenum Press.
- Grapel, J. N., Cicchetti, D. V., &amp; Volkmar, F. R. (2015). Sensory features as diagnostic criteria for autism: Sensory features in autism. The Yale Journal of Biology and Medicine , 88 (1), 69-71.

Hilton, C., Graver, K., &amp; LaVesser, P. (2007). Relationship between social competence and sensory processing  in  children  with  high  functioning  autism  spectrum  disorders. Research  in  Autism Spectrum Disorders , 1 (2), 164-173. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rasd.2006.10.002

Horder,  J.,  Wilson,  C.  E.,  Mendez,  M.  A.,  &amp;  Murphy,  D.  G.  (2014).  Autistic  traits  and  abnormal sensory experiences in adults. Journal  of  Autism  &amp;  Developmental  Disorders , 44 (6),  1461-1469. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-013-2012-7

- Howe, F. E. J.,  &amp;  Stagg,  S.  D.  (2016).  How  sensory  experiences  affect  adolescents  with  an  autistic spectrum condition within the classroom. Journal of Autism &amp; Developmental Disorders , 46 (5), 1656-1668. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-015-2693-1
- Johnson, L. (2022). Adapt and adjust: Doing UK-Based ethnographic fieldwork during the covid-19 Pandemic. Medical Anthropology , 41 (8), 763-777. https://doi.org/10.1080/01459740.2022.2106226
- Jones,  R.  S.  P.,  Quigney,  C.,  &amp;  Huws,  J.  C.  (2003).  First-hand  accounts  of  sensory  perceptual experiences in autism: A qualitative analysis. Journal of Intellectual &amp; Developmental Disability , 28 (2), 112-121. https://doi.org/10.1080/1366825031000147058

Kanner, L. (1943). Autistic disturbances of affective contact. The Nervous Child , 2 (3), 217-250.

- Kern,  J.  K.,  Trivedi,  M.  H.,  Garver,  C.  R.,  Grannemann,  B.  D.,  Andrews,  A.  A.,  Savla,  J.  S., Johnson,  D.  G.,  Mehta,  J.  A.,  &amp;  Schroeder,  J.  L.  (2006).  The  pattern  of  sensory  processing abnormalities in autism. Autism , 10 (5), 480-494. https://doi.org/10.1177/1362361306066564
- Kuhaneck, H. M., &amp; Britner, P. A. (2013). A preliminary investigation of the relationship between sensory processing and social play in autism spectrum disorder. OTJR: Occupation, Participation &amp; Health , 33 (3), 159-167. https://doi.org/10.3928/15394492-20130614-04
- Kuo,  M.  H.,  Orsmond,  G.  I.,  Cohn,  E.  S.,  &amp;  Coster,  W.  J.  (2013).  Friendship  characteristics  and activity patterns of adolescents with an autism spectrum disorder. Autism 17 , (4), 481-500. https:// doi.org/10.1177/1362361311416380
- Lai,  M.-C.,  Lombardo,  M.  V.,  Pasco,  G.,  Ruigrok,  A.  N.  V.,  Wheelwright,  S.  J.,  Sadek,  S.  A., Chakrabarti,  B.,  Consortium,  M.  A.,  &amp;  Baron-Cohen,  S.  (2011).  A  behavioral  comparison  of male  and  female  adults  with  high  functioning  autism  spectrum  conditions. PLOS  ONE , 6 (6), e20835. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0020835
- Lane, A. E., Young, R. L., Baker, A. E. Z., &amp; Angley, M. T. (2010). Sensory processing subtypes in autism: Association with adaptive behavior. Journal of Autism &amp; Developmental Disorders , 40 (1), 112-122. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-009-0840-2
- Mazurek, M. O., Kanne, S. M., &amp; Wodka, E. L. (2013). Physical aggression in children and adolescents with autism spectrum disorders. Research in Autism Spectrum Disorders , 7 (3), 455-465. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.rasd.2012.11.004
- Mazurek, M. O., &amp; Petroski, G. F. (2015). Sleep problems in children with autism spectrum disorder: Examining  the  contributions  of  sensory  over-responsivity  and  anxiety. Sleep  Medicine , 16 (2), 270-279. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sleep.2014.11.006
- Milton, D., &amp; Sims, T. (2016). How is a sense of well-being and belonging constructed in the accounts of  autistic  adults? Disability  &amp;  Society , 31 (4),  520-534.  https://doi.org/10.1080/09687599.2016. 1186529
- Morrison, K. E., DeBrabander, K. M., Jones, D. R., Faso, D. J., Ackerman, R. A., &amp; Sasson, N. J. (2020). Outcomes  of  real-world  social  interaction  for  autistic  adults  paired  with  autistic  compared  to typically developing partners. Autism , 24 (5), 1067-1080. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 1362361319892701
- Müller, E., Schuler, A., &amp; Yates, G. B. (2008). Social challenges and supports from the perspective of individuals  with  Asperger  syndrome  and  other  autism  spectrum  disabilities. Autism:  The International Journal of Research &amp; Practice , 12 (2), 173-190. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 1362361307086664
- O'Neill, M., &amp; Jones, R. S. P. (1997). No title found. Journal of Autism &amp; Developmental Disorders , 27 (3), 283-293. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1025850431170
- Pecora,  L.  A.,  Mesibov,  G.  B.,  &amp;  Stokes,  M.  A.  (2016).  Sexuality  in  high-functioning  autism: A  systematic  review  and  meta-analysis. Journal  of  Autism  &amp;  Developmental  Disorders , 46 (11), 3519-3556. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-016-2892-4

- Petrina, N., Carter, M., &amp; Stephenson, J. (2014). The nature of friendship in children with autism spectrum disorders: A systematic review. Research in Autism Spectrum Disorders , 8 (2), 111-126. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rasd.2013.10.016
- Prince-Hughes, D. (2004). Songs of the gorilla nation: My journey through autism . Three Rivers Press. Robertson, A. E., &amp; Simmons, D. R. (2015). The sensory experiences of adults with autism spectrum disorder: A qualitative analysis. Perception , 44 (5), 569-586. https://doi.org/10.1068/p7833
- Ryan, C., Coughlan, M., Maher, J., Vicario, P., &amp; Garvey, A. (2021). Perceptions of friendship among girls with autism spectrum disorders. European Journal of Special Needs Education , 36 (3), 393-407. https://doi.org/10.1080/08856257.2020.1755930
- Schauder,  K.  B.,  &amp;  Bennetto,  L.  (2016).  Toward  an  interdisciplinary  understanding  of  sensory dysfunction  in  autism  spectrum  disorder.  An  Integration  of  the  Neural  and  Symptom Literatures. Frontiers in Neuroscience , 10 , 10. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2016.00268
- Sedgewick, F., Hill, V., Yates, R., Pickering, L., &amp; Pellicano, E. (2016). Gender differences in the social motivation and friendship experiences of autistic and non-autistic adolescents. Journal of Autism &amp; Developmental Disorders , 46 (4), 1297-1306. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-015-2669-1
- Smith, R. S., &amp; Sharp, J. (2013). Fascination and isolation: A grounded theory exploration of unusual sensory  experiences  in  adults  with  Asperger  syndrome. Journal  of  Autism  &amp;  Developmental Disorders , 43 (4), 891-910. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-012-1633-6
- Solomon, O. (2010). Sense and the senses: Anthropology and the study of autism. Annual Review of Anthropology , 39 (1), 241-259. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.anthro.012809.105012
- Strunz, S., Schermuck, C., Ballerstein, S., Ahlers, C. J., Dziobek, I., &amp; Roepke, S. (2017). Romantic relationships  and  relationship  satisfaction  among  adults  with  Asperger  syndrome  and  High -Functioning autism. Journal  of  Clinical  Psychology , 73 (1),  113-125.  https://doi.org/10.1002/jclp. 22319
- Suarez, M. A. (2012). Sensory processing in children with autism spectrum disorders and impact on functioning. Pediatric Clinics of North America , 59 (1), 203-214. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pcl.2011. 10.012
- Syu, Y.-C., &amp; Lin, L.-Y. (2018). Sensory overresponsivity, loneliness, and anxiety in Taiwanese adults with autism spectrum disorder. Occupational Therapy International , 2018 , 1-7. https://doi.org/10. 1155/2018/9165978
- Tavassoli, T., Miller, L. J., Schoen, S. A., Jo Brout, J., Sullivan, J., &amp; Baron-Cohen, S. (2018). Sensory reactivity,  empathizing  and  systemizing  in  autism  spectrum  conditions  and  sensory  processing disorder. Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience , 29 , 72-77. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dcn.2017.05. 005
- Tavassoli,  T.,  Miller,  L.  J.,  Schoen,  S.  A.,  Nielsen,  D.  M.,  &amp;  Baron-Cohen,  S.  (2014).  Sensory over-responsivity  in  adults  with  autism  spectrum  conditions. Autism , 18 (4),  428-432.  https:// doi.org/10.1177/1362361313477246
- Thye, M. D., Bednarz, H. M., Herringshaw, A. J., Sartin, E. B., &amp; Kana, R. K. (2018). The impact of atypical  sensory  processing  on  social  impairments  in  autism  spectrum  disorder. Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience , 29 , 151-167. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dcn.2017.04.010
- Turner, D., Briken, P., &amp; Schöttle, D. (2017). Autism-spectrum disorders in adolescence and adulthood: Focus on sexuality. Current Opinion in Psychiatry , 30 (6), 409-416. https://doi.org/10.1097/ YCO.0000000000000369
- Van Den Boogert, F., Sizoo, B., Spaan, P., Tolstra, S., Bouman, Y. H. A., Hoogendijk, W. J. G., &amp; Roza,  S.  J.  (2021).  Sensory  processing  and  aggressive  behavior  in  adults  with  autism  spectrum disorder. Brain Sciences , 11 (1), 95. https://doi.org/10.3390/brainsci11010095
- Walsh,  R.  J.,  Krabbendam,  L.,  Dewinter,  J.,  &amp;  Begeer,  S.  (2018).  Brief  report:  Gender  identity differences  in  autistic  adults:  Associations  with  perceptual  and  socio-cognitive  profiles. Journal of  Autism  &amp;  Developmental  Disorders , 48 (12),  4070-4078.  https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-0183702-y
- Watson,  L.  R.,  Patten,  E.,  Baranek,  G.  T.,  Poe,  M.,  Boyd,  B.  A.,  Freuler,  A.,  &amp;  Lorenzi,  J.  (2011). Differential associations between sensory response patterns and language, social, and communication  measures  in  children  with  autism  or  other  developmental  disabilities. Journal  of  Speech,

Language,  &amp;  Hearing  Research , 54 (6),  1562-1576.  https://doi.org/10.1044/1092-4388(2011/100029)

- Weiner, B., &amp; Grenier, M. (2020). Sensory balancing strategies for students with autism spectrum disorder. The Journal of Physical Education, Recreation &amp; Dance , 91 (8), 21-28. https://doi.org/10. 1080/07303084.2020.1798308
- Yergeau,  M.  (2013).  Clinically  significant  disturbance:  On  theorists  who  theorize  theory  of  mind. Disability Studies Quarterly , 33 (4). https://doi.org/10.18061/dsq.v33i4.3876