Foranyissueswiththisdocument, pleasecontactyourlibrary.
____________________________________________________________________________________
Title:Semiotica
ArticleTitle: Epistemology andsemiotics ofmedicalsystems:Acomparative analysis
ArticleAuthor: BRANDS
Vol:132No:1-2Date:2000-01-01Pages:1-24
ISSN-00371998;
Publisher: 2000-01-01
Source:LibKeyNomad
Copyright: CCL
____________________________________________________________________________________
NOTICE CONCERNING COPYRIGHT RESTRICTIONS:
Thecopyright lawoftheUnitedStates[Title17,UnitedStatesCode] governsthemakingofphotocopies
orotherreproductions ofcopyrighted materials.
Undercertainconditions specified inthelaw,librariesandarchivesareauthorized tofurnisha
photocopy orotherreproduction. Oneofthesespecificconditions isthatthephotocopy isnottobe
"usedforanypurposeotherthanprivatestudy,scholarship, orresearch." Ifausermakesarequestfor,or
lateruses,aphotocopy orreproduction forpurposes inexcessof"fairuse,"thatusermaybeliablefor
copyright infringement.
Thisinstitution reservestherighttorefusetoacceptacopyingorderif,initsjudgment, fulfillment of
thatorderwouldinvolveviolation ofcopyright law.

Epistemology and semiotics of medical
systems: A comparative analysis
MARTIEN BRANDS, DOROTHEA FRANCK, and
EVERT VAN LEEUWEN
Features emerging 'upon analysis' is a
particular instance of reflexivity. These
features exist only within the reflexive work
of those researchers who make them exist.
This does not deny their reality.
(Mehan and Wood 1975: 18)
Introduction
Different forms of medical practice co-exist in the health care system
in many Western countries. Next to 'allopathy' or Orthodox' Western
medicine many forms of 'alternative' or 'complementary' practices are
present. The considerable growth of the use of alternative practices
within the total spectrum of health care has been documented amongst
others by Eisenberg et al. (1993). At the same time, the essence of forms
of complementary medicine is not familiar to general practitioners and
specialists when they finish their medical training (Berman et al. 1997;
Carlston et al. 1997), while patients do receive simultaneously or succes-
sively various treatments. This pluriform use in clinical practice could
be beneficial to the patients, if a structured communication between the
practices would exist (Astin 1998). A structured communication between
the different directions in medicine would involve amongst others:
— systematic referral of patients between doctors using different therapies,
— comparative research for certain diseases in terms of clinical effect
and cost-effectiveness,
— scientific exchange at a conceptual level for the development of, for
example, new therapies for diseases, which have not been treated
successfully by either form of medicine until now.
In the Netherlands, the Dutch Health Council (1993) published an
analysis of the reasons why so little research is done on the effectivity
of alternative practices; one of the conclusions has been that alternative
Semiotica 132-1/2 (2000), 1-24 0037-1998/00/0132-0001
© Walter de Gruyter

2 M. Brands, D. Franck, and E. van Leeuwen
medicine and university institutions lack a common meeting ground.
The absence of a 'common language' and 'a common taxonomy' were
identified as two major barriers to overcome existing prejudices between
practitioners in the respective forms of medicine.
Criticism is often expressed by allopathic or orthodox physicians of, for
example, homeopathy and Chinese medicine, two major complementary
medical systems, in that the latter two would not meet the standards of
natural scientific evidence of their working mechanisms, which makes
their clinical results implausible.
Recent meta-analyses of homeopathic clinical research show a positive
effect of this type of treatment (Kleijnen, ter Riet, and Knipschild 1991;
Linde et al. 1997), but these results are considered by opponents as not
'evidence-based' (Langman 1997; Vandenbroucke 1997). An extended
American review (National Institute of Health 1997) also shows the
clinical efficacy of acupuncture, and moreover, indicates options to
conduct research on its physiological explanation. These studies still
fail to contribute to an open communication, as they do not provide
a 'common meeting ground' with allopathy in terms of a physical and
biochemical plausibility of the homeopathic clinical results. An effect
is indeniably measurable, but the absence of a working mechanism of
homeopathy (and mutatis mutandis also for Chinese medicine) in
biochemical terms leaves room for speculation about a placebo-effect
(Reilly et al. 1994) — without a proper definition of this effect.
Bellavite and Signorini (1995) display some issues in biology, such as
complexity, information-processing and energy dynamics of biological
systems which need further investigation with regards to the field of medi-
cine. Also, physical, biological and immunological research using animal
and physical models indicates how high dilutions such as used in homeop-
athy can be examined scientifically (Endler and Schulte 1994; Bastide 1997;
van Wijk and Wiegant 1997).
This study seeks to contribute to overcome prejudice and distance
by the development of a method which considers the exertion of a medi-
cal practice as an applied system of thought, implying the use of certain
concepts of disease, cure and health in medical diagnosis and treat-
ment. We call this a 'medical system'. This conception of a medical system
opens the perspective of using various methods from cognitive sciences,
such as epistemology and linguistics, to analyze medical systems in terms
of how they acquire and process data to establish a diagnosis. A com-
parative framework using a semiotic perspective is presented in this article,
which may serve to examine if such systems have an inner consistency.
The central research question of this article is: If the concepts used
in the frame of reference of a medical system would be described,

Epistemology and semiotics of medical systems 3
would this imply that these concepts are only consistent within
that system, or can they claim universal validity, scientifically based,
excluding other systems? From here some operational questions can be
derived:
1. What are concepts in a medical system?
2. Which method would be necessary for the description of concepts?
3. Is there a theoretical framework which can be used for the development
of the method of description?
4. Would the description of the concepts enable their comparison?
5. And what would be the consequences of this comparison?
Before the methodology for researching these questions is displayed,
the issue is discussed whether statements made within one medical system
have a universal value, i.e., can be generalized to other systems; this, then,
is confronted with the assumptions made in semiotics about the tension
between the universal validity and the meaning of assertions.
Epistemology and linguistics
The universalist tradition
McMullin (1995) has pointed from a medical-philosophical perspective
to the resemblances between the search for objective truth about
diseases by Western allopathic medicine and the universalist tradition in
Western philosophy. Mullin mentions two central features of this tradi-
tion: (1) the search for the universality of truth and (2) the idea that
knowledge is acquired only by rational procedures. This opinion conforms
with Kirmayer (1988) who reviewed medical-anthropological research to
show how some basic notions of Western medicine are embedded in the
universalist tradition. This may, however, provoke some problems, as is
argued in what follows.
Epistemologically said, a main cognitive activity of medical practice is
to establish whether propositions about the condition of a patient such
as This is disease' or 'This is not disease' are true or not (Wright and
MacAdam 1979). Carnap (1935) discerned three forms of propositions:
he stated that if the truth-conditions, or circumstances under which
a proposition is true, can be defined, then the formulation can be a
correct scientific proposition, for its truth may be tested by testing the
circumstances — this is a synthetic proposition. If these truth-conditions
cannot be described, then the proposition is not useful for scientific
purposes, i.e., testing — for then it is either always true or never true
(an analytical or contradictory proposition, respectively).

4 M. Brands, D. Franck, and E. van Leeuwen
The concern about the truth of a proposition about disease has a very
practical basis, as the decision about the truth of such a proposition
determines whether a therapeutic action has to be taken or not. Its action-
orientedness makes medical thinking quite susceptible to universalistic
tendencies, for if this proposition were true in all possible conditions, it
would liberate both patient and practitioner from the uncertainty inher-
ent of relativistic and probabilistic reasoning (Benbassat 1994). When
discussing the rationalistic element of the objectivist tradition, Gillett
(1995) points to the implications for medical philosophy of the epistemo-
logical criticism by Rorty (1992) and Kühn (1971 [1962]) on scientific
claims of objective truth. Gillett states that truth-conditions of the best
possible medical decision with regard to diagnosis should no longer be
determined by pathophysiological arguments only, but also by the life
history and situation of the patient. Not the Objective' knowledge alone,
but also the context of the patient should determine the correctness of
the decision.
Medical anthropology has criticized the one-sided focus on disease-
entities of the biomedical model used in Western university medical train-
ing and practice, and pleads for the approach of a patient as a person within
the context of her/his own life, thus integrating this aspect into medical
diagnosis and treatment (Kleinman 1988). In an effort to trace the origin of
the rationalist character of Western medical thought, Gordon (1988)
examined the influence of naturalistic philosophy on the epistemology of
Western medicine. Nature is considered to be immanent and universal; so
aspects of Nature such as diseases can be studied, and finally they will reveal
their hidden immanent features and secrets. Also, naturalistic philosophy
makes an opposition between mind and body, representing in human
existence respectively the rationalistic and intentional pole, in contrast with
the involuntary and accidental pole. As a representative of the rational
pole, Western medicine has as its objective — by rational reasoning,
leaving aside the subjective tendencies of human perception — to acquire
absolute knowledge of disease-processes, in order to control them.
And allopathic medicine claims this knowledge to be based on natural
scientific data, and together with this claim it is assumed that these data
are independent of the context in which they are acquired. Thus, on a
meta-level a rationalistic view of medical science is still advocated. Ironi-
cally, this view is in a process of being left behind in current natural
sciences. Moreover, it can be questioned whether medical practice
actually can fulfill the demands, as medical data have some features
which do not fit this traditional view of natural science:
1. Many data do not meet the ideal of context-independency, of which
an example is the pathoanatomical 'proof that the existence of disease

Epistemology and semiotics of medical systems 5
is determined by microscopic examination of dead tissues. This ideal
runs parallel to the conception of natural science that, for example, in
physics data are acquired in studies of dead matter enabling the scientist to
control the manipulation to a high degree. Contrary to this, medical data
often are 'embodied': cognitive scientists such as Varela, Thompson, and
Rosch (1992) indicate that medical knowledge is acquired by means of
a living human body with a consciousness which causes a variable reaction
to external influence and manipulation. Although natural science should
be used as an auxiliary science, and human physical phenomena can be
described with the help of hydraulic metaphors such as the pump-function
of the heart, this does not suffice to explain all aspects of human disease
(Coulter 1975).
2. Medical data such as symptoms can vary over time during a disease-
episode, which is obvious in the descriptions of human illness; symp-
toms cannot be considered as constant phenomena, which undergo only
linear and reversible changes such as described in classical Newtonian
mechanics. On the contrary, their variability is comparable to phenom-
ena observed in modern physics, with applications in metereology and
astronomy. Physicists such as Hess (1978) and Nicolis and Prigogine
(1987), have studied so-called 'non-linear' or 'irreversible systems' in
physics and chemistry, in which they observed irreversible variations of
physical and chemical phenomena during the course of an experiment.
Hess (1991) indicated that irreversible systems also exist in human
cells, e.g., in the Adenosine Tri Phosphate (ATP)-cycle. Nicolis (1991)
pointed to the 'chaotic' or non-linear features of both biological and
human information-processing.
Irreversibility is a central feature of human disease-processes, as can be
seen in the time-dimension of disease expressed in the term 'the course of
the disease'. Medical knowledge is based on observations of occurrences
in single persons which are by definition irreversible and unique, although
multiple observations of patients can assist in discovering common
features of these occurrences and in inducing rules from them. But the
extrapolation of these rules to future occurrences is subject to probability,
and is not deterministic in nature, as future occurrences will never be
identical, as the current ones cannot be repeated (Feinstein 1983a).
3. Medical data are 'contextual': the account of human experience in
illness is susceptible in its assumptions and its mode of reasoning to the
culture in which these assumptions are formulated, by persons who are
part of that culture. This is contradictory to the notion of universally
true knowledge, independent of its context (Lock and Gordon 1988b).
The features of medical data make them apt for studying with linguistic
techniques which can take their variation into account; modern medicine

6 M. Brands, D. Franck, and E. van Leeuwen
should not solely rely on techniques which were adapted by medicine
from natural sciences as they existed in the nineteenth century, when
natural phenomena were thought to be deterministic and to predictably
obey immanent laws (McMullin 1995).
Moreover, although modern natural science has drawn nearer in its
assumptions to the practice of medicine as a context-dependent activity,
it still does not possess techniques to investigate the vehicle itself of
medical communication: language, in the form of discourse and text.
The linguistic challenge and its implications for medicine
From a linguistic perspective, some remarks can be made with regard to
the nature of medical knowledge. The patient-doctor discourse can be
conceived of as the telling of a narrative; moreover, the clinical theory the
doctor uses as the framework to interpret this narrative can be conceived
of as a text. Narrative and text can be analyzed by using linguistic tech-
niques such as discourse analysis and text-analysis, and together they
constitute an important part of what is considered medical knowledge.
Hunter (1991) has analyzed medical practice from a linguistic perspec-
tive, and described many factors which contribute to illness as expressed
in the narrative of patients. The description of symptoms is born out of
the experience of pain and disability, components of the lives of both
patient and doctor. And these lives constitute the cultural context in
which these symptoms are perceived (Price 1987).
An example of what the linguistic approach can offer the present
discussion about medical propositions, is how the linguist Searle (1980:
226) establishes the relationship between the truth-conditions of a sen-
tence, its meaning and the context of the reader of the sentence. The truth-
conditions of a sentence do not depend on its literal meaning but on the
'background-information' we already have of the concepts used in the
sentence in question, and of their relation to the central concept about
which that sentence provides information.
Searle shows different meanings of the word 'cut' in about eleven
sentences, e.g., 'Bill cut the grass' and 'Sam cut two classes last week'. For
each sentence truth-conditions can be formulated, and they depend on the
different meanings of this common word. In their turn, these meanings
depend on our background information about the other words in those
sentences, grass and classes. This information is our knowledge about
how physical nature is organized (growth of grass) and how our culture
is structured (classes in education). This information can be defined as
the context of the reader.

Epistemology and semiotics of medical systems 7
Searle's argument can be reformulated for medical epistemology in
such a way that the conditions under which a proposition such as 'this is
disease' is true, may differ between different medical practices, as they
may have different 'background information'. This background infor-
mation determines different interpretations of the symptoms of a patient.
And these interpretations are examined by considering basic notions about
what is disease, a central concept within each system. These notions then
lead to the formulation of truth-conditions, which make the proposition
'this is disease' a synthetic proposition in Carnap's sense: it can be
tested after having formulated precisely the circumstances under which
it is true; and these circumstances may differ depending on the medical
system in which they are formulated. This very medical system then
supplies the background information (cf. Searle) or context (cf. Gillett)
of the proposition.
Methodological issues
The comparison of medical systems
A methodological issue of comparing one conceptual system with another
is: can concepts and assumptions of one system be generalized to another
system?
The approach chosen here is to analyze and compare medical prac-
tices by focusing on their cognitive aspect; a medical practice is consid-
ered here as the application of a system of thought, this medical system
of thought is defined in cognitive terms as the conceptual design of how
medical diagnosis occurs within a specific medical practice.
The analysis of the diagnostic aspect of a medical practice should focus
on the interpretation of symptoms and on the meaning of diagnostic
statements or propositions about these symptoms, rather than on the
question whether these propositions are true under all circumstances. The
circumstances are the respective assumptions in different medical systems,
such as allopathy, homeopathy and Chinese medicine. If they can be
defined, the truth of propositions may be established for each system.
A comparison of diagnostic strategies requires a semiotic perspective,
to establish the relation between a symptom and a disease-category it
refers to as a sign. For what is important in semiotics is not the universal
truth of a proposition, but the meaning of a sign as the result of interpre-
tation (Eco 1976). The use of the semiotic approach can avoid universalist
discussions about the objective truth of propositions as referred to in
the previous section.

8 M. Brands, D. Franck, and E. van Leeuwen
When, in accordance with the definition of a medical system, as given
above, a medical system is considered here a conceptual design of medical
diagnosis, two aspects of such a conceptual design need to be com-
pared: the structural and the decision-making aspect of establishing
a diagnosis.
1. The structural aspect deals with how disease-categories cluster
symptoms of illness, so the description of the structure implies the
description of the categories used in that medical system.
2. The decision-making aspect addresses the selection and attribution
of symptoms to disease-categories, and this implies the description of
the process of interpretation; this is done by using a semiotic
perspective.
The structural aspect is discussed first, and in the next section the
semiotic approach of the analysis of the decision-making process is
elaborated on.
Concepts and categories
The structure of a medical system consists of concepts about what disease
is, what cure is and how it might be achieved, e.g., by interventions such
as administration of medicines; but it also contains concepts about diag-
nosis, how the symptoms of a patient should be attributed to a disease-
category, so that this patient can receive a diagnostic label, and can be
treated with an intervention, etc. The cognitive analysis of a medical
system thus should address the definition and practical use of concepts
and categories. This issue refers to the question of their origin.
What is considered to be the origin of concepts, seen as cognitive
entities, can vary according to different epistemological traditions.
Empiricism stresses that concepts refer to objects 'given' in nature, a pri-
orism that they exist as mental representations in the mind (see for more
discussion Chisholm 1986; Fodor 1991; Quine 1969). Both traditions
assume that concepts exist objectively, i.e., independently of their observer:
they 'wait' to be discovered by the researcher.
The question is whether the notion of objective, observer-independent
existence holds for the use of conceptual analysis in different cognitive
systems such as medical systems. Again the issue of context arises: is a con-
cept such as a disease-category (originated from either nature or the mind)
independent of its context, or is it shaped by the experience of illness?
Medical concepts arising from experience like cough, inflammation
or fever, have been categorized into clusters of symptoms or disease-
categories, e.g., pneumonia. A medical-diagnostic process is a form of

Epistemology and semiotics of medical systems 9
categorization, for a doctor tries to find an answer to the composite
question: To which disease-category do I attribute this patient with these
symptoms, or is there no disease (as a category) present here, or does the
symptom ambiguously refer to more diseases?' (Gale and Marsden 1985).
And this question refers to a fundamental issue in categorization: are the
properties of a category necessary and sufficient to define the category,
or are they not?
This implies the next question: whether a disease-category is a class of
uniform instances of diseases, or whether they can vary in the composition
of their elements. The first type is called a 'discrete category', the second
a 'non-discrete category' (Givon 1989). Wittgenstein (1953) used the
notion of 'family-resemblance' for instances within one category; this
was elaborated on by Rosch (1975, 1978) and led to the formulation of
the notion of 'prototype' categories. One class of a category can have
non-identical members (like in a family), and some of these members are
so characteristic that they are the 'prototype' for a certain category, the
prototype of a category is formed at the intersection of several typical
features. Classical discrete categories are the exception rather than the rule
of categorization, the majority of categorization occurs by 'prototypical
effects' (Rosch 1978), and the majority of categories are 'non-discrete'
(Givon 1989).
Medical categorization involves the question whether the central
medical unit of categorization — disease — is a prototype or a discrete
category — the latter is sometimes named a 'set' in medical texts on
categorization (Wright and MacAdam 1979). This question implies:
— Are all instances of diseases within one disease-category (e.g.,
pneumonia) identical, or are they classified according to a prototype
of pneumonia? And
— do all instances of pneumonia contain identical properties, or can
these properties vary over several instances?
Summarizing, the analysis of the structure of a medical system has two
aspects:
1. Concepts can be considered as fixed entities, existing independently
from their context, either in nature, or in the human mind. Findings
of research on child-development, such as those of Piaget (1972),
however, show the dependence of concepts on context, in that con-
cepts develop by experimentation with nature in interaction with
a maturing mind.
2. Categories have traditionally been considered discrete categories;
cognitive psychological research indicates that this is the exception
of a more general rule which says that categorization occurs by
prototype-effect (Rosch 1978).

10 M. Brands, D. Franck, and E. van Leeuwen
If medical systems are to be compared, three options can be used:
1. The establishment of a conceptual meta-system
Common concepts then should be designed, to account for and to
encompass the variation in concepts of the separate systems. The unifi-
cation of concepts and categories of medical systems would lead to the
creation of superimposed concepts and 'super-categories'; they would be
immanent, according to the universalist tradition. The unification denies
the character of concepts and categories as described before: categories
are protypical, and concepts depend on the context in which they originate
and in which they are used. It would also run counter to anthropolog-
ical findings which show the cultural dependency of disease-categories
(Kleinman 1986; Price 1987). Waitzkin and Magana (1997) examined
patients' narratives of traumatic events in different cultures; they relate
culture to the expression of different types of somatic manifestation
(somatization) of traumatic events. It is difficult to imagine how symp-
toms of such highly personal experiences could be categorized in
cross-culturally, universally valid disease-categories.
The variability of human disease-symptoms and their culture-dependent
expression would imply an endless translation of symptoms and concepts
into formalized 'super-categories' of the metasystem, for which natural
language as spoken by patient and doctor lacks the capacities. This would
require the development of a formalized language.
A formalized language is an inappropriate instrument for the descrip-
tion of the variations of manifestations of human illness. The level
of abstraction of this option makes it irrelevant for the daily practice, as
practitioners would not be satisfied with such an abstract description of
very concrete entities such as symptoms and categories.
2. The 'golden standard' option
This option is called metaphorically 'golden standard', as it implies
that one system of medicine would function as the superior calibration
point, the 'golden standard' with which to measure the validity and consis-
tency of other medical systems. The objective of such a method would be to
prove the superiority of one medical system by highlighting its featuring
concepts in contrast to the equivalents in other systems. In the case of
a medical system, selecting one of its features implies the use of a specific
concept about disease or a specific disease-category as the measure with
which to assess the validity of concepts or categories in other medical
systems.
When the concepts are considered context-dependent and categories
subject to variation, the selection of one of their features as the criterion

Epistemology and semiotics of medical systems 11
of comparison runs counter to the results of empirical research in prototype
categorization: the use of one feature as a 'golden standard' can only be
made by considering this feature valid in all different contexts, and that is
exactly what is refuted by the research on prototypes. Because, if one feature
of a category is considered to vary across categorizations (as is the case in
prototypical categories), it may be present or absent. How can a feature be
used as a calibration of other features if it is sometimes absent?
The discussion referred to above, about the lack in plausibility of
homeopathy and Chinese medicine in biochemical terms, is, in fact, an
example of such an isolation of one feature (in this case from allopathic
medicine), which is then used to 'prove' the non-scientific basis of the
other forms of medicine. However, in several university laboratories
high dilutions, such as used in homeopathic drugs, are the subject of
physical, biological, and physiological research. This has led to many
publications of fundamental research (Bastide 1997; Endler and Schulte
1994). This research refutes both the claim of some homeopaths that
natural science is not a suitable method for studying homeopathy, as well
as the allopathic claim that biochemistry cannot lead to supporting the
existence of the effect of high dilutions.
Moulton (1983) indicated with 'the Adversary Paradigm' the attitude
in scientific debate to exclude other concepts from one's own conceptual
model, and then to attack those other concepts. Gillett (1995) has men-
tioned that this excluding attitude leads to the opinion of allopathic medical
researchers that other diagnostic and therapeutic possibilities do not need
to be researched. This is not without practical, therapeutic danger as the
physicians Querido and Roos (1980) and the physiologist Root-Bernstein
(1993) have argued. Moreover, the use of the Adversary Paradigm is in itself
a violation of a main principle of an objectivist science — from which the
Adversary Paradigm originated (Moulton 1983): the selection of some
feature as a standard of comparison has not been subjected to an objective
procedure. Does a participant engaged in the debate, necessarily make an
objective selection? Popper (1958) pointed out that scientific choices are
usually influenced by subjective moments; Kühn 1971 [1962] went a step
further by stating that the process of scientific reasoning itself is influenced
by subjective concepts. Also, to date, no publications are known which
refute the homeopathic and Chinese medical assumptions by the use of an
empirical model. And an a priori rejection of a possible explanation on a
theoretical level contradicts the methodological, i.e., empirical framework
of allopathy itself.
The approaches of both the meta-system and the 'golden stan-
dard' assume that there are concepts and categories with immanent
properties which are independent of the context in which they are used.

12 M. Brands, D. Franck, and E. van Leeuwen
This is in contradiction with the properties of concepts and categories
described:
— the content of concepts depends on their contexts of origin and of use;
— categories do not have fixed properties, but are prototypical.
Therefore, both options do not seem to be the most appropriate
methods for the comparison of medical systems. What is even more
important, they fail to leave the universalist epistemological tradition
behind, as they both still try to establish truth-conditions of proposi-
tions — in this case about medical concepts — independently of the
specific circumstances (i.e., the medical system) in which the propositions
about disease-concepts are formulated. This runs counter to the logico-
positivist requirement of defining the circumstances in which a proposition
is true (Carnap 1935; Rorty 1992). Therefore, a method is developed
here which focuses on the interpretation of symptoms, rather than on
establishing whether a proposition about them is true. This method uses
semiotics as its theoretical framework.
3. The comparison of similarities and differences in interpretation
According to this option, the medical systems are compared for their
similarities and differences between their concepts and categories.
The parameters of comparison are the existing disease-categories within
each system, and the process of diagnosis (how symptoms are attributed
to those disease-categories).
Three features which medical systems have in common are:
1. the use of language as the main vehicle for the transfer of information.
2. categorization as the decision-making process in diagnosis. Symptoms
have to be attributed to disease-categories so that an appropriate
therapeutic action can be taken.
3. the use of analogy in the construction of theories of disease. Metaphors
used in textbook descriptions of disease-concepts give insight into how
doctors in different medical systems interpret information about
a similar complaint of a patient. The study of the use of analogy
(Gentner and Jeziorski 1995) may show how the same symptoms of
a patient can refer to different disease-categories when interpreted by
doctors within different medical systems.
These three features are used in the semiotic approach, in which
interpretation is the central focus.
Semiotics of medicine
In the part on categorization in the previous section a central question
of an examining doctor was formulated about the decision to which

Epistemology and semiotics of medical systems 13
disease-category a certain symptom of a patient should be attributed. This
attribution implies the establishment of the relationship between a symp-
tom and something this symptom refers to. A relationship in terms of
referral by one thing to another is called a 'semiotic relationship': a sign
('semeion' in Greek) refers to something else, its object. A semiotic rela-
tionship in medicine implies that a symptom may function as a sign if
it refers to a disease-category. The question can be posed: when does
the symptom become a sign, and when does it not? Or, in which way
does a symptom become a sign? Several researchers have pointed to the
relevance of posing these questions in a semiotic framework to study
the practice of medicine (Burnum 1993; Foucault 1975; Sebeok 1991;
Sundström 1987; Uexkull 1986).
Peirce, often considered the founder of modern semiotics in the nine-
teenth century, formulated conditions for when something becomes a sign,
i.e., it refers to an object. These three main conditions are formulated
here for words in a language. Words have a sign-function:
1. if their grammatical structure is correct,
2. if they can acquire a meaning, and
3. if their meaning can be transferred to the listener/reader of the word.
These conditions are reflected in the concept of the 'semiotic triangle'
(CP 5.473, 5.484). The semiotic triangle consists of the sign, the object to
which the sign refers, and the interpretant (the instance or person inter-
preting the sign referring to the object). According to Peirce (CP 1.339):
'a sign stands for something to the idea which it produces, or modifies.
That for which it stands is called its object; that which it conveys, its
meaning; and the idea to which it gives rise, its interpretant'.
Why is semiotics chosen as an approach for this comparison?
Eco (1976) compared semiotics with the traditional issues of philos-
ophy, such as the truth of an assertive proposition (Katz 1972), by
pointing out that semiotics is not so much concerned with truth as with
meaning. For something to be valid as a sign the truth-value is not
relevant, such as for a proposition in classical logic, but it is essential that
the sign can acquire a meaning, i.e., that the sign can be interpreted.
As it is indicated with Searle's example of the variance of word-
interpretation in different sentences, truth-conditions can be formulated
for the proposition 'this is disease'. It is questionable if these conditions
are valid beyond the specific medical system for which they are formulated.
There are no disease-concepts used in medical practice which are uni-
versally valid. Is it more important that a symptom has a meaning than
that it is 'true'? Doctors and patients can consider the sentence 'this is
a disease', (an attribution of a group of symptoms to a disease-category),
either as a proposition or as an interpretation of signs.

14 M. Brands, D. Franck, and E. van Leeuwen
If the sentence is considered a proposition with a general validity for
every system of medicine, universal truth-conditions (conditions under
which the proposition is true in all systems) should be formulated
(Eco 1976). These conditions might possibly differ between forms of
medicine, given the divergent interpretations of the same term 'disease'
in each system. If, however, the sentence 'this is disease' is conceived by
both patient and doctor as an interpretation, the meaning is the criterion
of analysis, and this meaning can differ between medical systems. With
regard to truth-conditions it can be said that each medical system con-
tains different conditions under which symptoms can be interpreted
to refer to a disease-category.
If they do refer, the interpretation can be considered as a true prop-
osition, but this truth depends on the specific context of one medical
system in which it is made. It may not be a true proposition if made in
another system of medicine; in semiotic terms, the truth does not depend
on Objective' or universal criteria, but on the correct interpretation
within one certain system.
Definitions
The main concepts in semiotics are: sign, sign-production, and codes;
these are applied to the medical context. They are defined by Eco as fol-
lows (1976: 116) (the medical application of these definitions is also given):
1. A sign is a correlation between an expression and a content.
2. Sign-production is the interpretative process that makes an expres-
sion (e.g., a symptom) refer to a content (e.g., a disease-category). Sign-
production in medicine occurs when a symptom is transformed into
a sign. This happens if this symptom can be provided with the correct
coding, so that it can be interpreted by its referral and acquires
a meaning. So sign-production is not a self-evident process: interpre-
tation is needed.
3. A code is a marker of the correspondence between an existing system
of sign-vehicles (symptoms) and a system of cultural units (diseases)
(Eco 1976: 67-68).
4. A cultural unit is a whole of culturally accepted notions about a phe-
nomenon. Anthropologists such as Price (1987), Waitzkin and Magana
(1997) and White and Robillard (1989) describe how disease-stories
convey messages about cultural notions. To understand a medical
consultation, it is necessary that both speaker and listener share
knowledge about the codes of the signs they use: the symptoms which
are presented by the patient.

Epistemology and semiotics of medical systems 15
5. The coding of symptoms is made, in semiotic terms, by syntactic and
semantic markers (Eco 1976). Syntactic markers provide information
about the form of the symptom; semantic markers concern its content
(its referral to a disease-category).
6. Peirce discerned between a sign as an 'index' or a 'symbol' (CP 2.247);
the index indicates a concrete object; the symbol tells in general terms
that there exists any object to which is referred; the nature of the object
is not necessarily known.
Prototype categorization and semiotics
Rosch (1978) established that most categories are organized around
prototypes. This implies that a disease-category has a high chance of
being a prototype; not always the same symptoms are included as
elements into that category. Therefore, it cannot be said beforehand if
a symptom refers unambiguously to one and the same disease-category.
It is therefore necessary to analyze how symptoms refer to disease-
categories; and this can be a central focus of comparison between medical
systems: how can the referring or semiotic relationship between a symp-
tom and a disease-category be established? It is highly probable that this
relation differs depending on how the concept of disease is formulated;
e.g., in Chinese medicine several disease-patterns can be discerned within
a group of patients with gastric ulcer (Kaptchuk 1983); one category in
allopathy, 'gastric ulcer', can be subdivided into several patterns in Chinese
medicine. This means that the referral of the symptom 'gastric pain' is
different in allopathy and Chinese medicine.
How this referring relationship is exactly established, and how it differs
between the three medical systems, depends on:
— which elements compose the prototypes of disease categories, and
— whether the categories are prototypes indeed, or discrete categories.
So, the structure of disease-categories may influence the semiotic
relation between symptom and disease-category. Sometimes a symptom
may refer to a disease-category, and sometimes it may not. This depends
on the variation within a category, and this depends, in its turn, on the
notion of what disease is; is disease a process defined to consist of a fixed
set of features, independently of its context, the patient, or is it context-
dependent, i.e., or do the features of the category depend on the patient?
A patient and doctor can establish a different semiotic relation between
a symptom and a disease-category. For example, a patient with an abdom-
inal pain suspects a physical diagnosis; when an allopathic doctor has

16 M. Brands, D. Franck, and E. van Leeuwen
done physical examination (eventually complemented with laboratory
data) without a result in the form of an anatomical cause for that pain,
then the doctor is likely to say: Ί can't find anything'. As allopathic
abdominal disease-categories are labeled according to anatomy (Harrison
1994), for this doctor the pain does not become a sign referring to any
disease; so in this case there is no allopathic disease-category the pain can
refer to. However, the pain does not disappear by stating that it is a
subjective feeling for the patient. Doctors sometimes even say 'You can't
have pain, as I can't find anything', then the problem becomes a discussion
about the truth of a symptom (Jackson 1992).
The possibility of assigning a sign-function to a symptom depends
on whether the symptom can be interpreted as referring to a disease-
category. If there is no such referral, interpretation is impossible within
this particular clinical theory: the symptom cannot become a sign. But
it does, however, if the symptom can be incorporated in the disease-
category as a variable element. The structure of a disease-category,
a prototype or a classical discrete category (Givon 1989) influences the
decision-making process, i.e., the interpretation by establishing a semiotic
relation between symptom and disease-category.
The comparative model
When the synthesis is made of categorization and a semiotic approach,
a working model for the comparison of systems of medicine is presented;
a medical system is defined as a conceptual design of how a diagnosis
is achieved. This model may function as a start to do research in a field
defined here as 'comparative medicine'. In this article the first outlines
are set for separate studies with regard to several aspects of medical
diagnosis.
It is proposed here to use a semiotic approach for the comparative
analysis of medical systems and to perform two operations first:
1. definition of the context of each system
2. description of the unit of the system's prototypical categorization:
the disease-category.
Together this leads to the third operation:
3. developing a semiotic process-analysis of medical diagnosis.
The relevance of including each of these three operations is summarized
as follows.
1. With 'context' is meant the cultural notions in which the key concepts
of the medical theory are embedded, such as for Western medicine the

Epistemology and semiotics of medical systems 17
aim to gain objective knowledge about diseases. The cultural notion
may lead to a definition of the disease-concept of the system under
study, and this concept influences the nature of the disease-category,
and thereby the type of categorization.
2. Whether prototypical or classical discrete categories are used in a
medical system is relevant, for their composition determines to which
disease-categories symptoms of a patient will be attributed, referring
as signs to these disease-categories. The semiotic process (i.e., the
referring relation between symptom and disease) depends on the kinds
of disease-categories used in that medical system.
3. Context description enables the definition of key concepts (operation 1)
which determine the mode of categorization (operation 2), which in
its turn determines the semiotic process of diagnosis.
Therefore, by these three operations the internal consistency of a medical
system may be examined and described.
A general scheme is proposed here for making explicit the recep-
tion and processing of the medical narrative. It is conceived of as
a semiotic process-analysis, which takes into account the process of
categorization and the influence from the context of the participants
in medical practice: doctors and patients. On the basis of the model
Eco (1976) developed for sign-production and coding, an application
is made in Hunter's (1991) terms for the medical situation. The
original semiotic model contains five steps in sending and receiving
a message:
1. coding of the sign by the sender
2. sending the message
3. transferring this information, depending on the context
4. receiving the information which includes the code
5. interpretation of the information (Eco 1976: 141, 154).
If this is applied to the medical situation, the model becomes as described
in Figure 1: The medical encounter as the starting point of diagnosis and
treatment is the focus of attention. The first column of Figure 1 contains
the phases Hunter mentions when describing the medical encounter in
terms of the encounter of two narratives, of doctor and patient. In the
second column the semiotic process is outlined for each of Hunter's phases.
The third column mentions the moments where the context exerts an
influence on the phase concerned.
The process can be divided into six phases:
1. The narrative of the patient is being told, including its coding (syn-
tactic and semantic markers); the coding depends on the experience
of the patient of her/his world. This phase includes steps 1 to 3 of
Eco's scheme.

18 M. Brands, D. Franck, and E. van Leeuwen
semiotic processkind of knowledge
involved
1. narrative coding
2. pattern coding 1 sign - production or semiosis
3. pattern recognition/
ad 2 reception: observation: the narrative of the patient
ad 3 diagnostic cycle: induction: hypothesis (diagnosis)
= sign-productionown experience
of the patient
framework of
medical knowledge
within a system
deduction
of data to be collectedtesting of hypothesis
rejecting or confirmation
4. inference-making
5. classification
6. therapeutic actiondata collection
(questions, examination, tests)
confirmation of hypothesis=diagnosis
attribution of symptoms to disease-category
Figure 1. Process-analysis of medical categorization
2. By narrating the symptoms, a pattern is being built, some symptoms
are emphasized, and others hardly mentioned; this process of selection
can be analyzed in the analysis of medical discourse.
3. During this building of a pattern in the patient's narrative, the message
is transferred to the listening doctor and received; the reception
consists of pattern-recognition by the doctor according to the context
of the doctor: personal experience and the form of medicine practiced
account for the selection of the information and the possibility of
attribution of the symptoms to categories. This possibility depends on
whether the symptoms can become a sign. The selection process can
be studied, as well as the interaction of selection of signs and the
medical context (the main concepts of disease, cure, and health in
a particular system).
This phase corresponds with steps 4 and 5 in Eco's scheme.
The second and third phase of the process constitute the actual
semiosis or sign-production. The framework of the medical knowledge

Epistemology and semiotics of medical systems 19
guides the decoding by the doctor of the patient's narrative, and the
synchronous coding of the selected symptoms, so that they can be
attributed to a disease category. When a patient starts talking about
stomach complaints, most probably the doctor's attention will initially
be directed towards this complaint. It depends on the medical frame-
work or available disease-categories, if other symptoms are interpreted
to refer to the same category, to complete the clinical picture, e.g., concur-
rent throat sensations (such as is done in Chinese medicine). This checking
of information by comparing it to an existing prototypical disease-
category is described here as the hypothetic cycle. This cycle is an
alternance of inductive and deductive reasoning. This also implies that
the second and third phase alternate, as the doctor may return to the
second phase to gain additional information which then may lead to
another hypothesis in the third phase:
— With some observations of the patient's narrative, the doctor induces
a preliminary hypothesis in the form of a selection of a potential
category to which the narrated symptom might be attributed.
— Then, the hypothesis is tested by deductive reasoning by posing addi-
tional questions and searching for the presence of symptoms, which, if
they are present, would also become signs given the presence of the first
sign which triggered the formulation of the initial hypothesis. Together
these signs will form a pattern.
Step 5 of Eco's scheme is divided here into the fourth and the fifth phase:
4. If the pattern of signs is present, the inference is made that these signs
together form sufficient reason to confirm the hypothesis and to attri-
bute the signs to a disease category: the hypothesized pattern is present.
5. The fifth step is the definite disease-classification, and the retelling
of the patient's narrative in the form of a medical story by the doctor
to the patient, justifying further diagnostic or therapeutic actions the
doctor is about to propose. The patient may have checks of this
information. This checking process may be analyzed further in
discourse analysis of medical consultations.
6. If this process of negotiation is concluded, the therapeutic action can
occur, although the proposal of it by the doctor can again cause a
negotiation with the patient. This may provoke a feedback to earlier
phases if the conclusion in the fifth phase is not agreed upon.
The exchange of the patient's narrative with the doctor's narrative is
a circular movement, in which adaptation occurs as a two-sided process
of sending and receiving messages. The two-sidedness, however, depends
on the possibilities of both parties to engage in such a process (Brown
1995), and this engagement depends among other things on the possibili-
ties of categorizing the information presented by the patient. A more

20 M. Brands, D. Franck, and E. van Leeuwen
detailed description of the limitations of these possibilities can be made
by the text-analysis of medical books and discourse-analysis of medical
consultations; these can be made in separate studies.
Steps of comparative analysis
In the description of the diagnostic process made above, several aspects
can be discerned. These aspects concern the structure, the meaning, and
the action of a semiotic process or semiosis. Morris (1971) proposed
a division of semiosis according to this tripartition:
1. the syntactic level, where issues of structure are dealt with;
2. the semantic level, where meaning is addressed;
3. the pragmatic level, where the actions are the focus of interest.
The model of comparative analysis is composed according to this
three-level structure, enabling the diagnostic explicitation of other medical
systems.
Each medical system which is to be compared can be analyzed in
separate studies at the following levels:
1. The syntactic level: here the structure is constituted by the elements
of the system of signs which is described; in this study this means
the definitions of the key concepts of the medical systems concerned.
The chosen key concepts are: disease, cure and health. They can
be defined for each system, such as for allopathy, homeopathy and
Chinese medicine. All three concepts form the basic terms in medical
narratives, be it on text- or discourse level. Medicine ultimately is
concerned with disease and the process of cure to arrive at a state of
health. Their interrelationships can be analyzed, as well as the meta-
phorical structure of the key concepts. The metaphors refer to the
underlying thoughts, which contributed to the origin of those concepts.
Together they form the foundation for the second level.
2. The semantic level: here the meaningful relations between the terms
disease, cure and health are displayed in the form of a clinical theory.
This clinical theory describes how a symptom such as gastric pain may
refer to different disease-categories, and these may differ in different
medical systems. Without a clinical theory a doctor cannot receive the
patient's story nor understand it in a form which enables description,
interpretation and treatment of the symptoms.
3. The pragmatic level of the analysis indicates the language actions in
the discourse in the way that they can be performed, given the possible
relationship which can be made at the semantic level, i.e., the clinical
theory. The patient's story is transformed by deletion and selection of

Epistemology and semiotics of medical systems 21
signs depending on the possibilities of interpretation of the doctor
(Browm 1995).
Conclusion
It seems feasible to design a framework for analysis and description of
the cognitive aspects of medical diagnosis, as such that similarities and
differences of the respective systems can be distinguished, without that an
a priori position needs to be taken about the validity of a medical system.
When the three levels of analysis, syntactical, semantical, and prag-
matical, are used as such a framework, those similarities and differences
may enable an explicit comparison, which can provide instruments for
a structured communication between practitioners of these systems.
References
Astin, John A. (1998). Why patients use alternative medicine. Results of a national study.
Journal of the American Medical Association 279, 1548-1553.
Bastide, Madeleine (ed.) (1997). Signals and Images. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Bellavite, Paolo and Signorini, Andrea (1995). Homeopathy. A Frontier in Medical Science.
Berkeley, CA: North Atlantic Books.
Benbassat, J. (1994). Difficulties in teaching of uncertainty to medical students. In
The Discipline of Medicine. Emerging Concepts and Their Impact upon Medical Research
and Medical Education, Proceedings symposium, May 1993, A. Querido, L. A. van Es,
E. Mandema (eds.), 185-191. KNAW verhandelingen. Amsterdam: North Holland.
Berman, Brian M.; Hartnoll, Susan M.; Singh, Betsy B.; and Krishna Singh, B. (1997).
Homeopathy and the US primary care physician. Growing interest in a forgotten field?
British Homeopathic Journal 86, 131-138.
Brown, Gillian (1995). Speakers, Listeners and Communication. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Burnum, John F. (1993). Medical diagnosis through semiotics. Giving meaning to the sign.
Annals of Internal Medicine 119, 939-943.
Carlston, Michael; Stuart, Marian; and Jonas, Wayne (1997). Alternative medicine
instruction in medical schools and family practice residency programs. Family Medicine
29 (8), 559-562.
Carnap, Rudolf (1935). Philosophy and Logical Syntax. London: Kegan Paul.
Chisholm, Roderick (1986). The myth of the 'given'. In Empirical Knowledge. Readings in
Contemporary Epistemology, P. Moser (ed.), 55-75. London: Rowman and Littlefield
Publications.
Coulter, Harris L. (1975). Divided Legacy. A History of the Schism in Medical Thought,
vols. 1, 2, and 3. Washington, DC: Wehawken Book Co.
Dutch Health Council (1993). Alternatieve Behandelwijzen en Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek
(Alternative Treatments and Scientific Research). Advice to the Minister of Health,
no 1993/13. Den Haag: Gezondheidsraad.

22 M. Brands, D. Franck, and E. van Leeuwen
Eco, Umberto (1976). A Theory of Semiotics. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Eisenberg, David M. et al. (1993). Unconventional medicine in the United States. New
England Journal of Medicine 328, 246-252.
Endler, Peter C. and Schulte, Jürgen (eds.) (1994). Ultra High Dilution. Physiology and
Physics. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Feinstein, Alvan R. (1983). An additional basic science for clinical medicine: I. The
constraining fundamental paradigms. Annals of Internal Medicine 99, 393-397.
Fodor, Jerry (1991). The dogma that didn't bark. In Korablith 1994: 191-216.
Foucault, Michel (1975). The Birth of the Clinic. New York: Vintage Books.
Gale, Janet and Marsden, Philip (1985). Diagnosis: Process not product. In Decision-Making
in General Practice, M. Sheldon, J. Brooke, and A. Rector (eds.), 59-105. London:
Macmillan Press.
Gentner, Dedre and Jeziorski, Michael (1995). The shift from metaphor to analogy in Western
science. In Ortony 1995: 447-480.
Gillett, Grant (1995). Virtue and truth in clinical science. Journal of Medicine and Philosophy
20, 285-298.
Givon, Talmy (1989). Mind, Code and Context. Essays in Pragmatics. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gordon, Deborah R. (1988). Tenacious assumptions in Western medicine. In Lock and
Gordon 1988a: 19-56.
Harrison, T. R. (1994). Principles of Internal Medicine, thirteenth edition, ed. by K.
Isselbacher et al. London: McGraw-Hill.
Hess, Benno (1991). General properties of non-linear processes in biology. Proceedings,
Congress of the International Research Group on High Dilutions (GIRI), Paris.
Hess, Benno; Goldbeter, A.; and Lefever, R. (1978). Temporal, spatial and functional order
in regulated biochemical cellular systems. Advances in Chemical Physics 38, 363-413.
Hunter, Kathryn Montgomery (1991). Doctor's Stories. The Narrative Structure of Medical
Knowledge. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Jackson, Jean F. (1992). After a while no one believes you: Real and unreal pain. In Pain as
Human Experience, M-J. Del Vecchio Good, P. E. Brodwin, B. J. Good, and A. Kleinman
(eds.), 43-65. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Kaptchuk, Ted (1983). The Web That Has No Weaver. New York: Cogdon and Weed.
Katz, Jerrold (1972). Semantic Theory. New York: Harper and Row.
Kirmayer, Laurence J. (1988). Mind and body as metaphors: Hidden values in biomedicine.
In Lock and Gordon 1988a: 57-94.
Kleinman, Arthur (1986). Concepts and a model for the comparison of medical systems as
cultural systems. In Concepts of Health, Illness and Disease. A Comparative Perspective,
Caroline Currer and Meg Stacey (eds.), 29-47. Leamington Spa, UK: Berg.
—(1988). The Illness Narratives and the Human Condition. New York: Basic Books.
Kleijnen, Jos; Knipschild, Paul; and ter Riet, Gerben (1991). Clinical trials of homeopathy.
British Medical Journal 302, 316-323.
Kornblith, Hilary (ed.) (1994). Naturalizing Epistemology. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kühn, Thomas (1971 [1962]). The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.
Langman, M. J. S. (1997). Homeopathy trails: Reason for good ones but are they warranted?
Lancet 350, 825.
Linde, Klaus; Clausius, Nicola; and Ramirez, Gilbert et al. (1997). Are the clinical effects
of homeopathy placebo effects? A meta-analysis of placebo-controlled trails. Lancet 350,
834-843.
Lock, Margaret and Gordon, Deborah (eds.) (1988a). Biomedicine Examined. Dordrecht:
Kluwer Academic Publishers.

Epistemology and semiotics of medical systems 23
—(1988b). Relationships between society, culture and biomedicine. In Lock and Gordon
1988a: 11-18.
McMullin, Ernan (1995). Underdetermination. Journal of Medicine and Philosophy 20,
233-252.
Mehan, Hugh and Wood, Houston (1975). The Reality ofEthnomethodology. New York: Wiley.
Morris, Charles (1971). Writings on the General Theory of Signs. Den Haag: Mouton.
Moulton, Janet (1983). A paradigm of philosophy: The adversary method. In Discovering
Reality, Feminist Perspectives on Epistemology, Metaphysics, Methodology and Philosophy
of Science, S. Harding and M. B. Hintikka (eds.), 149-164. Dordrecht: Reidel Publishing
Company.
National Institute of Health (1997). Consensus report on the efficacy of acupuncture.
Bethesda, MD: National Institute of Health.
Nicolis, G. and Prigogine, I. (1977). Self-organization in Non-equilibrium Systems. New York:
John Wiley.
—(1987). Exploring Complexity. An Introduction. München: Piper.
Nicolis, John S. (1991). Chaos and Information Processing: A Heuristic Outline. Singapore:
World Scientific.
Ortony, A. (ed.) (1995). Metaphor and Thought, second, revised edition. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Peirce, Charles (1931-1958). Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce, 8 vols., Charles
Hartshorne, Paul Weiss, and A. W. Burks (eds.). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press. [Reference to Peirce's papers will be designated CPJ
Piaget, Jean (1972). Psychology and Epistemology: Towards a Theory of Knowledge.
Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Price, Laurie (1987). Ecuadorian illness stories: Cultural knowledge in natural discourse. In
Cultural Models in Language and Thought, D. Holland and N. Quinn (eds.), 313-343.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Popper, Karl (1958). The Logic of Scientific Discovery. New York: Harper and Row.
Querido, A. and Roos, J. (eds.) (1980). Controversen in de geneeskunde (Controversies in
Medicine). Utrecht: Bunge.
Quine, W. V. O. (1969). Natural kinds. In Kornblith 1994: 57-76.
Reilly, David et al. (1994). Is evidence for homeopathy reproducible? Lancet 344,
1601-1606.
Root-Bernstein, Robert (1993). Rethinking Aids, The Tragic Cost of Premature Consensus.
New York: Free Press.
Rorty, Richard M. (1992). The Linguistic Turn. Essays in Philosophical Method. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Rosch, Eleanor (1975). Cognitive representations of semantic categories. Journal of
Experimental Psychology 104, 192-233.
—(1978). Principles of categorization. In Cognition and Categorization, E. Rosch and
B. B. Lloyd (eds.), 27-48. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Searle, John (1980). The background of meaning. In Speech Act Theory and Pragmatics,
J. R. Searle, M. Kiefer, and M. Bierwisch (eds.), 221-232. Dordrecht: Reidel Publishing
Company.
Sebeok, Thomas (1991). A Sign is Just a Sign. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Sundström, Per (1987). Icons of Disease. Dissertation, Linköping University.
Uexkuell, Thure von (1986). Medicine and semiotics. Semiotica 61, 201-217.
Vandenbroucke, Jan P. (1997). Homeopathy trials: Going nowhere. Lancet 350, 824.
Van Wijk, Roeland and Wiegant, Fred (1997). The Similia Principle in Surviving Stress;
Mammalian Cells in Homeopathy Research. Utrecht: Utrecht University Press.

24 M. Brands, D. Franck, and E. van Leeuwen
Varela, Francisco J.; Thompson, Evan; and Rosch, Eleanor (1992). The Embodied Mind.
Cognitive Science and Human Experience. Cambridge, ΜΑ: MIT Press.
Waitzkin, Howard and Magana, Holly (1997). The black box in somatization: Unexplained
physical symptoms, culture, and narratives of trauma. Social Science and Medicine 45 (6),
811-825.
White, Geoffrey M. and Robillard, Albert B. (1989). Doctor talk and Hawaiian 'talk story':
The conversational organization of a clinical encounter. In Doctor-Patient Interaction,
W. von Raffler-Engel (ed.), 197-212. Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig (1953). Philosophical Investigations. New York: Macmillan.
Wright, H. J. and MacAdam, D. B. (1979). Clinical Thinking and Practice; Diagnosis and
Decision in Patient Care. London: Churchill Livingstone.
Martien Brands (b. 1953) is at the Department of Philosophy of Medicine at Vrije University,
Amsterdam {mbrands@wxs.nl). His research interests include metaphors in medical
consultations, data registration, and clinical epidemiology. His major publications include
'Complementary research Γ (1996), 'Complementary research ΙΓ (1997), and 'Disease:
Language and experience' (with D. Franck and E. van Leeuwen, 1998).
Dorothea Franck (b. 1948) teaches in the Department of General Literary Studies at the
University of Amsterdam (d.franck@mail.uva.nl). Her research interests include linguistic
pragmatics, poetics, the philosophy of language, and the philosophy of art. Her major
publications include Grammatik und Konversation (1980), 'The life of language: Unity in
diversity' (1990), and 'Ko-und kontext' (1996).
Evert van Leeuwen (b. 1954) is Chair at the Department of Philosophy of Medicine at
Free University, Amsterdam (evleeuwen@med.vu.nl). His research interests include the
philosophy of medicine and ethics. His major publications include 'Neurosemiotics' (with
Broekman and Dillman 1992), 'The anthropological dimension of biomedical research'
(1994), 'Philosophy of medical practice' (with G. K. Kimoma 1997), and 'Bioethical aspects of
death and dying' (1998).