REVIEW
published: 07 February 2018
doi: 10.3389/fnins.2018.00036
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 1 February 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 36Editedby:
IsabellePeretz,
UniversitédeMontréal,Canada
Reviewedby:
AndreaEugenioCavanna,
BirminghamandSolihullMental
HealthNHSFoundationTrust,
UnitedKingdom
ClaudeAlain,
RotmanResearchInstitute(RRI),
Canada
*Correspondence:
M.ZacharyRosenthal
mark.rosenthal@duke.edu
Specialtysection:
Thisarticlewassubmittedto
AuditoryCognitiveNeuroscience,
asectionofthejournal
FrontiersinNeuroscience
Received: 13July2017
Accepted: 15January2018
Published: 07February2018
Citation:
BroutJJ,EdelsteinM,ErfanianM,
ManninoM,MillerLJ,RouwR,
KumarSandRosenthalMZ(2018)
InvestigatingMisophonia:AReviewof
theEmpiricalLiterature,Clinical
Implications,andaResearchAgenda.
Front.Neurosci.12:36.
doi:10.3389/fnins.2018.00036Investigating Misophonia: A Review
of the Empirical Literature, Clinical
Implications, and a Research Agenda
JenniferJ.Brout1,MirenEdelstein1,2,MercedeErfanian1,3,MichaelMannino4,
LucyJ.Miller1,5,RomkeRouw6,SukhbinderKumar1,7andM.ZacharyRosenthal1,8,9*
1InternationalMisophoniaResearchNetwork,NewYork,NY,Un itedStates,2DepartmentofPsychology,CenterforBrainand
Cognition,UniversityofCalifornia,SanDiego,SanDiego, CA,UnitedStates,3DepartmentofPsychologyandNeuroscience,
MaastrichtUniversity,Maastricht,Netherlands,4CenterforComplexSystemsandBrainSciences,FloridaAtla nticUniversity,
BocaRaton,FL,UnitedStates,5DepartmentofPsychology,BrainandCognition,AmsterdamU niversity,Amsterdam,
Netherlands,6BrainandCognition,DepartmentofPsychology,University ofAmsterdam,Amsterdam,Netherlands,
7AuditoryGroup,InstituteofNeuroscience,NewcastleUnive rsity,Newcastle,UnitedKingdom,8DepartmentofPsychiatry
andBehavioralScience,DukeUniversityMedicalCenter,Du rham,NC,UnitedStates,9DepartmentofPsychologyand
Neuroscience,DukeUniversity,Durham,NC,UnitedStates
Misophonia is a neurobehavioral syndrome phenotypically c haracterized by heightened
autonomic nervous system arousal and negative emotional re activity (e. g., irritation,
anger, anxiety) in response to a decreased tolerance for spe ciﬁc sounds. The aims of
thisreviewareto(a)characterizethecurrentstateoftheﬁ eldofresearchonmisophonia,
(b) highlight what can be inferred from the small research li terature to inform treatment
of individuals with misophonia, and (c) outline an agenda fo r research on this topic. We
extend previous reviews on this topic by critically reviewi ng the research investigating
mechanisms of misophonia and differences between misophon ia and other conditions.
Inaddition,weintegratethissmallbut growing literature withbasicandappliedresearch
from other literatures in a cross-disciplinary manner.
Keywords: misophonia, sensory processing, sensory over-re sponsivity, fear circuitry, defensive motivational
systems, emotion regulation
INTRODUCTION
Misophoniaisacomplexneurophysiologicalandbehavioralsyndr omecharacterizedbyheightened
physiologicalresponsivityandahighmagnitudeofemotional reactivityresultingfromintolerance
to speciﬁc auditory stimuli ( Jastreboﬀ and Jastreboﬀ, 2001, 2014; Møller, 2011; Wu et al., 20 14).
Originally described by Jastreboﬀ and Jastreboﬀ (2001) , individuals with misophonia are believed
todemonstrateincreasedsympatheticnervoussystemarousa l,accompaniedbyemotionaldistress
inresponsetospeciﬁcpattern-basedsounds,irrespectiveofde cibellevel( JastreboﬀandJastreboﬀ,
2001; Edelstein et al., 2013 ). Examples of these sounds include other people chewing, throa t
clearing,slurping,ﬁngertapping,footshuﬄing,keyboardtappi ng,andpenclicking( Jastreboﬀand
Jastreboﬀ,2001;Edelsteinetal.,2013;Schröderetal.,2013 ;Wuetal.,2014 ).Theacousticpatternof
thesesoundsandtheirelicitedresponsevaryacrossindivid uals.Bothsoundsandreactionsappear
totakeonidiosyncraticforms,suggestingthatindividual diﬀerences,learningandcontextmayplay
aroleinaversiveresponding.
Sounds are referred to as “triggers” and as “misophonic sound s” by suﬀerers in social media
support forums and by researchers in the emerging scientiﬁc li terature. Similarly, responses to
trigger sounds are often referred to as “misophonic responses .” Upon exposure to misophonic

Brout et al. Investigating Misophonia
trigger sounds, emotional responses frequently include ang er
(ranging from irritation to rage), anxiety, disgust, avoid ance,
escape behavior as well as a feeling of being overwhelmed
and/or overloaded by auditory stimuli. As noted in the
nascent literature, this newly deﬁned syndrome may, for som e
individuals, lead to severe impairments in daily functionin g
(e.g., occupationally, interpersonally, academically) and may
contributetothedevelopmentofbehavioralhealthproblems.
Although syndromal features have begun to be characterized
empirically, misophonia has not been formally recognized as a
speciﬁctypeofneurological,audiological,orpsychiatricdi sorder.
Over-responsivity to auditory stimuli is a feature observed
among a wide range of neurological, auditory, medical and
psychiatric disorders such as tinnitus, hyperacusis ( Jastreboﬀ
and Jastreboﬀ, 2001 ), migraine headaches ( Sullivan et al., 2013 ),
autism spectrum disorder ( Ben-Sasson et al., 2009a; Danesh
and Kaf, 2012; Lane et al., 2012 ), posttraumatic stress disorder
(Attias et al., 1996; Finsterwald and Alberini, 2014 ), borderline
personality disorder ( Rosenthal et al., 2016 ), bipolar disorder,
and schizophrenia ( Cabranes et al., 2013 ). The precise nature
of the relationship between misophonia and these disorders
is unknown. However, intolerance to aversive sounds does
not appear to be a phenomenon that co-occurs uniquely and
speciﬁcally with any one disorder. Indeed, rigorously condu cted
research is needed to elucidate whether misophonia is a uniqu e
constellation of symptoms or a transdiagnostically co-occu rring
syndromefoundacrossotherdisorders( Stansfeldetal.,1985 ).
Thesmallbodyofresearchinvestigatingmisophoniainclude s
studies conducted in the ﬁelds of audiology, otolaryngolog y,
psychiatry, psychology, and the neurosciences. Although
some promising research examining the neurobiological
underpinnings of misophonia recently has been conducted,
much of the early literature describes the phenotypic expressi on
and preliminary associations between symptoms of misophonia
andpsychiatricdisorders.
The primary aim of this paper is to review research on
misophonia using a cross-disciplinary approach, with the
goal of generating testable hypotheses and advancing the
conceptualization of this recently identiﬁed syndrome. In
addition, recent neuroscience-based paradigms of emotion
emphasizing the defense/fear circuitry are described to
contextualize the extant research and inform future studie s.
Speciﬁcally, we begin by detailing Jastreboﬀ and Jastreboﬀ
(2001)original theoretical model of misophonia and related
conditions. Next, we review the current research literatur e on
misophonia, with a brief discussion of the early case studies a nd
the small number of empirical studies that have followed. Last ,
we synthesize the empirical literature, outline a research a genda,
and highlight several key considerations in the treatment o f
thosewithmisophonia.
ORIGIN OF MISOPHONIA: THE
JASTREBOFFS’ MODEL
In this section, we trace the development of Jastreboﬀ and
Jastreboﬀ’s ( Jastreboﬀ and Jastreboﬀ, 2001 ) conceptualizationof misophonia. Although other models of sound intolerance
have been posited ( Pienkowski et al., 2014; Tyler et al., 2014 ),
misophonia as a speciﬁc syndrome was initially described by
the Jastreboﬀ’s ( Jastreboﬀ and Jastreboﬀ, 2001 ). The model
began with Pawel Jastreboﬀ’s phantom model of tinnitus
(Jastreboﬀ, 1990 ) and was inﬂuenced by Jastreboﬀ’s work
with hyperacusis ( Jastreboﬀ and Jastreboﬀ, 2001, 2002, 2014 ).
Tinnitus is a complex neurological condition with multiple
potential etiological pathways ( Baguley, 2016 ). Individuals with
tinnitus experience ringing in one or both of their ears, and
the condition often is associated with hearing loss. Jastre boﬀ’s
neurophysiological model of tinnitus as a phantom perception
gained wide acceptance when he published it in 1990 ( Baguley,
2016). According to this theory, tinnitus arises due to abnormal
patterns of neural activity in auditory neural pathways. These
abnormalactivitypatterns,possiblyoriginatingfromtheco chlea
(or in the subcortical structures in the auditory neurologi cal
pathway)aredetectedbytheneocortexwheretheyareperceive d
as a ringing noise. Essential to this model of tinnitus is the
diﬀerence between perception of tinnitus per seand emotional
responses to these symptoms. Reacting negatively to tinnitus
facilitates attention to it, which further ampliﬁes the percept of
tinnitus. With repetition of such responses, associative lea rning
betweentinnitusandthesenegativeemotionalresponsesocc urs.
In other words, whereas the perception of tinnitus involves th e
auditorysystem,theemotionalresponsetotinnitusismodul ated
by a wider range of neural systems, including those within
the limbic areas. Based on this, Pawel and Margaret Jastrebo ﬀ
developed Tinnitus Retraining Therapy (TRT), which includes
repeated exposure to low level, broadband noise in an eﬀort
to facilitate habituation by interfering with the neural act ivity
responsibleforgeneratingtinnitus( Jastreboﬀetal.,1996 ).
Using a similar model, Jastreboﬀ and Jastreboﬀ (2001)
purported that anatomical and functional links between the
central auditory system and the limbic system were integral
to the development of fear and anxiety related to hyperacusis
(i.e., extreme sensitivity to loud noise or the perception that
noises are much louder than they are). This model has been
supported by observations that patients with hyperacusis may
presentwithoutanyapparentdysfunctionorinvolvementwithi n
theperipheralauditoryapparatus( HazellandJastreboﬀ,1990 ).In
addition, Jastreboﬀ suggested that because of hyperacusis, ma ny
individualsalsodevelopphonophobia(i.e.,apronouncedfearo f
sound).Aswithtinnitus,theJastreboﬀs’( JastreboﬀandJastreboﬀ,
2001, 2002, 2014 ) proposed using the same principles of TRT to
helpindividualswithhyperacusisandphonophobia( Baguleyand
McFerran,2011 ).
Jastreboﬀ and Jastreboﬀ (2001) coined the term misophonia
while working with hyperacusis patients. They noted that some
hyperacusis patients reacted with aversion to sounds that hav e
speciﬁc patterns regardless of decibel level and irrespective o f
the physical characteristics of sounds ( Jastreboﬀ and Jastreboﬀ,
2001). The Jastreboﬀs reported ( Jastreboﬀ and Jastreboﬀ,
2001) that the sounds to which misophonics responded
included, as examples, slurping, lip smacking, breathing, an d
pencil tapping. In addition, unlike hyperacusis, misophonic
triggers were variable across people and environmental
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 2 February 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 36

Brout et al. Investigating Misophonia
contexts. Consequently, theJastreboﬀs( JastreboﬀandJastreboﬀ,
2001) hypothesized that these responses were developed and
maintained, in part, via associative learning mechanisms
activated in particular contexts. Accordingly, it could be
hypothesized from this framework that misophonic responses
to trigger cues were grounded in neurophysiological systems
responsible for emotion, memory, and learning. From this
perspective, misophonic responses to sounds may be inherently
bothbiologicalandshapedbyenvironmentalinﬂuences.
Thus, with higher cortical brain structures involved in the
maintenanceofmisophonia,theJastreboﬀ’susedtheframewo rk
of TRT to propose a treatment approach for misophonia.
Speciﬁcally, they proposed a treatment model using repeated
exposure to misophonic triggers with new and positively
experienced conditioned responses temporarily following
exposuretotriggers.Todate,thisretrainingintervention hasnot
been experimentally tested using randomized controlled tri als,
leavingtheeﬃcacyofthistreatmentwithoutempiricalevide nce.
CASE STUDIES OF MISOPHONIA
Most of the published literature exploring misophonia has
been conducted using individual case descriptions or a serie s
of case reports among small samples of adults self-reporting
symptoms ( Neal and Cavanna, 2012; Bernstein et al., 2013;
Ferreira et al., 2013; Johnson et al., 2013; Kluckow et al., 20 14;
Webber et al., 2014; Dozier, 2015 ). Across these case studies,
the speciﬁc symptoms vary. Although the Jastreboﬀs’ original
conceptualizationofmisophoniaincludedaversiverespondin gto
sounds generated by both living beings and inanimate object s,
many case reports speciﬁcally indicate that trigger sounds ar e
generated by other people (e.g., other people chewing, smacking
lips, coughing, throat clearing; Webber et al., 2014 ). However,
it is important to note that individuals also report aversion
to mechanical noises, such as air-conditioners, refrigera tor
humming, and/or noises emanating from pets ( Møller, 2011;
Cavanna and Seri, 2015 ). In addition, some case studies indicate
that individuals with misophonia describe experiencing aver sive
responses to repetitively presented visual stimuli or movemen t,
also known as misokinesia (e.g., seeing another person shaki ng
theirleg).
Thesecasereportshavebeenvaluableasinitialdocumentati on
of misophonia as a clinical syndrome not previously described
and found among patients presenting with other clinical
problems. For example, Neal and Cavanna (2013) observed
misophonia symptoms in one patient with Tourette’s syndrome.
Webber et al. (2014) reported misophonia symptoms in
a pediatric patient with Tourette’s syndrome and obsessive
compulsive disorder (OCD). As another example, using a
case series approach with three patients, Ferreira et al. (2013)
reportedmisophoniasymptomsinpatientswithseveraldiﬀerent
psychiatric disorders. Based on these case observations, Ferreira
etal.(2013) speculatedthatmisophoniacouldbecharacterizedas
asymptomofobsessive-compulsivedisorder,generalizedanxi ety
disorder(GAD),andschizotypalpersonalitydisorder.Itisu seful
to generate hypotheses from case descriptions. However, it ispremature to use such methods to draw causal inferences or to
extrapolate results beyond the cases being described. For mo re
deﬁnitive insights to be drawn from the empirical literature ,
appropriately powered studies are needed using experimental
methods with testable hypotheses to elucidate the mechanism s
underlyingmisophonia.
PHYSIOLOGICAL MEASURES AND
MISOPHONIA
Autonomic, Neurophysiological, and
Neurobiological Studies
A small number of studies have investigated the relationshi p
between subjective and behavioral responses in misophonia and
correspondingresponsesinthebrainandnervoussystem.Thes e
studies are the ﬁrst to begin examining whether misophonic
individuals respond in speciﬁc ways to misophonic trigger
soundsascomparedtootheraversivesounds.Importantly,the se
studies have begun to identify candidate neural and periphera l
psychophysiologicalmechanismsunderlyingmisophonia.
Edelstein et al. (2013) were the ﬁrst to apply
psychophysiological measurements to study misophonia.
They measured skin conductance response (SCR) to quantify
sympathetic nervous system reactivity in misophonic and
control participants using both unisensory1and multisensory2
stimuli. The researchers used stimuli that ranged in emotio nal
valence (e.g., children laughing, birds singing, gum chewi ng
and lip smacking) and asked participants to rate each by their
perceived level of aversion. These self-reports were compared
withthephysiologicaldata.
First, the subjectively reported autonomic (i.e., “ﬁght/ﬂig ht”)
responsewaspresentintheSCRdata.Furthermore,theresponse
was speciﬁc. Both aversiveness ratings and SCR data showed
increased responses in auditory-only stimuli in misophonics
as compared with controls, while no signiﬁcant diﬀerence was
obtained in visual-only stimuli. Results showed a signiﬁcan t
positive correlation between average level of aversiveness and
mean SCR across all participants and across unisensory and
multisensory trials. This ﬁnding suggests that subjective and
physiological responses to stimuli were consistent with one
another. Overall, the importance of this study is that it indic ates
(a) misophonic responses can be measured in the autonomic
nervoussystemand(b)misophoniaisassociatedwithheighte ned
SCRresponsestomisophoniccues.
The authors note that limitations of the study include
small sample size, a lack of rigorous screening for psychiatric
or psychological problems, and the fact that SCR measures
autonomic arousal but does not describe the nature of the
aﬀective state associated with autonomic arousal. In additi on,
because this study lacked a clinical comparison group, it is
unclear whether the ﬁndings can be attributed to misophonia
speciﬁcally,ortootherclinicalconditions.Indeed,recom mended
improvements for future studies using these methods includes
(a) a larger sample size, (b) use of a clinical control group,
1Unisensory(visualorauditoryalone).
2Multisensory(visualandauditorytogether).
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 3 February 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 36

Brout et al. Investigating Misophonia
(c) use of psychometrically validated and structured psychia tric
diagnostic evaluations, (d) more speciﬁc probing of trigger
sounds (e.g., including a trigger vs. non-trigger contrast in the
analyses), and (e) use of dependent measures that can more
clearly specify and diﬀerentiate exact physiological or subje ctive
responseselicitedbytriggersounds.
Edelstein et al. (2013) suggest that the potential underlying
mechanisms of misophonia may bear some similarities with
those of synesthesia and suggest that the two conditions may
informoneanother.Synesthesiaisaconditioninwhichasen sory
stimulus or sensation (also known as an “inducer”) consiste ntly
andautomaticallyevokes anotherseemingly unrelatedsens ation
or association(alsoknown as a “concurrent”; Ward andSimner,
2003; Saenz and Koch, 2008; Brang et al., 2010, 2011; Colizoli
et al., 2013 ). Though unusual, it is possible for emotion to be
a synesthetic concurrent, as indicated in previous research on
tactile-emotionsynesthesia( RamachandranandBrang,2008 ).A
diﬀerence between synesthesia and misophonia, however, is th at
synesthetes have a more speciﬁc and complex set of inducer-
to-concurrent associations (e.g., in a letter-color synes thete, the
letter“A”maybebluewhiletheletter“R”ispurple).Furtherm ore,
synesthetic responses remain constant over the years, and it is
not yet clear if this is the case for misophonic responses. Stil l,
the knowledge acquired in the past decade on the mechanisms
involved in synesthesia does oﬀer a useful preliminary model
for misophonic mechanisms. Speciﬁcally, Edelstein et al. sugg est
that akin to the abnormal brain connectivity between induce r
and concurrent brain areas obtained in synesthetes ( Rouw and
Scholte, 2007 ), deviant anatomical or functional connections
couldliebetweenauditoryandlimbicregionsinmisophonics .
Schröder et al. (2014) published the ﬁrst EEG study on
the neurobiological mechanisms involved in misophonia. The
authors examined auditory event-related potentials (ERPs),
including the P1, P2, and N1 components to explore the early
auditory processing system in participants with misophonia.
Notably, the N1 component is often associated with auditory
attention and abrupt changes in the detection of sounds.
Schröder et al. presented an oddball paradigm, wherein the
participantlistenedtoasequenceofstandardtones,withdev iant
tones randomly interspersed. Based on research indicating t hat
attentionprocessinganomaliescorrelatewithseveral psych iatric
disorders, Schröder et al. hypothesized that similar atypica l
responses would be observed in misophonics. Indeed, the N1
ERP peak evoked by the oddball tones was diminished in
misophonics, as compared to that of controls. The misophonics
did not diﬀer from controls in the P1 and P2 components of
misophonicsandcontrolsduringoddballtones,norinanyoft he
ERPcomponentsduringstandardtones.
Schröder and colleagues suggest that the observed N1
response may be a candidate neurophysiological marker for
pathology related to misophonia. Although these results do
not establish a deﬁnitive causal link between diminished N1
and misophonia, they do represent an important early step
toward understanding the neural underpinnings of misophonia .
Speciﬁcally, this study suggests how misophonia may aﬀect
earlyauditoryprocessingcomponents.Theﬁndingsfurthermo re
suggest a role for atypical auditory attentional processes inmisophonia. As a limitation of the study, the authors note
that the diminished N1 does not reveal the nature or level
of the atypical processes. Further, the study results do not
disconﬁrm the hypothesis that diminished N1 responding may
reﬂect transdiagnostic impairment, rather than being uniqu e to
misophonia per se. Accordingly, it is premature to conclude
that atypical N1 responses are speciﬁc to misophonia. A
study contrasting electrophysiological responses in misophoni cs
with other clinical control groups is needed to address
thisissue.
A technique commonly used to oﬀer insight in the exact
location of brain processes (due to higher spatial resolution ) is
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). A recent study
byKumar et al. (2017) performed a functional neuroimaging
as well as psychophysiological [heart rate (HR) and galvanic
skin response (GSR)] study with misophonic and age-matched
controls. Participants were presented with three sets of soun ds:
trigger sounds, unpleasant sounds (aversive non-misophonic
sounds) and neutral sounds. As expected, trigger sounds evok ed
a strong misophonic reaction in misophonic participants. The
unpleasant sounds, although perceived as annoying, did not
trigger a misophonic reaction, indicating a dissociation be tween
generalannoyanceandmisophonicresponses.
The group (misophonic vs. control) by sound type
(misophonic, unpleasant, neutral) interaction was signiﬁca nt
in the bilateral anterior insular cortex (AIC). Speciﬁcally , the
misophonics showed increased activation in this region in
response to trigger sounds. No diﬀerences between misophonics
and controls were found for the unpleasant and neutral sounds .
Activity in bilateral AIC furthermore correlated with mean
misophonic ratings, with increased scores related to increa sed
activation. Accordingly, one important conclusion from thi s
study is that the AIC is a neural structure that may have a key
roleintheprocessingofmisophonictriggers.
The AIC is known to be a core hub of the “salience network”
(Seeley et al., 2007 ) which detects personally relevant stimuli
in the environment and directs attention to these cues. In th e
Kumar et al. (2017) study, stronger activation of AIC to trigger
sounds show that misophonic participants assigned higher
salience to trigger sounds. Analysis of functional connecti vity
of AIC showed hyper-connectivity, which was again speciﬁc to
trigger sounds, to the default mode network (DMN) ( Raichle
et al., 2001 ) in misophonic participants. The DMN is known
to be active during internally directed thoughts and recall of
memories. Stronger coupling of AIC to DMN in misophonic
participantssuggeststhatprocessesrelatedtoassociativel earning
and memory may have an important role in the heightened AIC
activationtotriggersounds.
In addition, analysis of structural brain data in Kumar et al.
(2017)showed that misophonics had greater myelination in
the gray matter of ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC),
which forms a node of the DMN. This structural diﬀerence
possiblyunderliestheabnormalfunctionalconnectivityofA ICto
DMNinmisophonics.Finally,Kumaretal.observedheightened
autonomic responses (HR and GSR) speciﬁc to trigger sounds
in misophonic participants, and the analysis of sources of thes e
responseswerelocalizedinAICareas.
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 4 February 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 36

Brout et al. Investigating Misophonia
Collectively, the ﬁndings from Kumar et al. point to
the abnormal activation and functional connectivity of AIC ,
shedding light on candidate regions and systems representin g
the possible neural underpinnings of misophonia. Ultimately,
these ﬁndings may have clinical signiﬁcance by oﬀering clini cal
scientists key insights about possible biological mechanism s
which can be targeted for change when developing ways to help
peoplewithmisophonia.
An important limitation of this study is the lack of a
clinicalcontrolgroup.Withoutcomparingmisophonicresponse s
to those of individuals without misophonia but with other
clinical characteristics, it is not possible to conclude tha t the
ﬁndings from this study are unique and speciﬁc to misophonia.
Another limitation of this study is that obtaining correlat ions
and relationships among neural patterns of activation and
behavior does not warrant causal interpretations. Addition ally,
in neuroimaging the problem of “reverse inference” makes it
diﬃculttoassignaspeciﬁcanduniquefunctiontoobservedbr ain
activity.Literatureshowinghowacertaincognitiveproces sleads
to activation in a particular neural area, for example, does no t
validate the conclusion that activation in that brain area a lways
reﬂectsthatparticularcognitivefunction.However, Kumaretal.
(2017)partially counters the latter issue by combining diﬀerent
techniques (neuroimaging, physiology, behavior) so that th e
diﬀerent analyses can create converging evidence on the same
interpretationandoutcome.
Several conclusions can be drawn when considering,
collectively, the small number of reviewed studies using
autonomic, neurophysiological, and neurobiological measu res.
First, the subjective responses from misophonics are
corroborated by physiological measurements of increased
autonomic arousal in response to misophonic triggers. This
research validates the experience of suﬀerers of misophonia by
demonstratingthat,indeed,misophoniccuesdoelicitautom atic
sympathetic arousal and negative aﬀective states. Similarly ,
misophonics show atypical neuronal and physical responses
in the brain and nervous system in response to their triggers.
Second, current studies indicate a certain degree of speciﬁc ity:
responses to misophonic stimuli are diﬀerent from “normal”
aversivestimuli.Thestudiesalsopointataspecialroleforc entral
auditoryprocessingimpairments.Althoughthisisaninteres ting
notion, the eﬀects observed thus far may partially be due to
choice of stimulus materials or selection bias in participant
groups. Finally, these studies are not conclusive about the
mechanisms underlying misophonia, but do highlight candida te
processes for further research in both central and peripheral
nervoussystems,includingspeciﬁcsaliencetoparticularst imuli,
early eﬀects in the auditory system, the importance of physical
(bodily) sensations and responses, and the integration of
perceptual salience with atypical awareness of internal body
states.
SELF-REPORT MEASURES OF
MISOPHONIA AND MENTAL HEALTH
A small number of studies using self-report and interview
measures have begun to characterize possible psychological an dpsychiatriccorrelatesofmisophonia.Manyofthesestudiessh are
as aims the need to characterize (a) the subjective experienc es
and responses to triggers in those with misophonia, (b) the
relationship between misophonia and other conditions, and
(c) whether misophonia should be considered unique and
distinct from established psychiatric disorders. The ﬁrst of
these studies was by Schröder et al. (2013) , who recruited 42
Dutch adults from a mental health clinic who self-reported
misophonia symptoms. A psychiatrist interviewed participants
to assess psychiatric diagnoses. Results suggest that participa nts
met criteria for a wide range of co-occurring psychiatric
disorders. Speciﬁcally, the majority met criteria for obses sive-
compulsivepersonalitydisorder(OCPD;52.4%),whereasother s
met criteria for mood disorders (7.1%), ADHD 4.8%, panic
disorder(2.4%),andobsessivecompulsivedisorder(OCD2.4%).
Inaddition,participantsalsoself-reportedseveralcharacte ristics
about their responsivity to misophonic sounds, including: (1)
aversive and angry feelings evoked by particular sounds, (2)
rare potentially aggressive responses, (3) recognition by th e
misophonic individual that his/her behavior is excessive, ( 4)
avoidancebehavior,and(5)distressandinterferenceindai lylife.
Based on these results, Schröder et al. (2013) suggested the
possibility that misophonia be considered a disorder under
the broader classiﬁcation Obsessive and Compulsive Related
Disorders in the DSM-5 ( American Psychiatric Association,
2013). However, the authors also stated that it is premature
to make ﬁrm conclusions about this possibility. Indeed, when
considering the sampling approach from one clinic, the small
sample size, the use of a single diagnostic assessor, and the
lack of inter-rater reliability reported for psychiatric dia gnostic
assessment, it is premature to conclude from this study wheth er
misophonia is best categorized as an obsessive compulsive-
related disorder. In addition, given that only 2.4% ( n=1) of
the sample met criteria for OCD, and that most met criteria
for OCPD, the results suggest that future research is needed
to explore the co-occurrence of misophonia among those with
OCPDsymptoms.
Schröder et al. (2013) also suggest that misophonia be
consideredasadiscretepsychiatricdisorder.However,ther esults
from their study do not clearly point to misophonia being a
featureofanyonepsychiatricdisorder.Indeed,limitations tothe
designofthisstudyprecludeconclusionsabouttheclassiﬁca tion
of misophonia as a discrete psychiatric disorder. Additional
research is needed using, for example, larger and more diverse
samples with rigorous methods of assessment and data analysis
before it is reasonable to conclude that misophonia is best
classiﬁedasadiscretepsychiatricdisorder.
An additional consideration from Schröder et al. (2013) is
the possible co-occurrence between misophonia and sensory
over-responsivity, a syndromal subtype of sensory processing
disorder (SPD). In noting the possible relationship between
misophonia and SPD, the authors state that typical auditory
sensitivity in SPD is only in response to loud and unexpected
noises. However, research on sensory over-responsive childr en
has not diﬀerentiated between loud or softer/patterned noises3.
3OnmanyoftheSPD/SORscalesthereareitemsthatincludebothloudno isesand
repetitivenoises(seeSPDfoundation.net).
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 5 February 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 36

Brout et al. Investigating Misophonia
Therefore, associations between these two conditions warr ants
further exploration. More generally, results from Schröder
et al. (2013) raise important questions about the expected co-
occurrence between misophonia and other conditions. Indeed ,
the ﬁndings from this study help pave the way for future studie s
toinvestigateandfurthercharacterizingtherelationshi pbetween
misophoniaandpsychiatricdisorders.
In another study, Wu et al. (2014) investigated the
incidence, phenomenology, correlates, and level of impairme nt
associated with misophonia symptoms in 483 undergraduate
students through self-report measures. In this sample, nearly
20% of participants reported clinically signiﬁcant misophonic
symptoms,asmeasuredbytheMisophoniaQuestionnaire(MQ),
a newly developed self-report inventory. Psychometric data
suggest that the measure had high internal consistency, and
preliminary convergent validity was reported by a signiﬁcant
correlation( r=0.50)betweenmisophoniasymptomsandaself-
report item assessing auditory over-responsivity from the Ad ult
SensoryQuestionnaire( KinnealeyandOliver,2002 ).Preliminary
divergentvaliditywasreported,asmisophoniasymptomsonthe
MQ were signiﬁcantly positively correlated with sensory over -
responsivity across other sensory domains (e.g., olfactory ,r=
0.28; tactile, r=0.34; visual, r=0.33). In addition, higher
symptoms on the MQ were positively correlated with measures
of general life impairment and were moderately associated
with obsessive-compulsive ( r=0.47), anxiety ( r=0.39),
and depressive ( r=0.30) symptoms. The authors report that
the positive correlations between misophonia symptoms and
sensorysensitivitiesmayindicatethatmisophoniasymptoms are
associated with a more general defensive motivational respo nse
acrosssensorysystems.
In addition, the authors report that anxiety mediated the
relationship between misophonia and anger outbursts4. This
mediational ﬁnding, though preliminary and based on cross-
sectional data, raises the possibility that the self-reporte d
tendency to respond with anger may be a function of the
magnitude of anxiety elicited by trigger cues. In other word s,
the experience and expression of anger may be a secondary
emotional response following the elicitation of acute anxie ty
stemmingfromcentraldefensivemotivationalsystemrespon ses.
To replicate and extend the mediational ﬁndings in Wu et al.
(2014)future studies using prospective measurement should
elucidatethedynamicunfoldingovertimeofaﬀectivestates and
behavioralresponseselicitedbymisophonictriggers.Limit ations
tothisstudynotwithstanding(e.g.,fewmaleparticipants,r eliance
on self-report measures, use of undergraduates, preliminary
validityandreliabilitydata),resultsfrom Wuetal.(2014) provide
initialpsychometricdatafortheMQasanappropriateself-report
measureofmisophoniasymptoms.
In a recent replication and extension of Wu et al. (2014) ,
Zhou et al. (2017) used the MQ to explore the relationship
between misophonia and psychopathology in a sample of
Chinese college students. Consistent with Wu et al. (2014) ,
4Notably, studies that include the relationship of SOR and anxiet y (Ben-Sasson
et al., 2009b, 2010; Lane et al., 2010, 2012 ) may inform how anxiety mediates
misophoniaingeneralandinregardtoangeroutbursts.17% of the sample ( N=415) reported misophonia symptoms
caused clinically signiﬁcant impairment in their daily live s.
Higher MQ scores were signiﬁcantly positively correlated with
symptoms of anxiety, depression, and OCD. This suggests
misophonia is not uniquely associated with anxiety, depressio n,
or OCD per se, but may instead be more generally correlated
with higher levels of psychological distress. Additionally, h igher
MQ scores were signiﬁcantly positively correlated with general
sensory defensiveness (i.e., over-responsivity) across vi sual,
tactile, olfactory, and auditory sensory domains. This sugge sts
that misophonia symptoms may be related to sensory over-
responsivity in general, and not to auditory over-responsivit y
speciﬁcally.
In another recent study, Dozier and Robinson (2017)
explored self-reported responses to misophonic cues presented
via teleconferencing technology to a sample of 27 adults.
Participants self-reported emotional responses and associat ed
behavioral response tendencies to trigger sounds, includin g but
not limited to clenching of the hands, jaw, shoulders, and ch est.
Most participants self-reported feeling anxiety (92.3%) or ange r
(92.3%), with approximately half indicating a desire to escape
(53.8%) from the trigger sounds and a disgust (46.2%) response.
Based on their ﬁndings, the authors suggest that misophonia
symptoms are conditioned physical and emotional responses. In
the absence of any experimental research on misophonia using
conditioning paradigms, however, it is too early to make such a
conclusion. Indeed, the role of conditioning and learning i n the
etiologyandmaintenanceofmisophonianeedstobeelucidated .
Despitethelimitationsofasmallsamplesize,lackofacontro l
group, lack of psychiatric or clinical interviews, and the absen ce
of rigorously controlled experimental conditions, this stu dy
helps informs the conceptualization of misophonia in several
ways. For example, these ﬁndings provide empirical evidence
that emotional responses to triggers cues are likely to includ e
both subjective aﬀective states and associated behavioral u rges.
Additionally, this study highlights the complexity of aﬀecti ve
responses to misophonic cues, suggesting that the condition
may not be only or best characterized by anger. Although
more research is needed, one hypothesis is that activation
of defensive motivational systems, which mediate behavior
(e.g., ﬁght-ﬂight response) and aﬀective states, more genera lly
characterize misophonia than any one speciﬁc subjectively
experiencedaﬀectivestate.
Rouw and Erfanian (2017) used an online recruitment
approach to survey over 300 participants reporting misophonic
complaints. Participants responded to questionnaire items
assessing family and respondent history of misophonia,
development of misophonia symptoms, and common responses
to trigger sounds. Results revealed a pattern in the developmen t
of misophonia, with symptoms starting in childhood/early
adulthood and increasing in intensity with repeated exposure t o
triggers. Approximately one third of the participants reported
family members with misophonic symptoms. This ﬁnding
underscores the need for research evaluating the environme ntal
and genetic correlates of misophonia. In addition, there was
diversity in the nature and intensity of misophonia symptoms,
including heterogeneity in self-reported emotional, physical
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 6 February 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 36

Brout et al. Investigating Misophonia
and cognitive responses to triggering stimuli. This suggest s
the possibility of individual diﬀerences in the underlying
mechanismsofmisophonicresponses.
Half of the participants reported presence of autonomous
sensorymeridianresponsescharacterizedby“euphoric,rela xing,
and tingling sensations with particular sounds or sights”. T his
is particularly interesting in the light of recent ﬁndings by
Kumaretal.(2017) reportingatypicalperceptionofinternalbody
states in misophonia. Additionally, half of the participants i n
thisstudyreportedmisophoniccomplaintswithoutcomorbidit y
with another condition. The other half reported having a
variety of psychiatric conditions. Only one clinical condit ion
showedarelationshiptomisophonia:theseverityofmisophon ic
complaintswerestrongeriftheparticipantsalsoreportedhavi ng
adiagnosisofpost-traumaticstressdisorder(PTSD).
Because there was no clear pattern of misophonia co-
occurring with any psychiatric disorder across participants,
the authors concluded that misophonia is a unique and
independentcondition.However,itisimportanttohighlight that
limitations in the study design (i.e., self-report via onlin e data
collection) precluded the collection of diagnostic informa tion
using structured interviews. In order for clearer conclusi ons
to be made about the relationship between misophonia and
psychiatric disorders, it is necessary to conduct research
using psychometrically validated interview-based measure s of
psychiatricdisorders.
McKayetal.(2017) alsorecentlyinvestigatedtherelationship
between misophonia and psychopathology in a large sample
usinganonlinerecruitmentapproach.Inthisstudy,participan ts
with(n=121)andwithout( n=507)highlevelsofmisophonia
symptoms completed self-report instruments assessing clinic al
features related to OCD, GAD, body perception, anxiety
sensitivity, distress tolerance, depression, dissociatio n, anger,
behavioralinhibition/activation,andanxiety.
Using a multi-dimensional scaling approach, the authors
reported obtaining a proﬁle of clinical features that signiﬁc antly
accounted for 11% of the variance between those with and
without high misophonia symptoms. This proﬁle broadly was
characterized by higher scores across most of the measures o f
psychopathology. More speciﬁcally, however, harm avoidance
andorderingOCDsymptomswererelatedtohighermisophonia
symptoms, whereas neutralizing, obsessions, and washing OC D
symptoms were associated with lower misophonia symptoms.
In addition, most the variance (70%) in the diﬀerences between
groups with and without high symptoms of misophonia could
not be attributed to any measures of psychopathology. This
pattern of results suggests that misophonia may not be uniquely
relatedtoOCD,ortoanyspeciﬁcpsychiatricdisorder.
Overall, results from studies using self-report measures
collectively indicate that misophonia symptoms (a) can be
measured using self-report instruments, (b) vary in phenotypi c
expression across individuals, and (b) do not appear to co-occu r
with any one speciﬁc psychiatric disorder. Misophonia has been
observed across a wide variety of disorders (e.g., PTSD, OCP D),
raising the question of whether it is a separate and unique
condition. Similarly, ﬁndings across multiple studies usin g self-
reportmethodsconvergetosuggestthatmisophoniaiscorrela tedwith higher psychological distress and psychopathology in
general, but is not associated with any one speciﬁc disorder per
se. The research to date is beginning to point to the possibility
that there are clear and distinct characteristics which may s et
misophoniaapartfrompsychiatricdisorders.However,theexac t
natureofwhatcharacterizesmisophoniasymptomsdiﬀerentially
from existing psychiatric conditions remains unknown. Inde ed,
the studies described above using self-report suﬀer from
limitations (e.g., self-report biases) shared by all studie s using
questionnaires and not using random sampling. Replication
studiesandlargerstudiesusingstructuredpsychiatricdia gnostic
interviews will help to clarify whether and to what extent
misophonia may be correlated with other psychiatric disorders ,
andwhethertherearesymptomsdiﬀerentiatingmisophoniabest
fromotherdisorders.
CROSS-DISCIPLINARY PERSPECTIVES
Beyond studies with a primary aim of investigating misophonia,
other bodies of research can be drawn upon that may oﬀer
important insights. In particular, research examining audit ory
gating, sensory processing, and neural processes underlying
these can add to a foundation for the cross-disciplinary
conceptualization of misophonia. Although a comprehensive
review of all potential bodies of research that may contribut e to
multidisciplinaryconceptualizationofmisophoniaisbeyondt he
scope of this paper, we review these distinct areas, with some
speciﬁcstudyexamples.
AUDITORY GATING AND SENSORY OVER
RESPONSIVITY
Previous research has been conducted with children and adul ts
who have diﬃculty modulating sensory stimuli in a graded
manner ( Brown et al., 2001; Kisley et al., 2004; Davies and
Gavin, 2007; Gavin et al., 2011 ). The sensory gating response is
the brain’s capacity to selectively regulate sensitivity to s ensory
stimuli (Yadon et al., 2009 ), and individuals gating impairments
speciﬁc to the auditory modality have been studied across
various samples ( Jeste and Nelson, 2009 ). Examples include
children and adults with autism spectrum disorder ( Perry et al.,
2007), SPD (Green and Ben-Sasson, 2010 ) and schizophrenia
(McCarley et al., 1991; Brockhaus-Dumke et al., 2008 ). Previous
research in this area consistently shows abnormal informat ion
processing, measured in terms of early ERP5components in
the sensory cortex ( Brett-Green et al., 2010 ). These results are
consistentwiththosefrom Schröderetal.(2014) ,andsuggestthat
atypical sensory processing may be observed among adults with
misophoniaandchildrenwithsensorymodulationimpairments.
In addition, children characterized by heightened sensory
over-responsivity have demonstrated an increased number,
frequency and higher magnitude of SCR responses to sensory
cuesacrosssensorydomains,aswellasslowerratesofhabitu ation
5ERP (event related potential) refers to positive and negative volta ge ﬂuctuations
ofthebraininresponsetostimuliasmeasuredbyanelectroencephalogram (EEG).
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 7 February 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 36

Brout et al. Investigating Misophonia
to such cues compared to typically developing control children
(McIntosh et al., 1999 ). Sensory over-responsive children also
demonstrate greater levels of baseline arousal and higher
reactivity in response to various types of sensory stimuli tha n
childrenwithautismspectrumdisorders,althoughchildren with
autismhavelowerbaselinearousal( Schoenetal.,2009 ).
Whereas SPD, likemisophonia, is not delineatedas a discrete
DSM-5 disorder or ICD-10 condition, and has commonly
received attention in the ﬁeld of occupational therapy, audit ory
sensory over-responsivity shares some similar phenotypic
signs and symptoms to those expressed by individuals with
misophonia.
In addition, when one considers that many individuals with
misophonia also report visual sensitivity to movement, it is
appropriatetolookatstudiesrelatedtosensoryover-responsi vity
across sensory domains in an eﬀort to develop hypotheses about
possible mechanisms underlying misophonia. Accordingly, it
is reasonable and appropriate to consider the research on
sensory over-responsivity as part of a broadly construed cross -
disciplinaryaccountofmisophonia.
More speciﬁcally, although both Schröder and colleagues’
work (Schröder et al., 2013 ) as well as studies of children with
SPD (Davies and Gavin, 2007 ) demonstrate commonalities in
auditory gating deﬁcits, these comparisons should be made
somewhat tentatively, as the sensory processing studies did not
parse out responsivity to loud vs. soft/pattern based auditory
stimuli, and misophonia studies have not deconstructed the
complexmisophonictriggersounds,norsampledthispopulation
in large enough studies to determine how much aversive sound s
vary from one individual to another. In view of these studies
that relate to auditory gating, it is logical when returning to
the Jastreboﬀs’ ( Jastreboﬀ and Jastreboﬀ, 2001 ) original theory
of misophonia as related to pattern-based sounds, to include
repetitionofauditorystimuliasapossiblesoundrelatedvar iable
associated with lack of habituation to trigger sounds and/o r to
consider individual diﬀerences with regard to auditory gati ng
(or overall habituation) as a potential factor reactivity to speciﬁc
sounds.
Studies examining noise sensitivity (NS) and their neural
basis oﬀer another cross-disciplinary avenue that may inform
misophonia. In the context of NS, noise is any unwanted sound
and the degree of aversive reaction to it deﬁnes NS. The avers ive
reaction in NS does not depend on the loudness of sound and
in that sense shares a similarity with misophonia. A few studi es
in recent years have examined the neural basis of NS. Kliuchko
etal.(2016) measuredmulti-featuremismatchnegativity(MMN)
along with evoked responses by the sound onsets. They found
that magnitude of P1 response was smaller in subjects with
higher NS reﬂecting that representation of sound in the centr al
auditory system was compromised in NS individuals. This bears
some resemblance to a study in misophonia by Schröder et al.
(2014)whofoundthatmagnitudeofN1peakinmisophonicswas
smaller than that in controls, which also is suggestive of so und
encodingdeﬁcitsinmisophonia.
Kliuchko et al. (2016) suggest that the relatively recent
concept in perception called predictive coding (PC; Pelt et al.,
2016) could be oﬀered as a theoretical explanation for theirresults. In PC, the brain generates hypotheses or a model base d
on expectations and predictions about what sensory stimuli
are likely to be experienced ( Seth, 2013 ). The hypotheses are
continually processed and updated based on new information.
Combining both top-down and bottom up neural processes,
sensory stimuli are matched against the predictions; when the
incoming information matches predictions, the prediction err or
is small, and when they do not match, error is high. It is
possiblethatindividualswithhighNS(andthus,highuncertai nty
regarding sensory expectations) have impairments in the top-
down encoding of sound features and, accordingly, diﬃculti es
predicting incoming sensory information. Thus, a low MMN
responseforparticipantswithhighNSisconsideredtobeahigh
predictionerror,andaneuralmarkerofthisphenomenoncould
beasuppressedP1response( Friston,2005;Stefanicsetal.,2014 ).
By turning to this literature, studies examining responses t o
misophonictriggersoundsmayinvestigatehypothesesassoci ated
withthemechanismsunderlyingNS.
In a more recent study ( Kliuchko et al., 2017 ), gray matter
volumewasmeasuredinanumberofsensory(e.g.,Heschlgyrus ,
planum temporale) and emotion processing related areas (e.g.,
anterior insula, amygdala). Interestingly, a positive corre lation
between the volume and NS was measured in anterior insula, a
region which has been shown to play a key role in misophonia
(Kumar et al., 2017 ). Further collaborative work between the
researchers studying misophonia and NS would be helpful to
understand the similarities and diﬀerences between the two
phenomena.
NETWORK LEVEL APPLICATIONS TO
MISOPHONIA
The conceptual framework of network level neural models
may be useful in the development of a model specifying
candidate neural mechanisms of misophonia. This approach
emphasizes the understanding of basic brain processes at the
networklevel( BresslerandMenon,2010 ).Usinganetworklevel
approach permits testable hypotheses about multiple spatially
separatedbrainregionsworkinginanintegratedandcoordin ated
manner. Although most of our understanding of how the brain
implements perception, cognition and emotion processing is
based on the assumption of assigning a unique role to each
region of the brain, there is a growing realization that this
approach is not fruitful in understanding brain function, as a
given brain area can be involved in multiple functions. Instead,
it has been proposed that functions of the brain should be
understood at the network level ( Bressler and Menon, 2010 ). At
this level a number spatially separated brain regions coordin ate
and integrate to implement a function. In order to pinpoint
the neural mechanisms behind misophonia, it will not be
suﬃcienttodeterminewhichbrainareasareabnormallyacti vein
misophonia, but also to understand how those brain areas work
atanetworklevel.
Speciﬁcally applied to misophonia, a network modeling
approach may be used to elucidate underlying functional
connectivity and neural pathways with impaired functioning
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 8 February 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 36

Brout et al. Investigating Misophonia
across disparate regions of the brain. Kumar et al. (2012)
demonstrated the neural representation of aversive, salien t
sounds perceived as unpleasant. Speciﬁcally, using functiona l
magnetic resonance imaging fMRI. Kumar et al. (2012) revealed
brain responses in the amygdala and the auditory cortex while
listening to unpleasant sounds. Interestingly, this study r evealed
that the amygdala encodes information concerning the valen ce
and acoustic features of sounds, and that these characteris tics
modulate the functional connectivity between the amygdala and
auditorycortex.Thishasrelevancetomisophoniaasitpoints toa
potential mechanism via which the auditory cortex may become
hyperactive in misophonia, possibly accounting for abnormal
perceptual responses in those with misophonia. That is, it is
possible that the parts of the brain which extract salience fro m
(or assign negative or positive valence to) sounds may respond
abnormally to the typical misophonia trigger sounds. A high
level of salience and negative valence may then modulate the
activity of sensory (auditory) cortex. In addition, neural circuits
coordinating defensive motivation systems, including emo tional
processing(e.g.,amygdala,insula,etc.)alsolikelyareac tivatedas
partabroadercascadeofneurobehavioralresponses.
SUGGESTIONS FOR A RESEARCH
AGENDA
In order to advance a scientiﬁc understanding of misophonia
that also can be understood by the public and those who suﬀer
from misophonia, it is important to use clear and consistent
terminology. For example, although misophonia translates to
“hatred of sound,” the phenotype of this syndrome does not
appeartobelimitedtotheexperienceand/orexpressionofanger
alone. Indeed, the original conceptualization by Jastreboﬀ and
Jastreboﬀ (2001) was one of decreased sound tolerance in which
subconscious connections between auditory and emotional
stimuli elicit misophonia symptoms maintained by principles
and processes governing conditioning (e.g., associative le arning
and memory). From this perspective, conditioned responses
may vary across individuals and contexts. One implication of
this model is that anger is not a required aﬀective response in
misophonia. An important gap in the existing research is the
need to precisely characterize the nature and dynamic tempora l
unfolding of aﬀective, cognitive, and behavioral responses t o
misophonictriggers.
Research also could beneﬁt from improved clarity and
consistencyinterminologyinthedescriptionofneuralproce sses
associated with misophonia. For example, the term “limbic
system” has been used to describe the central region responsi ble
for mediating emotional responses in those with misophonia.
However,thismaybeanoverlysimplisticexplanationthatisn ot
well justiﬁed in light of contemporary aﬀective neuroscienti ﬁc
research demonstrating the importance of models using varied
and integrated processes across multiple areas of the brain. P ut
diﬀerently, and in the context of network level neural models,
emotional processes take place in many areas and on many
levelswithinthebrain. LeDoux(2015) ,forexample,describesan
emotionasanelusiveaggregateofmanysystemsandfunction sinthenervoussystemthatinvolvebothconsciousandunconsci ous
(older and newer) brain structures. This is relevant both to
the conceptualization of misophonia both diagnostically and in
regard to how individuals with this form of decreased sound
toleranceformattributionsabouttheirmisophonicresponses.
Since we do not have suﬃcient evidence to make conclusions
about the role of genetics in misophonia, or to ﬁrmly
concludehowthisconditiondevelopsinregardstocondition ing
and associated neurobiological processes, we suggest avoid ing
language suggestive of a false dichotomy between nature and
nurture. Describing disorders as “genetic” vs. “condition ed”
gives way to a potentially false dichotomy that aﬀects both
diagnosisandtreatment.Putdiﬀerently,misophoniaisacomple x
neurophysiological phenomenon. There are no scientiﬁc data
to support claims that it is speciﬁcally the result of any
single etiological factor or process. Because attention, lea rning,
memory,emotion,cognition,andotherbasicprocessesgerma ne
to misophonia all are grounded in basic biological processes
andinﬂuencedbyenvironmentalfactors,thedistinctionbet ween
natureandnurtureisnotwarranted.
There are several key areas of research needed to rapidly
advanceascientiﬁcunderstandingofthiscomplexphenomenon .
Chief among these needs are studies that add critical data to
characterize the public health signiﬁcance of misophonia. For
example, it is important to gain a more precise understanding
of the clinical symptoms and features that occur among
those who report impairment in functioning associated with
misophonia. Case studies and preliminary research have begun
to address this need, though such studies have used samples
of limited size ( Schröder et al., 2014 ) and generalizability
(Wu et al., 2014 ). Empirical research is needed to clarify
whether,forexample,misophoniaisaconstellationofsymptoms
that can be classiﬁed categorically and discriminated from
other related conditions and syndromes. Some researchers
have suggested that because misophonia symptoms have not
been found to correlate speciﬁcally with any single psychiatr ic
disorder, perhaps misophonia should be conceptualized among
a class of psychiatric disorders or as a discrete psychiatric
disorder ( Schröder et al., 2014 ). However, as has been noted
by others ( Taylor, 2017 ), we believe that there is inadequate
scientiﬁc research to warrant clear conclusions about the ex act
nature of misophonia as a psychiatric disorder. Although the
existing research does suggest that misophonia may not be
better explained by an existing psychiatric disorder, whether
misophonia is best classiﬁed as a discrete disorder or whether
it is a syndrome that co-occurs with OCDs, personality
disorders,anxietydisorders,orotherpsychiatricdisorder swillbe
determinedthroughsystematicresearchusingmultiplemethod s
and measures. Until this occurs, it is suggested that conclus ions
from individual studies about how to classify misophonia be
clearly identiﬁed as preliminary and used as hypotheses to test
usingrigorousresearchmethods.
In addition, as part of investigating whether misophonia
is best understood empirically as a categorical or dimension al
phenotype,advancementsareneededintheself-reportmeasure s
used to collect information from patients. To date, there are
several instruments that have been developed speciﬁcally for the
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 9 February 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 36

Brout et al. Investigating Misophonia
studyofmisophonia(e.g.,MQ)( Wuetal.,2014 ).Aspreliminary
self-report inventories, these measures oﬀer value as they ha ve
helped to begin characterizing the symptoms of misophonia.
However, in order for the etiology, maintenance, and treatm ent
of misophonia to be characterized rigorously using scientiﬁ c
methods,additionalresearchusingprospectivemethodologi esis
neededtofurthervalidateself-reportinventories.
As self-report measures of misophonia symptoms continue
to be developed and reﬁned, epidemiologic studies exploring
the prevalence and incidence of misophonia will need to be
conducted. Such research will help to elucidate (a) the exte nt
to which varying levels of misophonia symptom severity can
be expected to occur in the general population, (b) normative
diﬀerences in misophonia symptoms across age sex, gender, and
other demographic factors, and (c) population level estimates of
the developmental, medical, and psychiatric factors associa ted
with misophonia. In addition, prospective epidemiologic studi es
would permit inferences about the relative contributions of
genetic and environmental inﬂuences on the expression and
developmentofmisophoniaovertime.
In order to elucidate the neurophysiological mechanisms
underlying misophonia, highly rigorous controlled researc h
needs to be conducted using objective laboratory measures
and appropriately powered sample sizes. As detailed above,
preliminaryresearchhasinvestigatedmisophoniausingaﬀect ive
and cognitive neuroscience methods. The work done by Kumar
et al. (2012, 2017) andSchröder et al. (2014) , for example, oﬀers
importantinsightsintowhichneuralsystemsareactivatedw hen
misophonicshearcertaintriggersounds.Outsidethemisopho nia
literature, extensive research has been conducted in anima l
and human studies to characterize the primary and secondary
nervoussystemstructures,functions,andfunctionalconn ectivity
governing defensive motivational responses to aversive aud itory
stimuli. We recommend that research with the primary aim of
investigating the neural underpinnings of misophonia (a) be
groundedinatheoreticalframeworkoﬀeringtestablehypothe ses
and (b) leverage previous research exploring systems subserv ing
sensory processing, emotional reactivity, and the regulati on
of emotional arousal in clinical samples of individuals with
heightenedanxiousarousal.Itisessentialthataudiologi sts,basic
scientists and behavioral health researchers work togethe r in a
cross-disciplinary manner using team-based science. This h as
thepotentialtomorerapidlyidentifydiscoverieswithnear- term
clinical signiﬁcance than would occur if researchers use a m ore
siloedmodelwithnarrowconceptualizationsofmisophoniaas a
phenomenonpertinenttoonedisciplineortheoreticalmodel.
Finally,thesoundsthatpeoplewithmisophoniaﬁndaversive
should be studied in great depth. This includes amplitude
(loudness), pitch (or frequency of sound waves), and duratio n
(time interval), and timber (a combination of frequency
modulation, the rates of change in amplitude, and elements of
harmony).Abetterunderstandingofthespeciﬁcsoundfeatur es,
including studies of reactivity when sounds are presented in a
bimodalandunimodalmanner(soundwithoutvisualsvs.soun d
with visuals) as in the Edelstein et al. (2013) study, would be
an important next step in research. Studying sound features
and relating them to diﬀerent kinds of auditory processing, aswell as visual/auditory integrative processing, will bette r inform
the research related to reactivity, and help to deﬁne both th e
population and the disorder. Following this line of research
in a logical order, rather than ﬁrst comparing misophonia to
other disorders at a time in which science still redeﬁnes brai n
functioning and the nature of psychiatric and neurological
disorders,wouldlikelybemoreprudent.
CLINICAL CONSIDERATIONS
To date, no randomized controlled trials evaluating treatm ents
formisophoniahavebeenpublished.Casestudies(e.g., Bernstein
et al., 2013; Webber et al., 2014; McGuire et al., 2015; Schne ider
and Arch, 2017 ) and an uncontrolled clinical trial ( Schröder
et al., 2017 ) using cognitive and behavioral interventions have
been reported. There are no published studies reporting the
eﬀects of pharmacological treatments. In the absence of any
empirically supported treatments for misophonia, how can
healthcareprovidersprovidecaretoindividualswhoaresuﬀer ing
with these symptoms? We believe there are several reasonable
approachesthatclinicianscantakewhenapproachedbypatients
orprovidersaboutinterventionsformisophonia.First,provid ers
need to ethically characterize the state of empirical resear ch
on treatments to patients. As an example, it is recommended
that providers inform patients that there are few assessment
measures to quantify misophonia symptoms, a lack of clarity in
the etiology of misophonia, and no known treatments shown
to work in controlled randomized trials. Second, providers ca n
educate patients about the uncertainty with regard to how
to categorize misophonia. It is inappropriate at this point,
in the absence of suﬃcient research, to deﬁne misophonia
as a psychiatric disorder. Similarly, despite the preliminary
research identifying psychiatric diagnostic correlates, it remains
speculative to describe misophonia as a feature or co-occurri ng
syndrome related to any speciﬁc psychiatric disorder or class of
disorders.
Without empirical support to characterize the treatment of
misophonia, a third clinical consideration is that providers
adopt a multi-disciplinary approach to the assessment and
intervention of misophonia and co-occurring physical and
behavioral health problems ( Meltzer and Herzfeld, 2014 ). Such
an approach would beneﬁt from being individualized, such
that each patient’s unique history and symptoms be carefully
considered by professionals across appropriate ﬁelds, such as
neurology, audiology, occupational therapy, neuropsycholog y,
psychiatry, and clinical psychology. Further, it is recommen ded
that such a multi-disciplinary approach utilize a team-based
approach with a shared electronic medical record and regular
team meetings. This general framework can be described as a
multi-disciplinarymisophoniacaremanagementmodel.
Using a team-based management model, care pathways for
misophonia can be delineated and individualized such that, fo r
example, patients with co-occurring neurological condition s
may receive appropriate care concurrent with care these same
individuals might receive from a psychologist using behavioral
methods to improve response patterns to misophonic triggers.
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 10 February 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 36

Brout et al. Investigating Misophonia
Alternately, as a diﬀerent example, a higher functioning
patient with misophonia and co-occurring generalized
sensory over-responsivity could receive sensory integrati on
interventions with supportive counseling and education from
an occupational therapist. For that patient, a psychiatric or
psychological intervention may not be needed. However,
for some patients with more severe misophonia, the care
pathway might include neuropsychological testing, occupatio nal
therapy, psychotropic medication, and/or empirically supported
behavioral interventions shown to help reduce anxiety, ang er, or
otheroutcomes.
For patients with functional impairments and psychological
distress associated with misophonia, it is recommended that
the multi-disciplinary care pathway provide coping skills for
patients to learn to prevent and respond more eﬀectively to
their symptoms. Contemporary cognitive behavioral therapies
oﬀer empirically supported principles of change that, although
not tested directly for misophonia in controlled clinical tr ials,
may be considered as reasonable strategies to use in a
copingskills-basedapproach.Examplesincludeacceptance-[e. g.,
mindfulness, cognitive defuse ( Hayes et al., 1999; Kabat-Zinn,
2009);distresstoleranceskills( Linehan,2015 )andchange-based
behavioral(e.g.,interpersonalskills)andcognitive(e.g .,cognitive
reappraisal) interventions]. However, these skills utilize d in
isolation may not be enough. Family counseling, practical
strategies for knowing when and when not to avoid stimuli,
as well as individually-driven methods for down-regulatin g the
nervoussystemshouldalsobeincluded.
Clinicalguidelinesforthemanagementofmisophoniashould
emphasize the use of coping skills grounded in empiricallysupported principles of change, as there is no evidence-based
behavioralorpharmacologicaltreatmentshowntobeeﬃcacio us
for misophonia. While the study of misophonia is beginning, a
clinician would be remiss to claim that any particular treatme nt
is “standard” or “tested” or validated. However, this populat ion
includes suﬀerers, including children and adults, and we
recommend that coping skills used to manage misophonia
be derived across disciplines such as psychology, psychiatry,
audiology, occupational therapy and neurology. Clinicians f rom
each discipline can work together in cross-disciplinary team s to
implementindividualizedcopingskillsplansforclients/patient s.
Using this approach, we recommend that clinicians from
unique disciplines and training backgrounds work together t o
educate each other about the neurophysiological, emotional,
cognitive, and behavior manifestations of misophonia. Throu gh
a collaborative and team-based model, clinical interventio ns
and treatment plans can be thoughtfully tailored to each
individual, with empirically supported principles of change
(i.e., cognitive, emotional, behavioral, physiological) use d until
treatmentsshowntoworkthroughrigorousscientiﬁctestin gare
developed.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
All author contributed to the intellectual development and
writing of this manuscript. JB and MR conceptualized, wrote,
revised, and synthesized revisions of this manuscript. LM, RR,
SK, MEr, MEd, MM wrote sections and helped with revisions of
themanuscript.
REFERENCES
American Psychiatric Association (2013). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
MentalDisorders,5thEdn .Arlington,VA:AmericanPsychiatricPublishing.
Attias,J.,Bleich,A.,Furman,V.,andZinger,Y.(1996).Event -relatedpotentialsin
post-traumatic stress disorder of combat origin. Biol. Psychiatry 40, 373–381.
doi:10.1016/0006-3223(95)00419-X
Baguley, D. M., and McFerran, D. J. (2011). “Hyperacusis and disorde rs of
loudness perception,” in Textbook of Tinnitus , eds A. R. Møller, B. Langguth,
D.DeRidder,andT.Kleinjung(NewYork,NY:Springer),13–23.
Baguley, J. (2016). Outsourcing Clinical Development: Strategies for Working w ith
CROsandOtherPartners .NewYork,NY:CRCPress.
Ben-Sasson, A., Carter, A. S., and Briggs-Gowan, M. J. (2009b) . Sensory over-
responsivity in elementary school: prevalence and social-emotional co rrelates.
J.Abnorm.ChildPsychol. 37,705–716.doi:10.1007/s10802-008-9295-8
Ben-Sasson,A.,Carter,A.S.,andBriggs-Gowan,M.J.(2010). Thedevelopmentof
sensoryover-responsivityfrominfancytoelementaryschool. J.Abnorm.Child
Psychol.38,1193–1202.doi:10.1007/s10802-010-9435-9
Ben-Sasson, A., Hen, L., Fluss, R., Cermak, S. A., Engel-Yeger, B. , and
Gal, E. (2009a). A meta-analysis of sensory modulation symptoms in
individuals with autism spectrum disorders. J. Autism Dev. Disord. 39, 1-11.
doi:10.1007/s10803-008-0593-3
Bernstein, R. E., Angell, K. L., and Dehle, C. M. (2013). A brief cou rse
of cognitive behavioural therapy for the treatment of misophonia: a
case example. Cogn. Behav. Ther. 6:e10. doi: 10.1017/S1754470X130
00172
Brang, D., Hubbard, E. M., Coulson, S., Huang, M., and Ramachandran,
V. S. (2010). Magnetoencephalography reveals early activationof V4 in grapheme-color synesthesia. Neuroimage 53, 268–274.
doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.06.008
Brang, D., Rouw, R., Ramachandran, V. S., and Coulson, S. (2011). Similarly
shaped letters evoke similar colors in grapheme–color synesthesia.
Neuropsychologia 49,1355–1358.doi:10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2011.01.00 2
Bressler, S. L., and Menon, V. (2010). Large-scale brain networks in cognition:
emerging methods and principles. Trends Cogn. Sci. 14, 277–290.
doi:10.1016/j.tics.2010.04.004
Brett-Green, B. A., Miller, L. J., Schoen, S. A., and Nielsen, D. M.
(2010). An exploratory event-related potential study of multisensory
integration in sensory over-responsive children. Brain Res. 1321, 67–77.
doi:10.1016/j.brainres.2010.01.043
Brockhaus-Dumke, A., Mueller, R., Faigle, U., and Klosterkoetter, J . (2008).
Sensory gating revisited: relation between brain oscillations and auditory
evoked potentials in schizophrenia. Schizophrenia Res. 99, 238–249.
doi:10.1016/j.schres.2007.10.034
Brown,C.,Tollefson,N.,Dunn,W.,Cromwell,R.,andFilion,D.(2001 ).Theadult
sensory proﬁle: measuring patterns of sensory processing. Am. J. Occup. Ther.
55,75–82.doi:10.5014/ajot.55.1.75
Cabranes, J. A., Ancín, I., Santos, J. L., Sánchez-Morla, E., Ga rcía-Jiménez,
M. A., Rodríguez-Moya, L., et al. (2013). P50 sensory gating is a trait
marker of the bipolar spectrum. Eur. Neuropsychopharmacol. 23, 721-727.
doi:10.1016/j.euroneuro.2012.06.008
Cavanna, A. E., and Seri, S. (2015). Misophonia: current perspecti ves.
Neuropsychiatr.Dis.Treat. 11,2117-2123.doi:10.2147/NDT.S81438
Colizoli, O., Murre, J. M., and Rouw, R. (2013). A taste for words an d sounds: a
caseoflexical-gustatoryandsound-gustatorysynesthesia. FrontPsychol .4:775.
doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00775
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 11 February 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 36

Brout et al. Investigating Misophonia
Danesh, A. A., and Kaf, W. A. (2012). DPOAEs and contralateral ac oustic
stimulation and their link to sound hypersensitivity in children w ith autism.
Int.J.Audiol. 51,345-352.doi:10.3109/14992027.2011.626202
Davies, P. L., and Gavin, W. J. (2007). Validating the diagnos is of sensory
processing disorders using EEG technology. Am. J. Occup. Ther. 61, 176-189.
doi:10.5014/ajot.61.2.176
Dozier, T. H. (2015). Etiology, composition, development and mainte nance of
misophonia: a conditioned aversive reﬂex disorder. Psychol. Thought 30, 114-
129.doi:10.5964/psyct.v8i1.132
Dozier, T. H., and Robinson, K. L. (2017). Phenomenology of misoph onia:
initial physical and emotional responses. Am. J. Psychol . 130, 431–438.
doi:10.5406/amerjpsyc.130.4.0431
Edelstein,M.,Brang,D.,Rouw,R.,andRamachandran,V.S.(2013 ).Misophonia:
physiologicalinvestigationsandcasedescriptions. Front.Hum.Neurosci. 7:296.
doi:10.3389/fnhum.2013.00296
Ferreira, G. M., Harrison, B. J., and Fontenelle, L. F. (2013). Hatred of sounds:
misophonicdisorderorjustanunderreportedpsychiatricsymptom? Ann.Clin.
Psychiatry 25,271–274.
Finsterwald, C., and Alberini, C. M. (2014). Stress and glucocortic oid
receptor-dependent mechanisms in long-term memory: from adaptive
responses to psychopathologies. Neurobiol. Learn. Mem. 112, 17–29.
doi:10.1016/j.nlm.2013.09.017
Friston, K. (2005). A theory of cortical responses. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B
Biol.Sci.360,815–836.doi:10.1098/rstb.2005.1622
Gavin, W. J., Dotseth, A., Roush, K. K., Smith, C. A., Spain, H. D. , and Davies,
P. L. (2011). Electroencephalography in children with and without se nsory
processing disorders during auditory perception. Am. J. Occup. Ther. 65,
370–377.doi:10.5014/ajot.2011.002055
Green, S. A., and Ben-Sasson, A. (2010). Anxiety disorders and sensory
over-responsivity in children with autism spectrum disorders: is
there a causal relationship? J. Autism Dev. Disord. 40, 1495–1504.
doi:10.1007/s10803-010-1007-x
Hayes, S. C., Strosahl, K. D., and Wilson, K. G. (1999). Acceptance and
Commitment Therapy: An Experiential Approach to Behavior Ch ange. New
York,NY:GuilfordPress.
Hazell,J.W.,andJastreboﬀ,P.J.(1990).Tinnitus.I:auditory mechanisms:amodel
fortinnitusandhearingimpairment. J.Otolaryngol. 19,1–5.
Jastreboﬀ, M. M., and Jastreboﬀ, P. J. (2001). Components of decre ased sound
tolerance:hyperacusis,misophonia,phonophobia. ITHSNewsLett. 2,5–7.
Jastreboﬀ, M. M., and Jastreboﬀ, P. J. (2002). Decreased sound t olerance
and tinnitus retraining therapy (TRT). Aust. NZ J. Audiol. 24, 74-84.
doi:10.1375/audi.24.2.74.31105
Jastreboﬀ, P. J. (1990). Phantom auditory perception (tinnitus ):
mechanisms of generation and perception. Neurosci. Res. 8, 221–254.
doi:10.1016/0168-0102(90)90031-9
Jastreboﬀ, P. J., Gray, W. C., and Gold, S. L. (1996). Neurophysiolo gical approach
totinnituspatients. Otol.Neurotol. 17,236–240.
Jastreboﬀ, P. J., and Jastreboﬀ, M. M. (2014). “Treatments for de creased sound
tolerance (hyperacusis and misophonia),” in Seminars in Hearing , Vol. 35
(NewYork,NY:ThiemeMedicalPublishers),105–120.
Jeste, S. S., and Nelson, C. A. III. (2009). Event related potenti als in the
understanding of autism spectrum disorders: an analytical revie w.J. Autism
Dev.Disord. 39,495–510.doi:10.1007/s10803-008-0652-9
Johnson,P.L.,Webber,T.A.,Wu,M.S.,Lewin,A.B.,Murphy,T. K.,andStorch,E.
A.(2013).Whenselectiveaudiovisualstimulibecomeunbearable: acaseseries
onpediatricmisophonia. Neuropsychiatry 3,569–575.doi:10.2217/npy.13.70
Kabat-Zinn,J.(2009). FullCatastropheLiving:UsingtheWisdomofYourBodyand
MindtoFaceStress,Pain,andIllness .NewYork,NY:Delta.
Kinnealey, M., and Oliver, B. (2002). Adult Sensory Questionnaire . Unpublished
raw data. Temple University, College of Allied Health Professionals,
DepartmentofOccupationalTherapy3307.
Kisley, M. A., Noecker, T. L., and Guinther, P. M. (2004). Compari son
of sensory gating to mismatch negativity and self-reported perceptua l
phenomena in healthy adults. Psychophysiology 41, 604–612.
doi:10.1111/j.1469-8986.2004.00191.x
Kliuchko, M., Heinonen-Guzejev, M., Vuust, P., Tervaniemi, M. , and Brattico, E.
(2016).Awindowintothebrainmechanismsassociatedwithnois esensitivity.
Sci.Rep.6:39236.doi:10.1038/srep39236Kliuchko, M., Puoliväli, T., Heinonen-Guzejev, M., Tervaniemi, M., Toiviainen,
P., Sams, M. et al. (2017). Neuroanatomical substrate of noise sen sitivity.
Neuroimage 167,309-315.doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2017.11.041
Kluckow,H.,Telfer,J.,andAbraham,S.(2014).Shouldwescreenfor misophonia
inpatientswitheatingdisorders?Areportofthreecases. Int.J.Eat.Disord. 47,
558–561.doi:10.1002/eat.22245
Kumar, S., Hancock, O. T., Sedley, W., Winston, J. S., Callaghan, M. F., Allen,
M. et al. (2017). The brain basis for misophonia. Curr. Biol. 27, 527–533.
doi:10.1016/j.cub.2016.12.048
Kumar, S., von Kriegstein, K., Friston, K., and Griﬃths, T. D. (20 12).
Features versus feelings: dissociable representations of the aco ustic
features and valence of aversive sounds. J. Neurosci. 32, 14184–14192.
doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1759-12.2012
Lane, S. J., Reynolds, S., and Dumenci, L. (2012). Sensory overres ponsivity and
anxietyintypicallydevelopingchildrenandchildrenwithautismand attention
deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder: cause or coexistence? Am. J. Occup. Ther. 66,
595–603.doi:10.5014/ajot.2012.004523
Lane, S. J., Reynolds, S., and Thacker, L. (2010). Sensory over -responsivity and
ADHD: diﬀerentiating using electrodermal responses, cortisol, and an xiety.
Front.Integr.Neurosci. 4:8.doi:10.3389/fnint.2010.00008
LeDoux, J. (2015). Anxious: Using the Brain to Understand and Treat Fear and
Anxiety.NewYork,NY:Penguin.
Linehan, M. M. (2015). DBT Skills Training Manual . New York, NY: Guilford
Publications.
McCarley, R. W., Faux, S. F., Shenton, M. E., Nestor, P. G., and A dams, J.
(1991). Event-related potentials in schizophrenia: their biologi cal and clinical
correlatesandnewmodelofschizophrenicpathophysiology. SchizophreniaRes.
4,209–231.doi:10.1016/0920-9964(91)90034-O
McGuire, J. F., Wu, M. S., and Storch, E. A. (2015). Cognitive- behavioral
therapy for 2 youths with misophonia. J. Clin. Psychiatry 76, 573–574.
doi:10.4088/JCP.14cr09343
McIntosh, D. N., Miller, L. J., Shyu, V., and Hagerman, R. J. (1999 ). Sensory-
modulation disruption, electrodermal responses, and functional beha viors.
Dev.Med.ChildNeurol. 41,608–615.doi:10.1017/S0012162299001267
McKay,D.,Kim,S.K.,Mancusi,L.,Storch,E.A.,andSpankovic h,C.(2017).Proﬁle
analysisofpsychologicalsymptomsassociatedwithmisophonia:aco mmunity
sample.Behav.Ther. doi:10.1016/j.beth.2017.07.002.[Epubaheadofprint].
Meltzer, J., and Herzfeld, M. (2014). “Tinnitus, hyperacusis, and misophonia
toolbox,” in Seminars in Hearing , Vol. 35 (New York, NY: Thieme Medical
Publishers),121–130.
Møller,A.R.(2011).“Misophonia,phonophobia,and‘explodinghead ’syndrome,”
inTextbook of Tinnitus , eds A. R. Møller, B. Langguth, D. DeRidder, and
T.Kleinjung(NewYork,NY:Springer),25–27.
Neal, M., and Cavanna, A. E. (2012). P3 selective sound sensiti vity syndrome
(misophonia) and Tourette syndrome. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry 83,
e1–e1.doi:10.1136/jnnp-2012-303538.20
Neal, M., and Cavanna, A. E. (2013). Selective sound sensitivi ty syndrome
(misophonia) in a patient with Tourette syndrome. J. Neuropsychiatr. Clin.
Neurosci. 25,E01–E01.doi:10.1176/appi.neuropsych.11100235
Pelt, S. V., Heil, L., Kwisthout, J. H., Ondobaka, S., van Rooij, I . J., and
Bekkering, H. (2016). Beta-and gamma-band activity reﬂect predict ive coding
in the processing of causal events. Soc. Cogn. Aﬀect. Neurosci. 11, 973–980.
doi:10.1093/scan/nsw017
Perry, W., Minassian, A., Lopez, B., Maron, L., and Lincoln, A. (20 07).
Sensorimotorgatingdeﬁcitsinadultswithautism. Biol.Psychiatry 61,482–486.
doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2005.09.025
Pienkowski, M., Tyler, R. S., Roncancio, E. R., Jun, H. J., Brozo ski, T.,
Dauman, N. et al. (2014). A review of hyperacusis and future directio ns:
part II. Measurement, mechanisms, and treatment. Am. J. Audiol. 23, 420-36.
doi:10.1044/2014_AJA-13-0037
Raichle, M. E., MacLeod, A. M., Snyder, A. Z., Powers, W. J., Gu snard, D. A., and
Shulman,G.L.(2001).Adefaultmodeofbrainfunction. Proc. Natl.Acad.Sci.
U.S.A.98,676–682.doi:10.1073/pnas.98.2.676
Ramachandran, V. S., and Brang, D. (2008). Tactile-emotion synes thesia.
Neurocase 14,390–399.doi:10.1080/13554790802363746
Rosenthal, M. Z., Neacsiu, A. D., and Geiger, P. J. (2016). Emot ional reactivity
to personally-relevant and standardized sounds in borderline persona lity
disorder. Cogn.Ther.Res. 40,314–327.doi:10.1007/s10608-015-9736-y
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 12 February 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 36

Brout et al. Investigating Misophonia
Rouw, R., and Erfanian, M. (2017). A large-scale study of misopho nia.J. Clin.
Psychol.doi:10.1002/jclp.22500.[Epubaheadofprint].
Rouw,R.,andScholte,H.S.(2007).Increasedstructuralconnect ivityingrapheme-
colorsynesthesia. Nat.Neurosci. 10,792–797doi:10.1038/nn1906
Saenz, M., and Koch, C. (2008). The sound of change: visually-i nduced auditory
synesthesia. Curr.Biol. 18,R650–R651.doi:10.1016/j.cub.2008.06.014
Schneider, R. L., and Arch, J. J. (2017). Case study: a novel a pplication of
mindfulness-and acceptance-based components to treat misophonia.
J. Context. Behav. Sci. 6, 221-225. doi: 10.1016/j.jcbs.2017.
04.003
Schoen, S. A., Miller, L. J., Brett-Green, B. A., and Nielsen, D. M. (2009).
Physiological and behavioral diﬀerences in sensory processing: a comparison
of children with autism spectrum disorder and sensory modulation dis order.
Front.Integr.Neurosci. 3:29.doi:10.3389/neuro.07.029.2009
Schröder,A.E.,Vulink,N.C.,vanLoon,A.J.,andDenys,D.A.( 2017).Cognitive
behavioral therapy is eﬀective in misophonia: an open trial. J. Aﬀect. Disord.
217,289-294.doi:10.1016/j.jad.2017.04.017
Schröder, A., van Diepen, R., Mazaheri, A., Petropoulos-Petalas, D ., de Amesti,
V., Vulink, N., et al. (2014). Diminished n1 auditory evoked poten tials
to oddball stimuli in misophonia patients. Front. Behav. Neurosci. 8:123.
doi:10.3389/fnbeh.2014.00123
Schröder, A., Vulink, N., and Denys, D. (2013). Misophonia: dia gnostic
criteria for a new psychiatric disorder. PLoS ONE 8:e54706.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0054706
Seeley, W. W., Menon, V., Schatzberg, A. F., Keller, J., Glover, G . H.,
Kenna, H. et al. (2007). Dissociable intrinsic connectivity net works for
salience processing and executive control. J. Neurosci . 27, 2349–2356.
doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5587-06.2007
Seth,A.K.(2013).Interoceptiveinference,emotion,andtheemb odiedself. Trends
Cogn.Sci. 17,565–573.doi:10.1016/j.tics.2013.09.007
Stansfeld, S. A., Clark, C. R., Jenkins, L. M., and Tarnopolsky, A. ( 1985).
Sensitivity to noise in a community sample: I. Measurement of psychia tric
disorderandpersonality. Psychol.Med. 15,243–254.doi:10.1017/S0033291700
023527
Stefanics, G., Kremlácek, J., and Czigler, I. (2014). Visual misma tch
negativity: a predictive coding view. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 8:666.
doi:10.3389/fnhum.2014.00666Sullivan, J. C., Miller, L. J., Nielsen, D. M., and Schoen, S. A. (20 13). The
presence of migraines and its association with sensory hyperreactiv ity and
anxiety symptomatology in children with autism spectrum disorder. Autism
18,743-747.doi:10.1177/1362361313489377
Taylor, S. (2017). Misophonia: a new mental disorder?. Med. Hypotheses 103,
109-117.doi:10.1016/j.mehy.2017.05.003
Tyler,R.S.,Pienkowski,M.,Roncancio,E.R.,Jun,H.J.,Brozo ski,T.,Dauman,N.
et al. (2014). A review of hyperacusis and future directions: part I. D eﬁnitions
andmanifestations. Am.J.Audiol. 23,402-419.doi:10.1044/2014_AJA-14-0010
Ward, J., and Simner, J. (2003). Lexical-gustatory synaesthesi a:
linguistic and conceptual factors. Cognition 89, 237–261.
doi:10.1016/S0010-0277(03)00122-7
Webber,T.A.,Johnson,P.L.,andStorch,E.A.(2014).Pedia tricmisophoniawith
comorbidobsessive–compulsivespectrumdisorders. Gen.Hosp.Psychiatry 36,
231-e1.doi:10.1016/j.genhosppsych.2013.10.018
Wu, M. S., Lewin, A. B., Murphy, T. K., and Storch, E. A. (2014). M isophonia:
incidence,phenomenology,andclinicalcorrelatesinanundergradu atestudent
sample.J.Clin.Psychol. 70,994–1007.doi:10.1002/jclp.22098
Yadon, C. A., Bugg, J. M., Kisley, M. A., and Davalos, D. B. (2009 ). P50 sensory
gating is related to performance on select tasks of cognitive inhib ition.Cogn.
Aﬀect.Behav.Neurosci. 9,448–458.doi:10.3758/CABN.9.4.448
Zhou, X., Wu, M. S., and Storch, E. A. (2017). Misophonia symptoms
among Chinese university students: incidence, associated i mpairment,
and clinical correlates. J. Obsess. Compuls. Relat. Disord. 14, 7-12.
doi:10.1016/j.jocrd.2017.05.001
Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relations hips that could
beconstruedasapotentialconﬂictofinterest.
Copyright © 2018 Brout, Edelstein, Erfanian, Mannino, Miller, R ouw, Kumar and
Rosenthal. This is an open-access article distributed unde r the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in
other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) a nd the copyright owner
are credited and that the original publication in this journ al is cited, in accordance
with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or re production is permitted
whichdoesnotcomplywiththeseterms.
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 13 February 2018 | Volume 12 | Article 36