REVIEW
published: 22 May 2019
doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2019.00082
Edited by:
Chrystalina A. Antoniades,
University of Oxford, United Kingdom
Reviewed by:
Lazaros C. Triarhou,
University of Macedonia, Greece
Joshua C. Brumberg,
Queens College (CUNY),
United States
*Correspondence:
Richard E. Brown
rebrown@dal.ca
orcid.org/0000-0002-4762-8175
Received: 28 November 2018
Accepted: 05 April 2019
Published: 22 May 2019
Citation:
Brown RE (2019) Why Study the
History of Neuroscience?
Front. Behav. Neurosci. 13:82.
doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2019.00082Why Study the History of
Neuroscience?
Richard E. Brown*
Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada
The history of neuroscience is the memory of the discipline and this memory depends
on the study of the present traces of the past; the things left behind: artifacts,
equipment, written documents, data books, photographs, memoirs, etc. History, in all
of its deﬁnitions, is an integral part of neuroscience and I have used examples from the
literature and my personal experience to illustrate the importance of the different aspects
of history in neuroscience. Each time we talk about the brain, do an experiment, or write
a research article, we are involved in history. Each published experiment becomes a
historical document; it relies on past research (the “Introduction” section), procedures
developed in the past (“Methods” section) and as soon as new data are published, they
become history and become embedded into the history of the discipline (“Discussion”
section). In order to be transparent and able to be replicated, each experiment requires
its own historical archive. Studying history means researching books, documents and
objects in libraries, archives, and museums. It means looking at data books, letters and
memos, talking to scientists, and reading biographies and autobiographies. History can
be made relevant by integrating historical documents into classes and by using historical
websites. Finally, conducting historical research can be interesting, entertaining, and can
lead to travel to out-of-the-way and exotic places and meeting interesting people.
Keywords: history, research, archives, libraries, museums
INTRODUCTION
I know of very few neuroscience programs that focus on the history of neuroscience. However,
all research involves the study of history, even if it is only the history of a single research
topic. For example, a research project on ‘‘The genetic basis of Long-Term Potentiation
(LTP)’’ would involve some history of the discovery and relevant research on LTP. Likewise,
a study on ‘‘The role of oxytocin in maternal behavior of Peromyscus ’’ would involve a
history of studies of the effects of oxytocin on behavior. In other cases, researchers testing
a particular theory such as ‘‘The amyloid beta theory of Alzheimer’s disease’’ must discuss
the history of this theory before they can make a new contribution to it. Researchers who
use a particular research method, such as ‘‘single cell recording from the hippocampus’’
must know the history of the technique if they are going to improve upon it. Thus, all
researchers are involved in studying the history of their particular research project and will
summarize this history in the ‘‘Introduction’’ and ‘‘Discussion’’ sections of their research
articles. Making space in a neuroscience program for a course on the history of neuroscience
can be a hard sell, but neuroscientists with a strong historical understanding are more equipped
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 1 May 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 82

Brown Why Study the History of Neuroscience?
to understand the context of their own work and its impact
than those with no historical background. As noted by Shepherd
(2010, p. 4):
‘‘A historical perspective provides an education in how scientists are
able to push past the limits of current concepts in order to fashion a
new and more comprehensive understanding of the laws of nature.’’
In 2008, Zoltán Molnár and I rediscovered a box of Charles
Sherrington’s histological slides at Oxford University that had
been neglected for over 70 years (Molnár and Brown, 2010).
Sherrington is one of the most influential neurophysiologists in
the history of neuroscience, winning the 1932 Nobel Prize in
Physiology or Medicine (Eccles and Gibson, 1979). Considering
this, it is incredible that these important historical scientific
artifacts were unknown and inaccessible for such a long period of
time. For every Sherrington’s box that is rediscovered and made
accessible to scientific researchers and the public, many more
historical objects are lost.
WHAT IS HISTORY?
‘‘Everything but tomorrow is history’’
Grainger (1956; p. 81).
The definition of history and the methods used to conduct
historical research are fraught with criticism and debate. Elton
(1967) argued that historical research is the search for the
objective truth about the past. Carr (1961), on the other
hand, argued that history is a product of its own time; it is
the interpretation of events and facts from the past through
the specific lens of the historian’s own ideas and ideologies.
Later, Samuel (1992) argued that history is not a record of
the past, more or less faithful to the facts, but an invention
or fiction of historians themselves. Edelman (2006) discusses
the concept of scientific history from the point of view of
scientists and historians. Indeed, there are so many aspects of
the history of science that in some areas, such as physics, one
can write a history of the history of science (Južniˇ c, 2016).
Thus, the term ‘‘history’’ has multiple meanings. History is
the study of the past and includes the study of past events,
the events connected with a particular person or discovery, a
chronological record of an experiment, a historical document,
or events that are no longer relevant to the present. History
is a discipline, a method, and a personal memoir. Within
neuroscience, all of these definitions apply and this article
will discuss the relevance of different aspects of history to
neuroscientists today.
History as Memory
An approach to history that might appeal to neuroscientists
is to treat history as memory, with all of its faults and
flaws; its errors and omissions (Wachtel, 1986; Cubitt, 2007).
The conception of history as a collective memory is a useful
perspective for the study of neuroscience. Collective memory
is a ‘‘form of memory associated with social groups, e.g.,
nations, families, etc’’; it is a socially constructed history of
the past (Poole, 2008). The recollections from one’s memoryare fallible; a memory is constructed from a series of incidents
connected in time and reconstructed from many components. It
is not imprinted like a photograph. Memories are fragmented
and very seldom do two people remember an event in the
same way. Forgetting and false memories occur; emotions
and opinions can distort memories and a recalled memory
may become reconsolidated with erroneous information (Lee
et al., 2017). Therefore, a ‘‘perfect’’ memory may include
errors, omissions, distortions and false recollections (Loftus and
Palmer, 1974; Schacter, 1996; Loftus, 2003). For example, in
Dawkins’s (2013) memoir, An Appetite for Wonder , there is
a group photograph that is captioned ‘‘The Animal Behavior
Research Group after the move from Bevington Road.’’ That
move occurred in 1971, but I am in that photograph, and I
was only in the ABRG in 1976 and 1977. So, when was that
photo taken? What was the event? My own memory of the
event is vague. A third person featured in the photograph,
Marian Dawkins, recalled that it was taken at a group picnic
in November 1977. Clearly, even our own memories of
events that we were involved in are subject to personal and
unique distortions.
In considering the perspective of history as memory, the
definition of history may shift towards the subjective perspective
of Carr (1961) or Samuel (1992), and away from the objective
perspective of Elton (1967). Overall, a memory can be seen
as the raw material of history; whether it is a written or an
oral recollection, it is the source from which historians draw
information. History is thus a collection of individual and
collective memories (Jimerson, 2003), which are the facts as we
remember them. When the holders of these memories are gone,
history becomes a cultural memory, which is the interpretation
of these facts by someone who was not present at the event.
Like any memory, history consists of a number of fragments
linked together in time, with inevitable errors, confabulations,
omissions, and errors of reconsolidation. Despite this, it is
all we have. The definition of history as a collective memory
can help to clarify the purpose of its study, as summarized
by McNeill (1985):
‘‘Historical knowledge is no more and no less than carefully and
critically constructed collective memory. As such it can both make
us wiser in our public choices and more richly human in our private
lives.’’
HISTORY IS THE STUDY OF WHAT
REMAINS
History is the study of the present traces of the past. If
objects no longer exist, it is as though they had never
existed. The essential element for historical study is the
remaining evidence of materials from the past; those that no
longer exist, cannot be studied (Elton, 1967). History involves
analyzing and interpreting the present traces of the past and
integrating information from different sources to develop a
‘‘historical memory’’ of events as they occurred. An example
of this is the study of trepanation in ancient Greco-Roman
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 2 May 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 82

Brown Why Study the History of Neuroscience?
medicine. To understand trepanation, Tullo (2010) examined
the osteoarcheological evidence, the material culture and the
written texts from the Roman Empire. The osteoarcheological
evidence consisted of skulls, such as the skull of Chios,
which showed evidence of trepanation ( Figure 1 ). The material
culture consisted of the tools used for trepanation, which
were sophisticated surgical instruments for boring holes in
the skull. The written texts described the procedures for
trepanation. For this, Tullo (2010) consulted Hippocrates, On
Head Wounds , written in 400 BC (Panourias et al., 2005).
Each of these present traces of the past, however, had to be
interpreted in the present as no physician now exists from
ancient Rome to describe the process of trepanation, why
and how it was done, how patients were treated and how
many survived the treatment. Many other historical artifacts
no longer survive. Bandages, ligatures, steel tools and otherobjects deteriorate with time and provide no present traces. Thus,
the study of history involves the quest for the present traces
of the past.
Archeological evidence and material culture are kept in
museums and ancient manuscripts are kept in libraries and
archives. These are the sites that select, classify and maintain
the present traces of the past; the basic materials that comprise
‘‘archival memory’’ (Steedman, 1980; Jimerson, 2003; Rivera-
Orraca, 2009). Like individual and collective memory, archives,
museums and libraries are selective in what they collect and
maintain; many objects are never saved, while others are lost,
deteriorate or are discarded. Thus, ‘‘archival memory’’ is selective
and subject to errors, omissions, and interpretations. Museum
displays and archival documents reflect the perspectives of those
who decide what to save (remember) and what to discard
(forget), and how to classify, maintain and display their holdings
FIGURE 1 | The three elements that are necessary to understand the signiﬁcance of historical objects. In this case, the trephined skull (A)is the material object; the
tools used for trephining (B)show how the holes might have been made, and the text from Hippocrates (C)gives a textual description of the instructions for using
the tools to trephine the skull. (A)The trepanned skull of Chios. The arrow points to the healed linear fracture associated with the bur hole. Used with permission of
the copyright holder: Copyright Hellenic Ministry of Culture and Sports, Ephorate Antiquities of Chios, Archeological Museum of Chios. Published with permission.
(B)The raspatory (left), the serrated trepan or trephine (center), and the trepan (right) were used for scraping, sawing, and drilling, respectively. Used with permission
from Tsermoulas et al. (2014). Panel (C)is adapted from Hanson (1999).
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 3 May 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 82

Brown Why Study the History of Neuroscience?
(memories; Jimerson, 2003). Like individual and collective
memory, archival and historical memories are reconstructions
of the past from the present traces, as organized by historians at
a particular time (defined as ‘‘the present’’) and in a particular
place. However, many historical artifacts are lost or destroyed.
For the history of neuroscience, these losses are serious. If history
is a collective memory of the past, the loss of the historical objects
and documents of neuroscience is equivalent to ‘‘scientific
Alzheimer’s disease.’’ Treating this disciplinary ailment is more
than a matter of preserving and cataloging laboratory notes,
specimens, equipment, drawings and documents. This material
needs to be incorporated into the teaching and practice of
neuroscience today.
History is not static but is updated by new discoveries. As
with neuroscience itself, new discoveries enable us to update
our knowledge of the history of neuroscience. New discoveries
of lost manuscripts, letters or memoirs; new biographies
and autobiographies of scientists and the discovery of new
experimental phenomena allow us to reconsider the course
of history. For example, new discoveries resulted in the
re-evaluation of the function of Golgi cells and Golgi’s theories
of cellular connections (Kruger and Otis, 2007; Galliano et al.,
2010). Likewise, modern discoveries in epigenetics have led
to the up-dating of Darwin’s theory of evolution (Skinner,
2015) and our understanding of environmental influences on
brain and behavior development and evolution (Keverne, 2014;
Keverne et al., 2015). Likewise, the discovery of letters from
Sigmund Freud to his school friend, Eduard Silberstein, not
published until 1990 (Boehlich, 1990) give new insight into
Freud as a student.
Saving the Vanishing History of
Neuroscience
The present traces of the past are being lost. These include
books, diaries, published articles, unpublished manuscripts,
photographs, original data, laboratory books, equipment and
instruction manuals on how to use this equipment. As the
people, both scientists and technicians, who did the work
retire and then die, the experimental protocols, technical skills,
expertise and oral history is lost with them. This matters
because the crucial element for studying history is the present
evidence of the past; with no evidence, there is no history.
To understand the history of neuroscience, we must save
the traces of neuroscience of the past and present. But how
should this be done? Books should be donated to and saved
by libraries. Articles, manuscripts, diaries, lab notebooks and
data should be sent to archives. Equipment and the instruction
manuals for its use should be sent to museums. Why not
develop a ‘‘History of Neuroscience Museum?’’ Lorusso et al.
(2018) have proposed a ‘‘neuroscience without borders’’ program
to preserve the history of neuroscience in Europe. IBRO,
FENS and the Society for Neuroscience all have sections on
their websites on the history of neuroscience and history
poster sessions at their annual meetings. Autobiographical
accounts of neuroscientists provide important information
on how the history of neuroscience was done by those
who did it (Squire, 1996–2018). More neuroscientists shouldbe encouraged to write their memoirs and send their lab
notes and other research materials to libraries, archives
and museums.
The Virtual History of Neuroscience?
The internet is an important resource for saving the history of
neuroscience. Many historical neuroscience books and journals
are now available online as are some archives. FENS, IBRO and
the SfN have history websites, but what else can be done? Why
not develop a virtual museum of neuroscience? This was our
thinking when we developed the Oxford History of Medicine
website, which focuses on the history of neuroscience1. On
this website, we have digitized the slides from the collections
of Sir Charles Sherrington and Sir Wilfrid Le Gros Clark. A
variety of historical instruments, teaching models and other
objects have been captured using 3-D photography and can
be viewed on this website. There is also a collection of
clinical neurological cases with case histories, stories about the
objects, art works, and videos of Oxford lectures on the history
of neuroscience.
We have also developed the European Brain Museum Tour
project (Lorusso et al., 2018), which is a virtual tour of museums
with specialized collections on the brain and the history of
neuroscience in each country of Europe2. Using this virtual tour,
neuroscience enthusiasts can find exhibits of interest and use
the links on this website to view each museum’s own website.
This project, which is now sponsored by the FENS History
of Neuroscience Committee, started as part of the ‘‘History of
Neuroscience’’ course that I taught at Dalhousie University and
we hope that it will be useful to researchers as well as students
in neuroscience. There are numerous other websites about the
history of neuroscience, such as the milestones in neuroscience
research3. These can be found using an internet search.
WHY STUDY THE HISTORY OF
NEUROSCIENCE?
Neuroscience is a recent area of science, emerging as an explicit
discipline in the late 20th century (Shepherd, 2010), but the
history of neuroscience goes back to the ancient Egyptians
(Breasted, 1930; Finger, 1994). Most students enter neuroscience
to perform cutting-edge research with innovative technologies,
to understand the complex workings of the brain and discover
how to repair them when mechanisms fail. Seldom do students
enter neuroscience in order to study its history. As with other
scientific disciplines, neuroscientists focus on new discoveries
and contemporary theories. However, even the disproved and
rejected theories of the past, such as phrenology, which have
been relegated to cautionary anecdotes and the introductory
sections of textbooks, may be re-evaluated in light of more recent
discoveries (Jerison, 1977; Jones et al., 2018).
Many neuroscientists are interested in the history of their
discipline, but not everyone agrees that the knowledge of the
history of neuroscience is helpful or important for doing modern
1https://history.medsci.ox.ac.uk/
2https://www.fens.org/Outreach/History/EBM/
3https://faculty.washington.edu/chudler/hist.html
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 4 May 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 82

Brown Why Study the History of Neuroscience?
neuroscience research (Falk and Falk, 2007). Neuroscientists
tend to work pragmatically; using models that work and
are consistent with the data without worrying about the
philosophical or historical issues involved. However, theoretical
models break down, and at some point, they cease to be able
to explain observed phenomena or to produce new testable
theories (Maienschein et al., 2008). At this point, a history
of science perspective can be useful to analyze a theory
historically, investigate the circumstances under which it was
created, learn about its creators, examine the phenomena and
the original data incorporated into it, critique the underlying
assumptions, and examine rival theories that were previously
rejected (Maienschein et al., 2008). This approach offers a wealth
of material to research scientists, who can look to these historical
findings to examine how theories are constructed. With a history
of science approach, the end of a model’s productive life does not
mean that it cannot still furnish important lessons to researchers.
For example, there are numerous theories of the causes of
Alzheimer’s disease (Armstrong, 2013; Cubinkova et al., 2018;
Table 1 ), and new research attempts to integrate behavioral,
genetic and environmental risk factors into an over-arching
theory of AD (Nehls, 2016). Once the causes of AD are known,
one should be able to follow the historical threads of each of
these theories.
A history of science approach can also be an aid to
understanding the interdisciplinary nature of neuroscience.
Neuroscience, or more accurately, the neurosciences,
involve anatomy, physiology, pharmacology, neurology,
psychiatry, molecular biology, biochemistry, physics, cell
biology, developmental biology, evolution, physics, chemistry,
engineering, computer science, ethology, psychology and
economics (Shepherd, 2010). Each of these fields has its own
theories, methodologies, and data, but through collaborative
research projects, these influence each other. For example,
during the time that Star (1983) observed researchers in a
TABLE 1 | What causes Alzheimer’s disease?
The amyloid cascade hypothesis (APP , PSEN 1, PSEN2)
The tau hypothesis (Tau)
The APOE4 allele hypothesis
The protein folding hypothesis
The alpha-synuclein hypothesis
The prion-like hypothesis
The synaptic pathology hypothesis
The abnormal neurotransmitter activity hypothesis (cholinergic, glutamatergic)
The neurotrophic hypothesis (BDNF)
The neuro-vascular hypothesis.
The impaired insulin, IGF-I signaling hypothesis
The cholesterol hypothesis
The neuro-inﬂammation hypothesis (astrocytes, microglia)
The autoimmune hypothesis
The slow acting infection hypothesis (HSV)
The mitochondrial cascade theory (rate of mitochondrial decline)
The oxidative stress hypothesis
The cell cycle hypothesis
The altered blood-brain barrier hypothesis
The trace metal hypothesis (copper, zinc, aluminum)
There are many hypotheses about the causes of Alzheimer’s disease, but no deﬁnitive
support for any of them. How will history treat the study for the causes of AD? (from:
Armstrong, 2013; Cubinkova et al., 2018; Makin, 2018).psychophysiology laboratory, she saw that they collaborated
with neurologists and imported neurological procedures into
their research. In doing so, the psychophysiologists adopted
the assumptions about the localization of brain function made
by the neurologists. Although this interdisciplinarity is both
necessary and fruitful in neuroscience (Shepherd, 2010), it
comes with the risks of mixing disciplinary assumptions about
neural processes without a strong grounding in the bases for
these assumptions. A critical historical approach can help
neuroscientists engaged in interdisciplinary research to navigate
these issues (Falk and Falk, 2007).
The Importance of the History of Science
in General
To understand the importance of studying the history of
neuroscience, it is useful to review the importance of historical
research in science in general. To appreciate the role of science
and its influence on society involves understanding its history
(Nutton, 2004; Lindberg, 2007), philosophy (Godfrey-Smith,
2003) and sociology (Merton, 1962; Bloor et al., 1996). The
history of science describes the discoveries in science, their
evolution and how they were transmitted and received (Grainger,
1956). A textbook of neuroscience, for example, documents the
history and progress of each area of neuroscience (Finger, 1994).
Discoveries do not appear out of the blue; they have long periods
of incubation and their importance may not be recognized for
many years. New scientific knowledge is transmitted through
books and journal articles, which have their own history (Gross
et al., 2002). Only when they are published can new discoveries
be distributed and critically evaluated.
Many new discoveries have been rejected as ‘‘nonsense’’ when
first published only to be confirmed later (Gross, 2009), resulting
in paradigm shifts in science (Kuhn, 1962). The discovery of
a new fact is exciting, but if it is too revolutionary it will
be rejected by established scientists; it must be proved to be
correct and doubters must be convinced by hard data. The
discovery of a truth is one thing, but equally necessary is
its transmission to other scientists and their acceptance of
it (Grainger, 1956, p. 80). New discoveries and new theories
result in controversies. Of such controversies are scientific
histories made. For example, Vesalius’s (1543) book on human
anatomy was rejected when first published and stimulated heated
controversy that lasted decades (Montagu, 1955). The debate
on whether neural communication was electrical or chemical
(the soups vs. the sparks debate) also continued for decades
(Valenstein, 2002). The theory of animal electricity incited
debates between Galvani and Volta (Piccolino, 1998) and the
neuron doctrine resulted in debates between Golgi and Cajal
(Guillery, 2005). The history of neuroscience is important for
investigating how advances in neuroscience occur. For example,
while some would argue that new tools and techniques are
fundamental for new discoveries in neuroscience (Bickle, 2016),
others would argue that conceptual change is what drives
advances in neuroscience (Parker, 2018).
The formal academic study of the history of science dates
from the founding of the journal ISIS by George Sarton in
1913 (Sarton, 1918; Barnes, 1920; Hellman, 1958) and showed
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 5 May 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 82

Brown Why Study the History of Neuroscience?
a significant increase in the 1950s (Albrecht-Carrie, 1951;
Grainger, 1956). By the 1970s, Brush (1974) made the suggestion
that the history of science might be subversive and should be
X-rated. He suggested, with tongue-in-cheek, that the study of
the history of science might pervert young minds by telling
them the truth about how science is done as opposed to the
idealized methods of science presented in textbooks. By this
time, the traditional objective view of the history of science as
presented by Elton (1967) was giving way to the more subjective
interpretational view of history given by Carr (1961) and
represented by the view of history as a flawed memory process
(Cubitt, 2007). It is interesting to compare Grainger’s (1956)
reasons for studying the history of science ( Table 2 ), which focus
on discovering objective truths, to the more subjective reasons of
Maienschein (2000). On the other hand, although Maienschein
(2000) states that even if the history of science is subjective and
riddled with errors of memory, there are still many good reasons
for studying it ( Table 2 ).
Grainger (1956) painted an idealized view of the historian
of science as someone who must have a sound knowledge of
science, philosophical wisdom and a historical sense, and be able
to embrace the whole picture of the role of science in society.
According to Grainger (1956), the historian of science must
also be aware that the education of science students focuses
on teaching ‘‘facts’’ and technological expertise. Many scientists
are so specialized and narrow in their outlook that they reject
the history of science as ‘‘irrelevant’’ and a waste of time. The
enlightened scientist, however, judges modern findings in the
light of history in order to understand the relationships between
seemingly disparate studies and to use knowledge from one
area of science to facilitate discoveries in another. Finally, the
history of science, like any history, is an exercise in detective
work. In some ways understanding the history of a scientific
discovery is almost as exciting as making the discovery itself
(Goodfield, 1981).
Falk and Falk (2007, p. 44) suggest that there are a number
of benefits of scientists becoming historians. These include
the analysis of the social and cultural background of scientific
discoveries; the context of scientific research; and the implicit
assumptions that underlie the ‘‘dominant scientific Zeitgeist’’
under which scientific research is conducted. They argue
that scientists ‘‘adopt unawares those doctrines (and implicit
assumptions) that are established by the dominant scientific
Zeitgeist,’’ and suggest that studying the history of science
provides a way that scientists can recognize and overcome their
culturally-determined biases about their research. In the past,
historians of science emphasized that scientists had an almost
moral duty to learn the history of science so that they could
situate their pursuit of knowledge in relation to the social,
cultural and political events of their time (Grainger, 1956). This is
still an important reason to study the history of science. In many
cases, scientists investigating the brain are unaware of the cultural
biases that influence their work (Cooter, 2014). Historians of
science should make, and neuroscientists should read, engaging,
critical, rigorous histories of the study of the brain and the
nervous system to overcome these biases. Another benefit of
studying the history of science is to credit researchers whoseTABLE 2 | Why study the history of science?
Grainger (1956).
1. To understand scientiﬁc achievements in relation to society and culture.
2. To indicate the directions and progress of science itself.
3. To illustrate the creative imagination involved in basic science.
4. To view the needs and problems of science in relation to society and
education.
5. To show the long periods of innovation and development underlying new
discoveries.
6. To show the struggles of new discoveries to be accepted by other scientists
and society.
7. To show that what is considered “true” in science is continually being revised
in light of new discoveries.
8. To describe the changes in the way that new scientiﬁc discoveries change
our beliefs about the world.
9. To show how scientiﬁc discoveries underlie advances in engineering,
technology and medicine.
10. To humanize science, integrating the history of science with the humanities.
11. To put current discoveries into historical perspective.
12. To evaluate the beneﬁts and shortcomings of each side of a scientiﬁc
controversy, correcting errors and pointing out contradictions equally.
13. To illuminate how a discovery in one area of science relies on knowledge
from other areas.
14. To illuminate the sense, purpose and reasoning of science for education.
15. To focus a critical eye on new discoveries, evaluating them in light of past
research.
Maienschein (2000).
1. To show students and the general public how science works and how to
improve it.
2. To show the greatness and the weakness, the fallibility and the humanity of
scientists; reassuring students that scientists are, after all, only human.
3. To show the excitement of science.
4. To illuminate why some science ’works’ better than other science.
5. To show that science is not a static method unchanging over time, but
incorporates new innovations and responds to changing environments.
6. To increase the public understanding of science and promote
scientiﬁc literacy.
7. To demonstrate past failures as well as past successes in order to avoid the
former and build on the latter.
8. To make us better scientists; stressing creativity and humanness. To keep
scientists from being too arrogant about successes and too despondent
about failures
9. To reveal the mistakes of the past and make us more efﬁcient; recognizing
mistakes prevents us from making the same mistakes again.
10. To provide the larger perspective and allow scientists to make better
judgements of their own work and that of others.
11. To stimulate the imagination. Many new ideas and inventions are simply
adaptations, modiﬁcations or new uses for old ideas or inventions.
12. To show how science is really done by real people who are fallible and make
mistakes as well as clever discoveries, and how many discoveries are the result
of errors and good luck in addition to careful observation.
13. To increase the public understanding of science. It makes science more
accessible and interesting, showing the excitement of science and promotes
scientiﬁc literacy.
discoveries were premature and thus unheeded, or published in
older or foreign-language (non-English) journals (Gross, 2009).
Scientists who become historians also bridge the ‘‘two
cultures’’ of the arts and social sciences and scientific research
and are more able to see the influence of the arts on the sciences,
and vice-versa (Edwards, 2010; Frazzetto, 2011; Garcia-Lopez,
2012). Scientists who take a historical perspective are able to
have a more comprehensive perception of their scientific work
and may see things that others miss (Root-Bernstein, 1988).
Finally, because there is a great amount of ‘‘implicit knowledge’’
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 6 May 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 82

Brown Why Study the History of Neuroscience?
in science that cannot be learned from textbooks, but only from
hands-on research experience, the scientist-cum-historian can
explain the implicit rules of scientific work which are never
included in published articles. Indeed, one of the most significant
contributions of scientists to the history of science may be
their personal reminiscences, stories and anecdotes about how
their research was really done. These only come to light in
autobiographical works such as those of Watson (1968) on the
double helix and Cajal (1937/1989) on his life in neurobiology.
The personal accounts of many neuroscientists (e.g., Hebb, 1980)
have been given in the many volumes of The history of psychology
in autobiography that began as far back as the 1930s and in the
series of The history of neuroscience in autobiography edited by
Larry Squire since 1996.
Finally, scientific theories influence broader societal ideas
about the way the world works. The rise of the neurosciences has
produced a ‘‘neuroculture,’’ a distinct sociocultural phenomenon
that looks to neuroscience to explain all aspects of human
behavior (Rolls, 2012; Mora, 2015). Neuroculture has taken
hold in literature, film, television and the visual arts, as well
as education and even economics (Frazzetto and Anker, 2009).
Indeed, neuroculture seems to have taken hold of all aspects
of modern life, but it is not without its critics (Casper, 2014;
Cooter, 2014).
In summary, the answer to the question, ‘‘why study the
history of neuroscience?’’ falls into five categories: (1) self-
improvement, illuminating the theories and methods of
neuroscience and improving upon them; (2) efficiency,
avoiding past mistakes and learning from them; (3) perspective,
providing judgment and clarity and thus enlarging the scope
of neuroscience; (4) imagination, offering a wide repertoire
of ideas; and (5) education, improving scientific literacy and
the public understanding of neuroscience (Maienschein et al.,
2008). Shepherd (2010) points out that studying the history of
neuroscience helps us to understand the interdisciplinary nature
of neuroscience, and shows how neuroscientific research extends
across all species, systems and levels of neural organization.
A historical approach examines the factors that produce
discoveries: the methods and techniques used, the personalities
of the scientist themselves and the social, cultural, political and
ethical issues underlying neuroscience research.
HOW DOES HISTORY AFFECT YOU?
The average neuroscientist or student of neuroscience may
not feel that they are affected by the history of neuroscience.
However, the history of neuroscience is not just an academic
discipline; history is personal and your own research history is
important in three ways. The terminology you use, the scientific
articles you write, and the integrity of your research publications
all depend on history.
Naming the Brain
Simply talking about the brain is an exercise in history.
The term ‘‘brain’’ was first used by the ancient Egyptians in
about 1700 BC (Breasted, 1930); the distinction between the
‘‘cerebrum’’ (enkephalon) and ‘‘cerebellum’’ (parenkephalis) wasfirst made by Aristotle around 300 BC, and the ‘‘entorhinal area’’
was defined by Brodmann in 1909 (see Swanson, 2015 for the
history of neuroanatomical terminology). Likewise, the terms
‘‘neuron,’’ ‘‘synapse,’’ and ‘‘neurotransmitter’’ all have a history
(López-Muñoz and Alamo, 2009). Histological techniques, such
as the Golgi stain have a history (Shepherd et al., 2011), the
‘‘neurone doctrine’’ (Shepherd, 1991/2015), the ‘‘amyloid cascade
hypothesis’’ of Alzheimer’s disease (Hardy, 2017) and the theory
of the developmental origins of health and disease (DOHaD;
Hoffman et al., 2017; Suzuki, 2018) all have a history. So to talk
about any aspect of neuroscience is to talk about history.
Writing a Scientiﬁc Paper
The completion of your research articles relies on the history
of the problem of interest, and, when your research article is
published, it becomes a part of history. There are many guides
on how to write research articles (for example: Neill, 2007;
Plaxco, 2010; Adams, 2011; Kallestinova, 2011; Saper, 2015).
Each section of a research article involves some form of history,
thus all scientists study history when completing a research
project and writing a scientific article. The ‘‘Introduction’’
summarizes the history of the problem that you are investigating
and introduces the hypotheses you plan to test. It summarizes
the main discoveries in the area and who made them. When
you are testing a theory, the ‘‘Introduction’’ describes who
developed the theory, what previous data supports or refutes
it, and describes any controversies, which you hope that your
research will resolve. It provides the scientific context for your
research problem with reference to theoretical and empirical
developments in the field. Your ‘‘Methods’’ section describes the
apparatus and procedures used, often discussing who developed
the equipment and techniques, their reliability and validity. Your
experimental methods, both those explicitly referenced in the
article and those tacitly passed on, all have a history. In some
cases, older methods may be used to solve research problems
in the present (Schwerdtfeger, 2018; Schwerdtfeger and Tobet,
2018). The core of your research article is the presentation of
new results. Once the experiment is completed, your ‘‘Results’’
section is written and adds new data to the field of study.
These results are new today, but as soon as they are published,
they are history. The ‘‘Discussion’’ section describes how your
findings fit into the history of the problem and whether or
not they support the theory being tested. The ‘‘Discussion’’
section summarizes how your research is relevant to previous
research and summarizes the advances that you have made.
The ‘‘Reference’’ section describes the history of the problem
by listing the publications that you relied on to complete your
study. It is a bibliographic resumé of the history of your research
topic. When writing a scientific article, you become a selective
historian. Your introduction does not cite every article on your
topic; it is selective, focusing on the articles most relevant to your
study. Likewise, you select the apparatus, methods and procedure
from the many options available. You may even select which
results to publish and which to omit. Your ‘‘Discussion’’ is also
selective, focusing on one or more of the possible theories to
explain your results. Finally, your reference list is also selective;
you do not cite every single article on your topic.
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 7 May 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 82

Brown Why Study the History of Neuroscience?
Once published, your article can become part of the history of
someone else’s research project. If you write a review article, it is
a history project. Your grant proposals are also history projects:
they must demonstrate how the proposed research fits into the
history of the field. Grant reviewers and journal referees must
evaluate whether your research adds enough to the great chain
of knowledge to be funded or published. This means that the
reviewers of grants and manuscripts must know the past and
current history of the research being evaluated. Thus, everything
that you do in neuroscience involves history. Often without
realizing it, neuroscientists study history simply by conducting
their research, writing review articles, grant applications and
reviewing manuscripts.
Keeping Your Own Historical Archives
A scientific publication involves two types of history: the history
of the problem being researched (the literature cited) and the
history of the experimental project itself. If someone wants
to replicate your experiment, they will need to know all of
the details of the methods and procedure: the subjects, the
protocols followed, equipment used, laboratory conditions and
methodological issues not included in the article and they may
want to see your laboratory notebooks, apparatus and methods,
raw data, statistical analyses, etc. (Gorgolewski and Poldrack,
2016; Gilmore et al., 2017; Zwaan et al., 2018 and the ensuing
commentaries). But what happens if other researchers cannot
replicate your findings? What if you are accused of fraud or
research misconduct? Your raw data, statistical analyses, letters,
notebooks, diaries and e-mails will be open to scrutiny. Thus, for
each published article, a personal archive is critical in order to
provide a comprehensive documentation of your experimental
procedures and results and to establish that there was no
scientific misconduct, fudging of results, manipulation of data
or photo-shopping of figures. Open and transparent research
relies on a careful historical account of each research project
(Iqbal et al., 2016). To improve reproducibility of published
findings, many journals, such as Nature, require authors to
submit research report forms that provide information on
the research subjects, materials used, experimental design and
statistical analyses (see Nature Publishing Group, 2017).
What do you do when others cannot replicate your results?
This happened to me when other authors (Birke and Sadler,
1984) could not replicate the results of my study on olfaction
and scent marking in rats (Brown, 1978). By carefully examining
the differences in methods between the two studies, I was able
to show that using the methods of my study, I replicated my
results and using the methods of Birke and Sadler (1984), I
replicated their results (Brown, 1991). Thus, by replicating the
different methods used in both studies, I was able to show that
the differences in social and sexual experience of the rats in
each study produced the different behavioral results. There are
many such methodological issues in behavioral neuroscience
(Schellinck et al., 2010). Thus, it is important to keep a research
archive for each publication.
When developing a personal research archive, many questions
must be answered. What should be kept? Where should it be
kept and for how long? How can other scientists access yourarchive? Your research archive is a historical document and
may become subject to inspection and scrutiny. Many journals,
universities, and governmental institutions now provide archives
for the documentation of each research project and the storage of
raw data. For example, Cambridge University has a website with
a guide to research data management4, and there are a number of
other guidelines to how to manage research data (see for example,
Ingram, 2016).
The development of data archives enables the creation of large
neuroscience databases for data sharing (Cheung et al., 2009;
Freeman, 2015; Wiener et al., 2016). Researchers must, therefore,
ensure that the data archived in these large scale databases are
reliable and valid. Once such databases are created, those who
wish to use them must learn new techniques for data-mining
and neuroinformatics (Grisham et al., 2010, 2016; Akil et al.,
2011; Gregory et al., 2018) and for statistical analysis (Bzdok
and Yeo, 2017). Formal data archives have been developed in
structural biology (Kleywegt et al., 2018) and neuroimaging
(Gorgolewski et al., 2016; Borghi and Van Gulick, 2018). The
Jackson Laboratory Mouse Phenome Database5is a collaborative
archive where data collected on laboratory mouse strains and
populations have been collected from multiple sources. We used
such public databases (The Allen Brain Atlas, STRING, GoMiner
and Mouse Genome Informatics databases) for an in-silico
analysis of grooming behavior (Roth et al., 2013). New resources
have been published for making large databases available to
neuroscientists (Vogelstein et al., 2018) and for searching these
databases for designing and planning research projects (Matiasz
et al., 2018). Thus, if your data is included in a public database,
you must ensure that it is replicable.
What happens if your results cannot be replicated and you are
accused of scientific fraud (Gunsalus and Robinson, 2018)? Other
researchers, university administrators and granting agencies may
want to inspect your personal archives for each experiment. If
scientific misconduct is found (if your experimental data does
not support the published results) your articles may be retracted
and your reputation as a scientist tarnished. The Retraction
Watch website6keeps track of retracted articles. If you cannot
replicate your own experiments, the published articles may also
need to be retracted. For example, LoLordo and Ross (1990)
retracted their own articles because the rescoring of videotapes
on which the published data were based did not confirm the
original findings. Zhang et al. (2012) had their article in the
‘‘Neurobiology of Aging’’ retracted at the request of the Editor-
in-chief and the authors ‘‘due to inappropriate duplication of
photomicrographs and errors in the description of the material’’
with the result that ‘‘the quantitative results reported in the article
cannot be considered reliable’’ (Zhang et al., 2016). If you are
falsely accused of scientific misconduct, you will need to use
your scientific archive to demonstrate your research integrity
(see Goldenring, 2010). On the other hand, some authors have
argued that most published research is not replicable (Ioannidis,
2005), while others argue that failure to replicate is an inherent
4https://www.data.cam.ac.uk/data-management-guide/organising-your-data
5https://phenome.jax.org
6http://retractionwatch.com
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 8 May 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 82

Brown Why Study the History of Neuroscience?
property of scientific research (Redish et al., 2018). Ioannidis
(2014) has presented 12 steps for improving the reliability and
validity of published research.
Even if you are certain that none of your own research articles
will be retracted, you need to beware of referring to retracted
articles in your research articles, reviews and grant proposals. For
example, in one of our articles (O’Leary et al., 2018), we referred
to Zhang et al. (2012), but when we were doing the revisions
to our article, we found that this article had been retracted
(Zhang et al., 2016), and so we had to find a new reference and
make substantial revisions to our article. When writing review
articles one must also beware of retracted articles. Uher and
Weaver (2014a) wrote a commentary on a article by Perroud et al.
(2014) that was subsequently retracted because one of the authors
had fabricated data (Aubry et al., 2014). As a result, Uher and
Weaver (2014b) had to retract their commentary on this article.
In this case, the embarrassment of having to retract an article had
nothing to do with the reviewers, who were innocent victims of
a third party. Thus, the Retraction Watch website and database
(Brainard, 2018) is becoming an essential resource for preventing
neuroscientists from becoming victims of scientific malpractice
by others.
In summary, history is a personal issue in neuroscience. Each
of your research projects relies on previous studies, methodology
and theories. Once your article is published, it becomes a part of
history. Establishing a personal archive for each research project
is critical to ensure that future researchers can gain access to your
data and that your research documents are available for historical
analysis. Such an archive is also essential for other researchers
who wish to replicate your experiments and to defend yourself
against claims of scientific misconduct and the danger of having
your articles retracted. Finally, you must be wary of citing articles
that have been retracted.
HOW TO MAKE THE HISTORY OF
NEUROSCIENCE RELEVANT TODAY
History is more than a matter of cataloging and preserving
laboratory notes, specimens, equipment, drawings and
photographs. This material needs to be incorporated into
the teaching and practice of neuroscience research. To make
history relevant to students of neuroscience, faculty could
integrate historical topics into their neuroscience teaching and
research using websites, artifacts and historical publications.
Through the study of history, students can be introduced
to the historical context of their research and learn how it
is integrated with other disciplines and society in general.
The history of neuroscience can be approached through
textbooks (Finger, 1994, 2000; Glickstein, 2014), or books on
special topics (Shepherd, 1991/2015). There are biographies
of many neuroscienctists, including Galen (Mattern, 2013),
Helmholtz (Meulders, 2010), Golgi (Mazzarello, 2010), and
Pavlov (Todes, 2014). Neurobiographies (Söderqvist, 2002,
2007) and autobiographies (Squire, 1996–2018) provide personal
histories, describing how individual neuroscientists did their
research, and bridging the gap between neuroscience and
the humanities.The most common way that neuroscientists do historical
research is to identify past studies on the topic of interest using
reference citations, PUBMED, Web of Science or Google Scholar
as a guide. However, this often does not encompass the many
texts located on library shelves or in library special collections of
rare books that must be accessed separately from the main library
catalog. Archives keep letters, diaries, photographs, memos and
other documents donated by scientists or their families. They
may include drafts of articles, unpublished manuscripts, lab data
books, and other valuable information. Newspaper clippings,
awards, medals, and honorary degrees also find their way into
archives. For example, the McGill University archives have many
boxes of articles of Donald O. Hebb (Brown and Milner, 2003)
and the Oxford University archives have the articles of Sir
Charles Sherrington, but so do the archives at the University
of Liverpool, the University of British Columbia and the Royal
Society of London (Molnár and Brown, 2010). The National
Archives of each country also contain materials on the history
of individual neuroscientists.
Historical objects may be kept in museums, and there are
many museums with brain collections that provide essential
resources for studying comparative neurobiology and the history
of neuroscience (Iwaniuk, 2010, 2011; Fobbs and Johnson, 2011;
Manger, 2011 and other articles in this volume). The importance
of saving anatomical specimens in museum collections is that
they can be re-analyzed using modern methods to gain new
insights into neural disorders. Such is the case of the brains
of Broca’s famous patients, Leborgne and Lelong, held in the
Museum Dupytren in Paris, which have been reanalyzed by
modern researchers using PET and fMRI scans to reveal the
damage that was unseen by Broca (Dronkers et al., 2007).
In addition, the old equipment used in scientific laboratories,
including machinery and lab notes, become critical historical
objects (Ceccarelli, 2002; Arnold and Söderqvist, 2011) and
it is important to preserve these in museum collections
(Lorusso et al., 2018).
Beyond these physical locations, information on the history of
the neurosciences is readily accessible through the internet. The
internet is an incredibly powerful tool for the study of the history
of neuroscience and for engaging students in historical research.
Even the most ancient texts can be accessed online. There are
also virtual archives and virtual museums. The European Brain
Museum Tour website7allows anyone to locate museums with
brain collections at the click of a button. Developing a virtual
museum of neuroscience was the reasoning behind the creation
of the Oxford History of Medical Sciences Project8where
students and researchers can access slides, objects, art, stories,
case histories and seminars that are relevant to conducting
historical research. There is also the ability to analyze historical
equipment using this website.
Historical research also involves personal interactions:
contacting the colleagues, students, friends and families of
neuroscientists to locate hidden information about their lives
and work. Former students and colleagues of neuroscientists
7https://www.fens.org/Outreach/History/EBM/
8http://history.medsci.ox.ac.uk
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 9 May 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 82

Brown Why Study the History of Neuroscience?
may have letters, manuscripts and photographs stored away
in filing cabinets. There may be old materials in university
store-rooms that have never been sent to the archives. Still,
other historical artifacts have been stored in back rooms of
university departments, or in display cases in corridors. Other
documents reside in the basements and attics of the friends and
families of neuroscientists. Interviews with colleagues, students,
spouses, children and grandchildren of neuroscientists may turn
up unseen documents, as well as valuable information that has
never been published. For example, in this way I obtained some
letters and other documents from the families of Sir Wilfred Le
Gros Clark and Donald Hebb. Such family documents are not
publically available and are on the verge of being lost if someone
is not there to salvage them. Once all such information has
been collected, one must sort and arrange it and decide how to
preserve it. Too often there are large gaps, missing information
and one-sided conversations. One may find the letters from A to
B, but none of the letters from B to A, and so inferences must
be made about the information they might contain. Additionally,
if the topic that you are researching is controversial, you may
find yourself the center of a war of words, as I found with my
investigation of Donald Hebb’s research on sensory deprivation
(Brown, 2007a).
History is the study of the present traces of the past or the
memories of the past. Thus libraries, archives, and museums are
all repositories of the memories of the history of neuroscience.
However, we are now facing a number of problems in preserving
the history of neuroscience (Lorusso et al., 2018). Many of these
repositories have selective memories; some select only certain
items to keep and others have political and personal preferences
for what is collected. Some archives have online indexes and
others do not. Some archives no longer have archivists. Some
archives and museums have been closed and the materials are no
longer accessible. In addition, libraries, archives and museums
‘‘get rid of’’ or de-access items they no longer deem interesting.
Old books, just the kind of thing a historian looks for, which
have not been taken out of the library for years, get discarded,
so are no longer available to anyone. Archival materials sit in
boxes without being indexed and museums reject donations of
old equipment as they have no space for it. Most museums
exhibit only a small fraction of their holdings; the rest is in
storage and may become lost. And, worst of all, documents
and equipment may have been destroyed or thrown out by
over-zealous administrators who just want to ‘‘get rid of all of
this old junk.’’ Finally, many neuroscientists do not leave their
records to any library, archive or museum and these records
get destroyed or languish unknown in attics and basements.
My aim in this article is to encourage the preservation of these
historical documents.
THE EXCITEMENT OF HISTORICAL
RESEARCH
Historical research is interesting, illuminating and enlightening.
To be able to conceptualize the perspectives of older
neuroscientists gives us an ability to understand their discoveries
more deeply and make sense of our own research, theories,and methodology. In addition, historical research allows one
to hear exciting stories and meet interesting people. If these
are not appealing as reasons to study history, some may find
consolation in the fact that doing historical research often
involves travel to incredible places. Some examples from my
own research illustrate how the search for historical documents
can be interesting and exciting: academic detective work. These
include finding ancient Greco-Roman surgical tools in Greece,
searching for Leonardo da Vinci in Italy, finding Sir Charles
Sherrington’s box of slides in Oxford, the search for traces of
Donald O. Hebb in Montreal, Boston, and Chicago and the
opportunity to visit Pavlov’s laboratories and home in Russia.
Ancient Greco-Roman Surgical Tools
During a FENS meeting in Thessaloniki, Greece, in October
2015, I visited the Archeological Museum, which had exhibits on
FIGURE 2 | Surgical tools from the 3rd century AD. These tools are replicas
of those on exhibit at the National Archelogical Museum of Greece and were
purchased at the museum in Thessaloniki, Greece. On the far left is a
copper-alloy spoon for preparing and taking medicines and applying them to
wounds. Next to it is a copper-alloy knife handle that is decorated with a
small animal, possibly a mouse, which links the instrument with Asklepios.
The mouse was seen as a daemonic being with prophetic powers and was
associated with Apollo Smintheus, who protected people against evil and
epidemics. The blade is missing. Because blades were made of iron, they
often rusted away. The item at the top of the six items shown horizontally is a
copper-alloy double hook which is decorated with silver bands at the head
and in the middle. It was used during surgical operations on blood vessels
(aneurysms), on membranes in the eye, and on tonsils, and to clasp pieces of
tissue and the edges of wounds during surgery. The second horizontal item is
a copper-alloy knife used to make incisions in the ﬂesh during operations. It
has an engraved depiction of a snake on the blade and a snake’s head at the
end. The third item is a copper-alloy spoon-shaped probe that was used to
prepare and apply medicines. The fourth is a copper-alloy needle used to sew
bandages applied to wounds. The ﬁfth is a copper-alloy spatula probe used
to mix and apply medicines in deep surgical incisions, to diagnose and
measure the depth of injuries, and more rarely to clean internal wounds to the
nose and other, larger wounds. The bottom item is also a copper-alloy
spatula probe. On the far right is a copper-alloy clasp with serrated ends. This
was used to clasp or cut away ﬂesh and tumors during surgical operations.
Next to this is another copper-alloy spatula used to clean wounds and
incisions, scrape away ﬁstulae, and remove foreign bodies and broken bones
from the ear and nose. In eye operations, it was used to remove cysts. It was
also used to prepare and apply medicines, particularly to the eyes. These
tools are described by Bliquez (1982).
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 10 May 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 82

Brown Why Study the History of Neuroscience?
trepanning and on ancient surgical tools. Sets of exact replicas
of these tools were for sale in the gift shop and I bought
one to use for teaching ( Figure 2 ). These tools include hooks,
knives, probes, needles, spatulas, spoons, and knife handles. A
copper-alloy knife, used to make incisions during operations,
has an engraved depiction of a snake on the blade and a
snake’s head at the end, which link the instrument to Asklepios,
the god of medicine. A scalpel handle carved in the shape
of a mouse is also linked to Asklepios (see Figure 2 ). When
I lecture on the writings of Hippocrates or Galen, I open
the box of ancient surgical instruments and the students are
struck by how ‘‘modern’’ they look. This increases their interest
in history.
The Search for Leonardo
In order to complete a presentation on Leonardo da Vinci for
a history poster (Brown, 2014), I obtained security clearance
to view the original pages from Leonardo’s notebooks, which
are held in the print room at Windsor Castle in England.
When I left I ordered my own copies of the prints to
use for teaching. During the FENS Milan meeting, Lorenzo
Lorusso organized tours of libraries and archives such as the
Biblioteca Nazionale Braidense, which displayed Leonardo’s
drawings. On this tour, we visited the town of Vinci ( Figure 3 ),
the Leonardo museum and the house where Leonardo was
born. In Florence, we visited other Leonardo da Vinci
museums, libraries, and exhibits where we purchased books on
Leonardo and prints of his drawings. In researching Leonardo
da Vinci as a neuroscientist, a tour of Italy is interesting
and exciting.Sherrington’s Box of Wonders
In 2008, Zoltán Molnár discovered a box of histological slides
used by Sherrington from 1888 to 1935 ( Figure 4 ). This
box contains 21 drawers of slides from Sherrington’s years
at St. Thomas Hospital (1888–1895), Liverpool University
(1896–1914) and Oxford University (1914–1935). It also
contains slides presented to him by other leading contemporary
neuroscientists. Much of the histological data behind these
incredible discoveries are available for research at the University
of Oxford. This material provided information for our
publication on the work of Sherrington (Molnár and Brown,
2010) and the impetus to develop our History of Neuroscience
Website9. This website allows the viewer to use a program
called ‘‘Zoomify’’ to magnify each image as if it were
under a microscope. The materials in this website can
now be used for teaching classes anywhere in the world
(Chang and Molnár, 2015).
The Man Behind the Hebb Synapse
Donald O. Hebb’s influential book, The Organization of Behavior
(Hebb, 1949/2002), established the concepts of synaptic change
and cell assemblies. This was the basis for the prominent
Hebbian theory, which has been summarized as ‘‘cells that
fire together wire together.’’ Hebb’s research was diverse and
involved a wide range of ideas (Brown, 2007b) and his research
on intelligence A and B was used by Cattell to develop his theories
of fluid and crystallized intelligence (Brown, 2016). Hebb was
Professor Emeritus at Dalhousie University from 1977 to 1985
(Figure 5 ) and, after he died, a Hebb Memorial Lecture was
9https://history.medsci.ox.ac.uk/
FIGURE 3 | The house in Vinci, Italy, where Leonardo Da Vinci was born [Photo by Richard Brown].
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 11 May 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 82

Brown Why Study the History of Neuroscience?
FIGURE 4 | I am examining Sherrington’s box of slides at Oxford University [Photo by Zoltán Molnár].
FIGURE 5 | At the Hebb “cottage” in Chester Basin, Nova Scotia. Hebb’s 80th birthday 1984. Left to right: Richard Brown, Donald Hebb, Raymond Klein and his
daughter [Photo taken by John Fentress].
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 12 May 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 82

Brown Why Study the History of Neuroscience?
established. I began to write the introductions to these lectures
and this resulted in having Hebb’s book republished (Hebb,
1949/2002) and writing articles on his life and work (Brown
and Milner, 2003; Brown, 2007b). To research the life of Donald
Hebb took me to the archives at Dalhousie University, McGill
University, the University of Chicago, Harvard University and
the archives of the History of Psychology in Akron Ohio, as
well as to many small archives and museums. Hebb’s family
provided me with materials and I met his brother, Andrew (aged
98) who told me about their childhood and schooling. I scoured
the National Archives of Canada in Ottawa for information
about Hebb and met with his former students and colleagues
and I am not finished yet; indeed, I have my own ‘‘Quest for
Corvo’’ (Symons, 1934/1966) in trying to write a biography of
Donald Hebb.
Pavlov’s Physiology Labs
In May 2017, the FENS History committee participated in the
100th anniversary of the Russian Physiological Society in Saint
Petersburg Russia. During our visit, we not only presented
lectures but also visited the laboratories used by Pavlov. The
highlights of the trip were our visits to the lab at Koltushi and
to Pavlov’s apartment, where we had tea in Pavlov’s dining room
(Brown et al., 2017).
These examples illustrate some of the excitement of the
search for the history of neuroscience. It is interesting because
you discover things that you would never have expected. It is
illuminating as it shows the ideas and methods used to make
some of the basic discoveries in neuroscience. Finally, it is
enlightening to view the lives of famous neuroscientists through
their writings, letters and photographs and through the eyes
of their students and families. In the search for the history of
neuroscience, you have the opportunities to meet interesting
people, hear fascinating stories and to travel to far away places.
Finally, the study of the history of science helps you to make sense
of your own research.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
The history of neuroscience can be important for students and
researchers who can use insights from the history of science
to illuminate their work. By methodologically investigatinghistorical data, models, hypotheses and experiments, alternatives
to contemporary theories can be contemplated. Lessons from
the history of neuroscience also reveal the cultural context and
social responsibility of those investigating the brain. Popular
ideas about the brain influence the direction that neuroscientists
take in their research. Especially in the past half-century, new
discoveries in neuroscience have had a widespread popular
appeal. Nerves and brain function have become a powerful
analogy in spheres of thought far removed from neuroscience.
In order to avoid repeating prejudices, neuroscientists can take a
history of science approach to their discipline.
Because history points out the flaws and problems with
past research, it has been suggested that it be ‘‘X-rated,’’ as
the focus has moved away from the search for the ‘‘objective
truths’’ in history to the more subjective ‘‘memory’’ approach
to history, with all its errors, omissions and flaws. Since all
research relies on history, and each research project has its
own history, neuroscientists rely on their historical records to
demonstrate their research integrity. Without history, whether
in the form of actual physical objects, written documents,
or personal reminiscences, neuroscientists have little context
for their contemporary work. Historical approaches can be
integrated into research and teaching in neuroscience and many
neuroscientists will find interest and pleasure in the study of the
history of neuroscience.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
RB wrote the manuscript.
FUNDING
Publication of this article was supported, in part, by grant A7441
from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council
(NSERC) of Canada.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to thank my students, Brianna Aird and Jessica Pelley
for their assistance in the preparation of previous drafts of this
article, and Aimee Wong for her help in editing the article.
REFERENCES
Adams, J. (2011). ‘‘Writing in neurosceicne’’: a course designed for
neuroscience undergraduate students. J. Undergrad. Neurosci. Educ. 10,
A50–A57.
Akil, H., Martone, M. E., and Van Essen, D. C. (2011). Challenges
and opportunities in mining neuroscience data. Science 331, 708–712.
doi: 10.1126/science.1199305
Albrecht-Carrie, R. (1951). Of science, its history and the teaching thereof. Sci.
Mon. 73, 16–24.
Armstrong, R. A. (2013). What causes Alzheimer’s disease? Folia Neuropathol. 51,
169–188. doi: 10.5114/fn.2013.37702
Arnold, K., and Söderqvist, T. (2011). Medical instruments in museums:
immediate impressions and historical meanings. Isis 102, 718–729.
doi: 10.1086/663613Aubry, J. M., Dayer, A., Perroud, N., Piguet, C., Nallet, A., and Favre, S. (2014).
Retraction of ‘‘Childhood maltreatment and methylation of the glucocorticoid
receptor gene NR3C1 in bipolar disorder’’. Br. J. Psychiatry 205, 164.
doi: 10.1192/bjp.205.2.164a
Barnes, H. E. (1920). The historian and the history of science. Sci. Mon. 11,
112–126.
Bickle, J. (2016). Revolutions in neuroscience: tool development. Front. Syst.
Neurosci. 10:24. doi: 10.3389/fnsys.2016.00024
Birke, L. I. A., and Sadler, D. (1984). Scent-marking behaviour in response to
conspecific odours by the rat, Rattus norvegicus .Anim. Behav. 32, 493–500.
doi: 10.1016/s0003-3472(84)80286-9
Bloor, D., Barnes, B., and Henry, J. (1996). Scientific Knowledge: A Sociological
Analysis . Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Bliquez, L. J. (1982). The Tools of Asclepius: the surgical gear of the Greeks and
Romans. Vet. Surg. 11, 150–156. doi: 10.1111/j.1532-950x.1982.tb00692.x
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 13 May 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 82

Brown Why Study the History of Neuroscience?
Boehlich, W. (Eds). (1990). The Letters of Sigmund Freud to Eduard Silberstein,
1871–1881. Translated by Jeffrey M. Masson. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Borghi, J. A., and Van Gulick, A. E. (2018). Data management and sharing
in neuroimaging: practices and perceptions of MRI researchers. PLoS One
13:e0200562. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0200562
Brainard, J. (2018). Rethinking retractions. Science 362, 390–393.
doi: 10.1126/science.362.6413.390
Breasted, J. H. (1930). The Edwin Smith Surgical Papyrus. Chicago, IL: University
of Chicago Press.
Brown, R. E., Molnár, Z., Filaretova, L., Ostrovskiy, M. A., Piccolino, M., and
Lorusso, L. (2017). The 100th anniversary of the Russian Pavlov Physiological
Society. Physiology 32, 402–407. doi: 10.1152/physiol.00023.2017
Brown, R. E. (1978). Hormonal control of odor preferences and urine-marking
in male and female rats. Physiol. Behav. 20, 21–24. doi: 10.1016/0031-
9384(78)90197-x
Brown, R. E. (1991). Effects of rearing condition, gender, and sexual experience on
odor preferences and urine-marking in Long-Evans rats. Anim. Learn. Behav.
19, 18–28. doi: 10.3758/bf03197856
Brown, R. E. (2007a). Alfred McCoy, Hebb, the CIA and torture. J. Hist. Behav. Sci.
43, 205–213. doi: 10.1002/jhbs.20225
Brown, R. E. (2007b). The life and work of Donald Olding Hebb, Canada’s
greatest psychologist. Proc. N. S. Inst. Sci. 44, 1–25. doi: 10.15273/pnsis.v44
i1.3880
Brown, R. E. (2014). ‘‘Leonardo Da Vinci and the search for the anatomical basis of
the soul,’’ in Program No. 21.04SA/UU24. 2014 Neuroscience Meeting Planner
(Washington DC: Society for Neuroscience).
Brown, R. E. (2016). Hebb and Cattell: the genesis of the theory of fluid and
crystallized intelligence. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 10:606. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.
2016.00606
Brown, R. E., and Milner, P. M. (2003). The legacy of Donald O. Hebb: more
than the Hebb synapse. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 4, 1013–1019. doi: 10.1038/
nrn1257
Brush, S. G. (1974). Should the history of neuroscience be rated X?: the
way scientists behave (according to historians) might not be a good
model for students. Science 183, 1164–1172. doi: 10.1126/science.183.
4130.1164
Bzdok, D., and Yeo, B. T. T. (2017). Inference in the age of big data: future
perspectives on neuroscience. Neuroimage 155, 549–564. doi: 10.1016/j.
neuroimage.2017.04.061
Cajal, S. R. (1937/1989). Recollections of My Life. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Carr, E. H. (1961). What is History? Cambridge: University of Cambridge Press.
Casper, S. T. (2014). History and neuroscience: an integrative legacy. Isis105,
123–132. doi: 10.1086/675554
Ceccarelli, L. (2002). A scientific rhetoric [Review of Communicating Science
by Alan G. Gross, Joseph E. Harmon and Michael Reidy]. Science 298:757.
doi: 10.1126/science.1076841
Chang, B., and Molnár, Z. (2015). Practical neuroanatomy teaching in the 21st
century. Ann. Neurol. 77, 911–916. doi: 10.1002/ana.24405
Cheung, K. H., Lim, E., Samwald, M., Chen, H., Marenco, L., Holford, M. E.,
et al. (2009). Approaches to neuroscience data integration. Brief. Bioinform. 10,
345–353. doi: 10.1093/bib/bbp029
Cooter, R. (2014). Neural veils and the will to historical critique: why
historians of science need to take the Neuro-turn seriously. Isis105, 145–154.
doi: 10.1086/675556
Cubinkova, V., Valachova, B., Uhrinova, I., Brezovakova, V., Smolek, T.,
Jadhav, S., et al. (2018). Alternative hypotheses related to Alzheimer’s disease.
Bratisl. Lek. Listy 119, 210–216. doi: 10.4149/BLL_2018_039
Cubitt, G. (2007). History and Memory. Manchester: Manchester University Press.
Dawkins, R. (2013). An Appetite for Wonder: The Making of A Scientist. A Memoir.
London: Bantam.
Dronkers, N. F., Plaisant, O., Iba-Zizen, M. T., and Cabanis, E. A. (2007). Paul
Broca’s historic cases: high resolution MR imaging of the brains of Leborgne
and Lelong. Brain 130, 1432–1441. doi: 10.1093/brain/awm042
Eccles, J. C., and Gibson, W. C. (1979). Sherrington: His Life and Thought. Berlin:
Springer-Verlag.
Edelman, G. M. (2006). Second Nature: Brain Science and Human Knowledge. New
Haven, CT: Yale University Press.Edwards, D. (2010). The Lab: Creativity and Culture. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Elton, G. R. (1967). The Practice of History. New York, NY: Thomas Y. Crowell.
Falk, R., and Falk, R. (2007). ‘‘Why should scientists become historians?,’’ in
Positioning the History of Science , eds K. Gavroglu and J. Rean (New York, NY:
Springer), 43–48.
Finger, S. (1994). The Origins of Neuroscience: A History of Explorations Into Brain
Function. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Finger, S. (2000). Minds Behind the Brain: A History of the Pioneers and Their
Discoveries. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Fobbs, A. J. Jr., and Johnson, J. I. (2011). Brain collections at the national museum
of health and medicine. Ann. N Y Acad. Sci. 1225, E20–E29. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-
6632.2011.06036.x
Frazzetto, G. (2011). How to bridge neuroscience, society, and culture. PLoS Biol.
9:e1001178. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001178
Frazzetto, G., and Anker, S. (2009). Neuroculture. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 10, 815–821.
doi: 10.1038/nrn2736
Freeman, J. (2015). Open source tools for large-scale neuroscience. Curr. Opin.
Neurobiol. 32, 156–163. doi: 10.1016/j.conb.2015.04.002
Galliano, E., Mazzarello, P., and D’Angelo, E. (2010). Discovery and rediscoveries
of Golgi cells. J. Physiol. 588, 3639–3655. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2010.
189605
Garcia-Lopez, P. (2012). Sculpting the brain. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 6:5.
doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2012.00005
Gilmore, R. O., Diaz, M. T., Wyble, B. A., and Yarkoni, T. (2017). Progress toward
openness, transparency, and reproducibility in cognitive neuroscience. Ann. N
Y Acad. Sci. 1396, 5–18. doi: 10.1111/nyas.13325
Glickstein, M. (2014). Neuroscience: A Historical Introduction. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Godfrey-Smith, P. (2003). Theory and Reality: An Introduction to the Philosophy of
Science. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Goldenring, J. R. (2010). Innocence and due diligence: managing unfounded
allegations of scientific misconduct. Acad. Med. 85, 527–530. doi: 10.1097/acm.
0b013e3181cd4c7a
Goodfield, J. (1981). An Imagined World: A Story of Scientific Discovery. London:
Penguin Books.
Gorgolewski, K. J., Auer, T., Calhoun, V. D., Craddock, R. C., Das, S., Duff, E. P.,
et al. (2016). The brain imaging data structure, a format for organizing
and describing outputs of neuroimaging experiments. Sci. Data 3:160044.
doi: 10.1038/sdata.2016.44
Gorgolewski, K. J., and Poldrack, R. A. (2016). A practical guide for improving
transparency and reproducibility in neuroimaging research. PLoS Biol.
14:e1002506. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1002506
Grainger, T. H. (1956). Why study the history of science? Improv. Coll. Univ.
Teach. 4, 79–82. doi: 10.1080/00193089.1956.10533944
Gregory, K., Khalsa, S. J., Michener, W. K., Psomopoulos, F. E., de Waard, A., and
Wu, M. (2018). Eleven quick tips for finding research data. PLoS Comput Biol.
14:e1006038. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006038
Grisham, W., Lom, B., Lanyon, L., and Ramos, R. L. (2016). Proposed training to
meet challenges of large- scale data in neuroscience. Front. Neuroinform. 10:28.
doi: 10.3389/fninf.2016.00028
Grisham, W., Schottler, N. A., Valli-Marill, J., Beck, L., and Beatty, J. (2010).
Teaching bioinformatics and neuroinformatics by using free web-based tools.
CBE Life Sci. Educ. 9, 98–107. doi: 10.1187/cbe.09-11-0079
Gross, C. G. (2009). Three before their time: neuroscientists whose ideas
were ignored by their contemporaries. Exp. Brain Res. 192, 321–334.
doi: 10.1007/s00221-008-1481-y
Gross, A. G., Harmon, J. E., and Reidy, M. (2002). Communicating Science.
The Scientific Article From the 17th Century to the Present. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Guillery, R. W. (2005). Observations of synaptic strutures: origins of the neuron
doctrine and its current status. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 360,
1281–1307. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2003.1459
Gunsalus, C. K., and Robinson, A. D. (2018). Nine pitfalls of research misconduct.
Nature 557, 297–299. doi: 10.1038/d41586-018-05145-6
Hardy, J. (2017). The discovery of Alzheimer-causing mutations in the APP
gene and the formulation of the ‘‘amyloid cascade hypothesis’’. FEBS J. 284,
1040–1044. doi: 10.1111/febs.14004
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 14 May 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 82

Brown Why Study the History of Neuroscience?
Hanson, M. (1999). Hippocrates: On Head Wounds. Translation and Commentary
by Maury Hanson CMG I 4,1. Berlin: Corpvs Medicorvm Graecorvm.
Hebb, D. O. (1949/2002). The Organization of Behaviour: A Neuropsychological
Theory. New York, NY: Wiley. [Reprinted 2002 by Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, Mahwah, New Jersey]
Hebb, D. O. (1980). ‘‘D. O. Hebb,’’ in A History of Psychology in Autobiography,
Vol VII , ed. G. Lindzey (San Francisco: WH Freeman), 273–309.
Hellman, C. D. (1958). George Sarton, historian of science and new humanist.
Science 128, 641–644. doi: 10.1126/science.128.3325.641
Hoffman, D. J., Reynolds, R. M., and Hardy, D. B. (2017). Developmental origins
of health and disease: current knowledge and potential mechanisms. Nutr. Rev.
75, 951–970. doi: 10.1093/nutrit/nux053
Ingram, C. (2016). How and why you should manage your research data: a guide
for researchers: an introduction to engaging with research data management
processes. Available online at: https://www.jisc.ac.uk/guides/how-and-why-
you-should-manage- your-research-data# [Accessed March 15, 2019].
Ioannidis, J. P. (2005). Why most published research findings are false. PLoS Med.
2:e124. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0020124
Ioannidis, J. P. (2014). How to make more published research true. PLoS Med.
11:e1001747. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1001747
Iqbal, S. A., Wallach, J. D., Khoury, M. J., Schully, S. D., and Ioannidis, J. P.
(2016). Reproducible research practices and transparency across the
biomedical literature. PLoS Biol. 14:e1002333. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.10
02333
Iwaniuk, A. N. (2010). Comparative brain collections are an indispensable
resource for evolutionary neurobiology. Brain Behav. Evol. 76, 87–88.
doi: 10.1159/000320214
Iwaniuk, A. N. (2011). The importance of scientific collecting and natural history
museums for comparative neuroanatomy. Ann. N Y Acad. Sci. 1225, E1–E19.
doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2011.05977.x
Jerison, H. J. (1977). Should phrenology be rediscovered? Curr. Anthropol. 18,
744–746. doi: 10.1086/201981
Jones, O. P., Alfaro-Almagro, F., and Jbabdi, S. (2018). An empirical, 21st century
evaluation of phrenology. bioRxiv [Preprint]. doi: 10.1101/243089
Jimerson, R. C. (2003). Archives and memory. OCLC Syst. Serv. 19, 89–95.
doi: 10.1108/10650750310490289
Južniˇ c, S. (2016). History of history of physics. Acta Balt. Hist. Philos. Sci. 4, 5–26.
doi: 10.11590/abhps.2016.2.01
Kallestinova, E. D. (2011). How to write your first research paper. Yale J. Biol. Med.
84, 181–190.
Keverne, E. B., Pfaff, D. W., and Tabansky, I. (2015). Epigenetic changes in
the developing brain: effects on behavior. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 112,
6789–6795. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1501482112
Keverne, E. B. (2014). Significance of epigenetics for understanding brain
development, brain evolution and behaviour. Neuroscience 264, 207–217.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2012.11.030
Kleywegt, G. J., Velankar, S., and Patwardhan, A. (2018). Structural biology data
archiving—where we are and what lies ahead. FEBS Lett. 592, 2153–2167.
doi: 10.1002/1873-3468.13086
Kruger, L., and Otis, T. S. (2007). Whither withered Golgi? A retrospective
evaluation of reticularist and synaptic constructs. Brain Res. Bull. 72, 201–207.
doi: 10.1016/j.brainresbull.2006.11.016
Kuhn, T. (1962). On the Structure of Scientific Revolutions. Chicago, IL: University
of Chicago Press.
Lee, J. L. C., Nader, K., and Schiller, D. (2017). An update on memory
reconsolidation updating. Trends Cogn. Sci. 21, 531–545. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.
2017.04.006
Lindberg, D. C. (2007). The Beginnings of Western Science. The European Scientific
Tradition in Philosophical, Religious and Institutional Context, Prehistory to
A.D. 1450. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Loftus, E. (2003). Our changeable memories: legal and practical implications. Nat.
Rev. Neurosci. 4, 231–234. doi: 10.1038/nrn1054
Loftus, E. F., and Palmer, J. C. (1974). Reconstruction of auto-mobile destruction:
an example of the interaction between language and memory. J. Verbal Learn.
Verbal Behav. 13, 585–589. doi: 10.1016/s0022-5371(74)80011-3
LoLordo, V. M., and Ross, R. T. (1990). Retraction of Ross and LoLordo findings
concerning blocking in serial feature-positive discriminations. J. Exp. Psychol.
Anim. Behav. Process. 16, 402–406. doi: 10.1037/0097-7403.16.4.402López-Muñoz, F., and Alamo, C. (2009). Historical evolution of
the neurotransmission concept. J. Neural Transm. 116, 515–533.
doi: 10.1007/s00702-009-0213-1
Lorusso, L., Brown, R. E., Motta, S., Gasparello, A., Barbara, J.-G., Molnár, Z., et al.
(2018). Neuroscience without borders: preserving the history of neuroscience.
Eur. J. Neurosci. 48, 2099–2109. doi: 10.1111/ejn.14101
Maienschein, J. (2000). Why study history for science? Biol. Philos. 15, 339–348.
doi: 10.1023/a:1006733114136
Maienschein, J., Laubichler, M., and Loettgers, A. (2008). How can history of
science matter to scientists? Isis99, 341–349. doi: 10.1086/588692
Manger, P. R. (2011). Collectibles and collections for comparative and
evolutionary neurobiological research in Africa. Ann. N Y Acad. Sci. 1225,
E85–E93. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2010.05948.x
Makin, S. (2018). The amyloid hypothesis on trial. Nature 559, S4–S7. doi: 10.
1038/d41586-018-05719-4
Matiasz, N. J., Wood, J., Doshi, P., Speier, W., Beckemeyer, B., Wang, W., et al.
(2018). ResearchMaps.org for integrating and planning research. PLoS One
13:e0195271. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0195271
Mattern, S. P. (2013). The Prince of Medicine. Galen and the Roman Empire. New
York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Mazzarello, P. (2010). Golgi. A Biography of the Founder of Modern Neuroscience.
Oxford: Oxford University Press. [Translated by Aldo Badiani and Henry A.
Buchtel]
McNeill, W. (1985). Why study history? American historical association. Available
online at: https://www.historians.org/about-aha-and-membership/aha-
history-and-archives/historical-archives/why-study-history [Accessed March
15, 2019].
Merton, R. (1962). The Sociology of Science: Theoretical and Empirical
Investigations. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Meulders, M. (2010). Helmholtz. From Enlightenment to Neurosceince. Cambridge,
MA: The MIT Press. [Translated and edited by Laurence Garey]
Moln Kar, Z., and Brown, R. E. (2010). Insights into the life of Sir Charles
Sherrington. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 11, 429–436. doi: 10.1038/nrn2835
Montagu, M. F. A. (1955). Vesalius and the Galenists. Sci. Mon. 80, 230–239.
Mora, F. (2015). ‘‘Neuroculture: a new cultural revolution?’’ in Art, Aesthetics and
the Brain , eds J. P. Huston, M. Nadal, F. Mora, L. F. Agnati and C. J. C. Conde
(Oxford: Oxford University Press), 3–18.
Nature Publishing Group. (2017). Announcement: toward greater reproducibility
for life-sciences research in Nature. Nature 546:8. doi: 10.1038/546008a
Nehls, M. (2016). Unified theory of Alzheimer’s disease (UTAD): implications for
prevention and curative therapy. J. Mol. Psychiatry 4:3. doi: 10.1186/s40303-
016-0018-8
Neill, U. S. (2007). How to write a scientific masterpiece. J. Clin. Invest. 117,
3599–3602. doi: 10.1172/jci34288
Nutton, V. (2004). Ancient Medicine. London: Routledge.
O’Leary, T. P., Hussin, A. T., Gunn, R. K., and Brown, R. E. (2018). Locomotor
activity, emotionality, sensori-motor gating, learning and memory in the
APPswe/PS1dE9 mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease. Brain Res. Bull. 140,
347–354. doi: 10.1016/j.brainresbull.2018.05.021
Panourias, I. G., Skiadas, P. K., Sakas, D. E., and Marketos, S. G. (2005).
Hippocrates: a pioneer in the treatment of head injuries. Neurosurgery 57,
181–189. doi: 10.1227/01.neu.0000163416.66374.48
Parker, D. (2018). Kuhnian revolutions in neuroscience: the role of tool
development. Biol. Philos. 33:17. doi: 10.1007/s10539-018-9628-0
Perroud, N., Dayer, A., Piguet, C., Nallet, A., Favre, S., Malafosse, A., et al. (2014).
Childhood maltreatment and methylation of the glucocorticoid receptor gene
NR3C1 in bipolar disorder. Br. J. Psychiatry 204, 30–35. [Retracted in Br.
J. Psychiatry 2014, 205 (2): 164]. doi: 10.1192/bjp.bp.112.120055
Piccolino, M. (1998). Animal electricity and the birth of electrophysiology: the
legacy of Luigi Galvani. Brain Res. Bull. 46, 381–407. doi: 10.1016/s0361-
9230(98)00026-4
Plaxco, K. W. (2010). The art of writing science. Protein Sci. 19, 2261–2266.
doi: 10.1002/pro.514
Poole, R. (2008). Memory, history and the claims of the past. Mem. Stud. 1,
149–166. doi: 10.1177/1750698007088383
Redish, A. D., Kummerfeld, E., Morris, R. L., and Love, A. C. (2018).
Reproducibility failures are essential to scientific enquiry. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U S A 115, 5042–5046. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1806370115
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 15 May 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 82

Brown Why Study the History of Neuroscience?
Rivera-Orraca, L. (2009). Are museums sites of memory? New School Psychol. Bull.
6, 32–37.
Rolls, E. T. (2012). Neuroculture: On the Implications of Brain Science. New York,
NY: Oxford University Press.
Root-Bernstein, R. S. (1988). Setting the stage for discovery. Breakthroughs depend
on more than luck. Sciences , 28, 26–34.
Roth, A., Kyzar, E., Cachat, J., Stewart, A. M., Green, J., Gaikwad, S., et al.
(2013). Potential translational targets revealed by linking mouse grooming
behavioral phenotypes to gene expression using public databases. Prog.
Neuropsychopharmacol. Biol. Psychiatry 40, 312–325. doi: 10.1016/j.pnpbp.
2012.10.015
Samuel, R. (1992). Reading the signs: II. Fact-grubbers and mind-readers. Hist.
Workshop J. 33, 220–251. doi: 10.1093/hwj/33.1.220
Saper, C. B. (2015). Academic publishing, part III: how to write a research paper
(so that it will be accepted) in a high-quality journal. Ann. Neurol. 77, 8–12.
doi: 10.1002/ana.24317
Sarton, G. (1918). The teaching of the history of science. Sci. Mon. 7,
193–211.
Schacter, D. L. (1996). Searching for Memory. The Brain, The Mind, and The Past.
New York, NY: Basic Books.
Schellinck, H. M., Cyr, D. P. and Brown, R.E. (2010). How many ways can mouse
behavioral experiments go wrong? Confounding variables in mouse models of
neurodegenerative diseases and how to control them. Adv. Study Behav. 41,
255–366. doi: 10.1016/s0065-3454(10)41007-4
Schwerdtfeger, L. A. (2018). Spirals of science. Science 362:1318.
doi: 10.1126/science.362.6420.1318
Schwerdtfeger, L. A., and Tobet, S. A. (2018). From organotypic culture to body-
on-a-chip: a neuroendocrine perspective. J. Neuroendocrinol. 2018:e12650.
doi: 10.1111/jne.12650
Shepherd, G. M. (1991/2015). Foundations of the Neuron Doctrine. New York, NY:
Oxford University Press.
Shepherd, G. M. (2010). Creating Modern Neuroscience: The Revolutionary 1950s.
New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Shepherd, G. M., Greer, C. A., Mazzarello, P., and Sassoè-Pognettoc, M. (2011).
The first images of nerve cells: Golgi on the olfactory bulb 1875. Brain Res. Rev.
66, 92–105. doi: 10.1016/j.brainresrev.2010.09.009
Skinner, M. K. (2015). Environmental epigenetics and a unified theory
of the molecular aspects of evolution: a neo-Lamarckian concept that
facilitates neo-Darwinian evolution. Genome Biol. Evol. 7, 1296–1302.
doi: 10.1093/gbe/evv073
Söderqvist, T. (2002). Neurobiographies: writing lives in the history of neurology
and the neurosciences. J. Hist. Neurosci. 11, 38–48. doi: 10.1076/jhin.11.1.38.
9099
Söderqvist, T. (2007). ‘‘A new look at the genre of scientific biography,’’ in
The History and Poetics of Scientific Biography , ed. T. Söderqvist (Cornwall:
Ashgate), 1–15.
Squire, L. S. (Eds). (1996–2018). The History of Neuroscience in Autobiography,
10 Volumes. Washington, DC: Society for Neuroscience.
Star, S. L. (1983). Simplification in Scientific Work: an example from
neuroscience research. Soc. Stud. Sci. 13, 205–228. doi: 10.1177/0306312830130
02002
Steedman, C. (1980). The space of memory: in an archive. Hist. Hum. Sci. 11,
65–83. doi: 10.1177/095269519801100405
Suzuki, K. (2018). The developing world of DOHaD. J. Dev. Orig. Health Dis. 9,
266–269. doi: 10.1017/s2040174417000691Swanson, L. (2015). Neuroanatomical Terminology: A Lexicon of Classical Origins
and Historical Foundations. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Symons, A. J. A. (1934/1966). The Quest for Corvo. London: Penguin books.
Todes, D. P. (2014). Ivan Pavlov. A Russian Life in Science. New York, NY: Oxford
University Press.
Tsermoulas, G., Aidonis, A., and Flint, G. (2014). The skull of Chios: trepanation
in Hippocratic medicine. J. Neurosurg. 121, 328–332. doi: 10.3171/2014.4.
jns131886
Tullo, E. (2010). Trepanation and Roman medicine: a comparison of
osteoarchaeological remains, material culture and written texts. J. R. Coll.
Physicians Edinb. 40, 165–171. doi: 10.4997/jrcpe.2010.215
Uher, R., and Weaver, I. C. (2014a). Epigenetic traces of childhood maltreatment
in peripheral blood: a new strategy to explore gene-environment interactions.
Br. J. Psychiatry 204, 3–5. doi: 10.1192/bjp.bp.113.127209
Uher, R., and Weaver, I. C. (2014b). Retraction. Br. J. Psychiatry 205:249.
doi: 10.1192/bjp.205.3.249
Valenstein, E. S. (2002). The discovery of chemical neurotransmitters. Brain Cogn.
49, 73–95. doi: 10.1006/brcg.2001.1487
Vesalius, A. (1543). De Humani Corporis Fabrica Libri Septum. Basil: Karger.
[Translated and Annotated by D. H. Garrison and M. H. Hast. 2014. The Fabric
of the Human Body]
Vogelstein, J. T., Perlman, E., Falk, B., Baden, A., Gray Roncal, W.,
Chandrashekhar, V., et al. (2018). A community-developed open-source
computational system for big neuro data. Nat. Methods 15, 846–847.
doi: 10.1038/s41592-018-0181-1
Wachtel, N. (1986). Memory and history. Hist. Anthropol. 2, 207–224.
doi: 10.1080/02757206.1986.9960766
Watson, J. (1968). The Double Helix: A Personal Account of the Discovery of the
Structure of DNA. New York, NY: Atheneum Press.
Wiener, M., Sommer, F. T., Ives, Z. G., Poldrack, R. A., and Litt, B. (2016).
Enabling an open data ecosystem for the neurosciences. Neuron 92, 617–621.
doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2016.10.037
Zhang, W., Bai, M., Xi, Y., Hao, J., Zhang, Z., Su, C., et al. (2012). Multiple
inflammatory pathways are involved in the development and progression of
cognitive deficits in APPswe/PS1dE9 mice. Neurobiol. Aging 33, 2661–2677.
doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2011.12.023
Zhang, W., Bai, M., Xi, Y., Hao, J., Zhang, Z., Su, C., et al. (2016). Retraction notice
to ‘‘Multiple inflammatory pathways are involved in the development and
progression of cognitive deficits in APPswe/PS1dE9 mice’’ [Neurobiol. Aging
33 (2012) 2661-2677]. Neurobiol. Aging 38:219. doi: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.
2016.01.005
Zwaan, R. A., Etz, A., Lucas, R. E., and Donnellan, B. (2018). Making replication
mainstream. Behav. Brain Sci. doi: 10.1017/S0140525X17001972 [Epub ahead
of print].
Conﬂict of Interest Statement : The author declares that the research was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Copyright © 2019 Brown. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms
of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or
reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) and the
copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication in this journal
is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or
reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms .
Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 16 May 2019 | Volume 13 | Article 82