. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted October 29, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.29.346650 doi: bioRxiv preprint

## Increased orbitofrontal connectivity in misophonia

Leonardo Cerliani 1,2,* , Romke Rouw 1

1 Dept. of Psychology, Brain and Cognition, Nieuwe Achtergracht 129-B, 1018WT, University of Amsterdam.

2

*

Dept. of Psychiatry, Amsterdam Medical Center, Meibergdreef 5, 1105AZ, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Corresponding author. E-mail: leonardo.cerliani@gmail.com

## Abstract

For individuals with misophonia, specific innocuous sensory stimuli - such as hearing another person chewing or breathing - evoke strong negative emotional and physiological responses, such as extreme anger,  disgust,  stress  and  anxiety.  Instead  people  with  misophonia do not experience  or  display atypical  reactions  to generic aversive sounds such as screams or nails scratching on a blackboard. Misophonia  appears  to  be  unrelated  to  neurological  trauma  or  hearing  deficit,  and  features  a characteristic developmental pattern. Its aetiology is currently unknown.

The few previous fMRI studies on misophonia showed that sufferers feature increased dorsal anterior insula activity during trigger vs. generic aversive sounds. While this effect likely reflects the saliency associated with the perception of trigger sounds in people with misophonia, in the present fMRI study we investigate the neural mechanisms underlying the emotional reaction to trigger stimuli. To this aim, we probe the task-dependent connectivity of mid-cingulate, medial premotor and ventrolateral premotor cortex.  We observe that only in participants with misophonia the presentation of trigger audio-visuals prompts an increased interaction of these three brain regions with  the lateral orbitofrontal cortex. This brain region is crucial for behavioural inhibition mediated by cognitive and emotional content (such as in reward-reversal learning) and is part of the temporo-amygdala-orbitofrontal network, which integrates visceral and emotional  states with cognition and behaviour. We also observe that in people with misophonia trigger sounds prompt a significant increase in the interaction between mid-cingulate and the primary auditory cortex.

Our  study  replicates previous  results and  expands  the  network  of  brain  regions  involved  in misophonia.  The  involvement  of  the  orbitofrontal  cortex  suggests  a  defective  functioning  of high-order integrative processes allowing the reappraisal of experience-dependent negative emotional association  with  harmless  sensory  stimuli,  and  sheds  light  on  the  mechanisms  underlying  the compulsive  nature  of  the  misophonic  reaction.  The increased  interaction,  rather  than  the  overall activity,  of  the  primary  auditory  cortex  with  the  mid-cingulate  supports  the  hypothesis  that  the emotional response in misophonia is subserved by an indirect auditory-limbic pathway processing the subjective valence of specific sounds, rather than their physical properties alone.

. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted October 29, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.29.346650 doi: bioRxiv preprint

## Introduction

Misophonia is  a  recently  described  neurobehavioural  condition  where specific innocuous 'trigger' sounds -  typically  human-generated sounds such as chewing, sniffing or breathing - evoke a very strong negative emotional response which manifests itself with anxiety, avoidance, deep anger and occasionally aggressive reactions (Jastreboff and Jastreboff, 2001; Edelstein et al. , 2013; Johnson et al. ,  2013; Schröder et  al. ,  2013; Wu et  al. ,  2014).  These emotional and behavioral patterns have detrimental effects on the social and professional life of the sufferers, potentially leading to extreme behavioural responses such as avoiding any gatherings, erupting in angry outbursts during meals, or experiencing  extreme difficulty in focussing their attention on the workplace (Rouw and Erfanian, 2018; Jager et al. , 2020).

The emotional responses observed in misophonia occur compulsively, despite sufferers being aware of the disproportion of their emotional reaction with respect to the nature of the trigger stimuli, and regardless of the volume of trigger sounds. The latter feature clearly distinguishes misophonia from hyperacusis (Jastreboff and Jastreboff, 2001; Tyler et al. , 2014), qualified as a hypersensitivity to the physical properties of any sound (e.g. loudness, frequency spectrum), although a comorbidity between the two conditions is common (Jastreboff and Jastreboff, 2015). However misophonia can also not be qualified as hyperresponsivity to the subjective valence of generally aversive sounds, as sufferers have normal autonomic responses and report experiencing different feelings when hearing generic aversive sounds  (e.g.,  baby  crying,  fire  alarms)  and  trigger  sounds (Kumar et  al. ,  2017).  While there  is evidence of comorbidity with obsessive-compulsive and mood disorders, it has been suggested that misophonia  can  be  distinct  from a secondary manifestation  of  a  major neuropsychiatric  disorder (Jager et al. , 2020). Currently misophonia is however not yet contemplated by psychiatric diagnostic manuals, and its exact definition is still debated (Kumar and Griffiths, 2017, Schröder et al. , 2017 b ).

The  originally proposed  neurological  model  for  misophonia  suggests  an  atypically  enhanced interaction between sensory - especially auditory - and limbic systems (Jastreboff and Hazell, 2004; Edelstein et  al. ,  2013; Jastreboff  and Jastreboff,  2015).  Recently,  neuroimaging studies  began to identify  the  network  of  brain  regions  which  interact  to  generate  the  emotional  and behavioural response  to  trigger  stimuli  in  misophonia.  These studies  highlighted  the presence of an increased activity  in  the  anterior  dorsal  insula  during  trigger  stimuli  compared to generic  aversive  sounds (Kumar et  al. ,  2017). While the insula represents an important node for the low-level integration of sensory and emotional, as well as autonomic and cognitive information (Mesulam and Mufson, 1985; Gogolla, 2017), increases in its activity - and especially in its anterior division - can be elicited by any event  impacting  the  emotional  and autonomic homeostasis of the  organisms,  such as pain, social exclusion, gambling,  (Critchley, 2005;  Seeley et al. , 2007;  Craig,  2009;  Kurth et al. , 2010; Nieuwenhuys,  2012).  Thus  the  increased  insular  activity  recorded  during  trigger  stimuli  cannot explain per se why sufferers of misophonia react to these sounds differently from aversive sounds or other emotionally-loaded stimuli (Craig, 2010; Cauda et al. , 2012; Perini et al. , 2018).

Importantly in the same study (Kumar et al. , 2017) it was shown that the presentation of misophonic stimuli triggered an increased interaction (functional connectivity) between the anterior dorsal insula and the default-mode network (Fox et  al. ,  2005). Instead no alteration was found in the activity or

. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted October 29, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.29.346650 doi: bioRxiv preprint connectivity  of  the  auditory  cortex,  and  only  a  marginally  significant  effect  was  found  in  the functional connectivity of the amygdala (Kumar et al. , 2017). This important evidence suggests that in misophonia the extreme emotional reaction to trigger stimuli is not subserved by direct sensory-limbic circuits  responding to the physical properties of the sound alone, but rather mediated by high-level cognitive associations between the stimulus and its subjective valence.

Given  that  the  dorsal  anterior  insula  and the  default  mode network are respectively  involved  in estimating  the  subjective  valence  of  the  sensory  stimuli  (Craig,  2009),  and in  internally  directed cognitive processes - such as social cognition and autobiographical memory (Margulies et al. , 2016) these findings shed light on the perceptual processes involved in misophonia, but they leave open the question of which brain regions and neural networks are involved in the generation of the emotional response to trigger stimuli.

Besides  the  anterior  insula,  other  brain regions show increased activity during trigger stimuli in a whole-brain corrected analysis (Kumar et al. , 2017), namely the mid-cingulate cortex (MCC) - which together with the anterior insula defines the saliency network (Seeley et al. , 2007) - the supplementary motor area (SMA) and the ventrolateral premotor cortex (vlPMC). All these regions are likely to play an  important  role  in  the  misophonic response,  by prompting an autonomic-driven emotional  and behavioural response such as the urge to avoid or react to the trigger sounds (Schröder et al. , 2013; Perini et  al. ,  2020).  However, the activity  of  these  brain  regions in misophonia has not yet been further investigated.

In  the  present  study  we use fMRI to systematically  investigate  the  presence  of alterations  in the task-dependent connectivity across all brain regions whose activity is enhanced in misophonia when experiencing trigger stimuli. To this aim, we contrast the brain response to misophonic triggers with that  associated  with  sounds generally  perceived  to  be aversive (e.g., nails on chalkboard) but not eliciting  atypical  emotional  response  in  people  with  misophonia.  This  contributes  to  define  the network of regions  specifically  involved  in this  complex association of innocuous sensory stimuli with extremely negative emotional responses in misophonia. We expected this investigation to bring further evidence to the hypothesis that misophonia is grounded on high-order cognitive associations, rather than in an atypical perception of the trigger sounds. Another non-secondary aim of the present study was to replicate previous fMRI results, given the current paucity of neuroimaging studies on misophonia.

. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted October 29, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.29.346650 doi: bioRxiv preprint

## Methods

## Participants

In  a  preliminary  behavioural  study,  we examined a large number of individuals with misophonic complaints  (N=232),  measuring  severity  and  nature  of  the  misophonic  complaints  (Rouw and Erfanian, 2018). In this relatively young research field, an agreed upon diagnostic tool for misophonia is  still  lacking.  A number of questionnaires  have been proposed by researchers  and clinicians to measure the nature and severity of misophonic complaints (Fitzmaurice, 2010; Edelstein et al. , 2013; Schröder et al. , 2013; Wu et al. , 2014; Bauman, 2015; Dozier, 2015). The commonalities across these questionnaires  highlights  which  characteristics  are  currently  viewed  as  key  to  the  condition  of misophonia.  The misophonia symptoms severity (MSS) questionnaire we used for the selection of participants  is  a  collection  of  15  items  measuring  at  an  interval  scale  the  common features of misophonia identified in previously proposed questionnaires (see Supplementary materials).

Participants rated statements, such as I feel angry when I hear/see a trigger on a 5-point scale, ranging from 'Strongly disagree' (1) to "Strongly agree" (5). A misophonia symptoms severity (MSS) score was calculated as the mean of all 15 items. This preliminary study showed that our questionnaire has high scale reliability (Cronbach's alpha 15 items; α = 0.97; Guttman's lambda-2 α = 0.97), and created a strong basis for selecting participants to invite for the neuroimaging  experiment.  For  the neuroimaging study,  we invited  participants  with  very  high MSS scores (not lower than 3 in any item), and did not meet the following exclusion criteria: visual impairments, age below 18 or above 60 years old, presence of non-removable  metal  objects  in  the  body,  (possible) pregnancy  and claustrophobia.

We checked the presence of misophonia complaints in control subjects with an interview as well as with the MSS questionnaire. In total, thirty-nine participants were included in the present analyses; 19 individuals with misophonia (15 female and 4 male, mean age 31 years, range 18-58) and 20 controls (15 female and 5 male, mean age 29 years , range 19-53). Groups were matched by gender and age (T (37) = 0.4, p = 0.69). The mean score on the MSS questionnaire in the misophonia subject group was 3.9 (score range: 3.2 to 4.5). The mean score for the control group was 1.45 (scores range: 1.0 to 2.2). The MSS scores were significantly higher in people with misophonia (T (37) = 18, p &lt; 0.0001).

## fMRI paradigm and behavioural ratings

We used  audio-visual  stimuli,  rather  than  only  sounds  as  in  (Kumar et al. , 2017),  to  better approximate  real-life  conditions  (Schröder et  al. , 2019).  Misophonic  stimuli  (hereafter:  'trigger stimuli') were 12-second audio-visuals in which an actor produced sounds that were known to elicit a particularly negative emotional response (anger, disgust) in our participants with misophonia, such as chewing an apple, heavily inhaling with the nose and clearing the throat. These trigger stimuli were contrasted with clips presenting generically aversive sounds (e.g. nails on a chalkboard) and with clips in which the actor created neutral sounds (e.g. peeling an apple, shaking a bottle of water).

. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted October 29, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.29.346650 doi: bioRxiv preprint

For each of  three  categories  of  audio-visuals - trigger, aversive, neutral - we presented inside the scanner six clips of 12 sec. each. Each clip was preceded by a short text description of 2 sec. and followed by a rating time of 6 sec. Audio-visual  presentation and rating time were separated by blank screens of variable durations from 1 to 5 seconds.

After the presentation of each audio-visual, participants were asked to evaluate their own emotional reaction (positive or negative) to that particular audio-visual clip. They responded by moving a cursor on  the  screen  (by  pressing  the  left  or  right  button  on  the  response  box)  along  a  dotted  line, representing an 11 points Likert scale ranging from minus 5 (very negative) to 0 (neither negative nor positive)  to plus 5 (very positive). Since in the neuroimaging analyses a more negative rating is a proxy for increasing unpleasantness associated with different stimuli, in the results reported below the ratings are reversed, so that higher scores reflect more negative feelings and increasing unpleasantness (see Figure 1). We choose to use a rating scheme that would also cover positive feelings to avoid biasing  the  ratings  towards negative feelings also for stimuli which might have been perceived as neutral or positive.

Each participant completed a sequence of 3 runs for the entire paradigm. The order of the clips was different across the three runs, but identical for all subjects within each run. Blank screen time always amounted to 108 sec. per run, but the order of the breaks was randomized for each participant and each run. In total, each run lasted 468 sec.

## MRI data acquisition

MRI images were acquired at the Spinoza Center for Neuroimaging (Amsterdam, NL) on a Philips 3T Achieva scanner equipped with a 32-channel  head coil.  For each participant,  fMRI images were acquired with a Philips T2* FEEPI sequence with the following parameters: repetition time (TR) = 2.0 sec, echo time (TE) = 27.63 ms, flip angle = 76.10°, voxel size = 3x3x3 mm, slice gap = 0.3 mm, 37 axial slices, FOV=240x121.8x240. For each of the three fMRI runs, 234 whole-brain images were acquired.  Participants  were  instructed  to  stay  still  and  relax  their  head.  Head movements were restrained  with  padding  cushions  around the  head within  the  head coil.  In  the  same session,  an anatomical T1w image covering the whole brain was acquired, with the following parameters: 220 axial slices, voxel resolution = 1 mm  isotropic, TE = 3.86 ms, TR = 8365 ms, flip angle = 8°. 3

## Analysis of movie ratings

The analysis of movie ratings was carried out in JASP (JASP Team, 2020). Besides including these ratings in our fMRI model, we examined this data alone to test for the expected difference in ratings between  groups  only  for  trigger stimuli. For  each  participant, ratings were  averaged  across audio-visuals of the same category, to obtain one mean rating for trigger, aversive and neutral movies per participant.

. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted October 29, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.29.346650 doi: bioRxiv preprint

## fMRI data analysis

## Preprocessing

Analysis of fMRI and T1w data were carried out using the FSL FMRIB Software Library (Woolrich et al. , 2009; Jenkinson et al. , 2012). The T1w image of each participant was skull-stripped using bet2 (Smith, 2002) and the results visually inspected. The fMRI data of each participant was preprocessed with the following  parameters:  motion  correction  using  MCFLIRT  (Jenkinson et al. , 2002); slice-timing correction; non-brain removal (Smith, 2002); spatial smoothing with a Gaussian kernel of FWHM 5 mm; grand-mean intensity normalisation of the entire 4D dataset by a single multiplicative factor; high  pass  temporal  filtering  (Gaussian-weighted  least-squares  straight  line  fitting,  with sigma=50.0s).

## Standard group-by-task fMRI analysis

The effect of each task of interest - trigger, aversive or neutral audio-visuals - on brain activity was modelled  as  a  boxcar  spanning  the  duration  of  the  audio-visual,  convolved  with  a  standard haemodynamic  response  function.  The  amplitude  of  the  boxcar  reflected  the  (mean  corrected) increasing  perceived  unpleasantness  -  derived  from the  behavioural  ratings  -  that  the  participant associated with each audio-visual. Therefore this predictor modelled the effect of the audio-visual, modulated by the associated unpleasantness rating (Poline et al. , 2007). We also generated confound predictors for the rating period, button press during the rating period (orthogonalized with respect to the rating period predictor), text presented before the audio-visuals. The temporal derivatives of these 6 predictors were also added to the model, as well as 18 additional confound predictors modelling motion parameters.

We then defined contrasts of parameter estimates (COPEs) to compare brain activity between each category of stimuli: Trigger &gt; Aversive; Trigger &gt; Neutral; Aversive &gt; Neutral. For each participant, the contrast of parameter estimates maps (COPEs) were averaged across the three runs in a 2nd-level analysis using a fixed effect model.  Group-level  effects  were  then  estimated  in  a  3rd-level mixed-effect analysis using FLAME-1 (Woolrich et al. , 2004) including the average COPEs from the 2nd-level analysis of each participant. Z image statistics were thresholded using clusters determined by Z &gt; 3.1 and a corrected cluster significance (using Gaussian Random Fields) of p=0.05 (Worsley, 2001).

## Psychophysiological interaction

Psychophysiological interactions (PPI) are task-dependent variations in the functional connectivity that  is,  in the temporal synchronization - between the activity of two brain regions (Friston et  al. , 1997).

. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted October 29, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.29.346650 doi: bioRxiv preprint

The standard  group-by-task  fMRI analysis  detailed  above detects brain regions where an average increase in activity - across all the time of the audio-visual - is observed when contrasting the task of interest (trigger audio-visuals) with a control condition (aversive or neutral audio-visuals). Instead the PPI analysis probes the synchronization of brain activity between two brain regions due to the task . This  allows  to  differentiate  regions  which interact  with  each other  during  the  task,  from regions which, although both activated by the task, work independently (O'Reilly et al. , 2012).

The results of PPI can be interpreted as a modulatory effect of the task on the interaction between two brain regions, or as the modulatory activity of one brain region on another brain region when the latter is  (or  both  are)  processing  a  stimulus  (See  Fig.  5 in  (Friston et  al. ,  1997)). Importantly, regions associated with this modulatory activity by the standard fMRI analysis, as the increase in functional connectivity between two brain regions is not necessarily accompanied by an increase in brain activity (or more precisely in the intensity of the blood-oxygen-level dependent signal, which is measured by the fMRI acquisition) during the task of interest with respect to the control condition.

PPI is practically implemented by adding two predictors to the model used in the standard analysis: (1) a physiological predictor, represented by the time course of the (seed) region of interest - usually identified  in  the  initial  standard  analysis;  (2)  a  psychophysiological  predictor,  represented  by the element-by-element  multiplication  between  the  task  predictor  (psychological  predictor)  and  the physiological predictor (Friston et al. , 1997; O'Reilly et al. , 2012; Di et al. , 2020).

In our study, we seeded one PPI analysis in each of the clusters where a significant increase in brain activity was detected when contrasting Trigger &gt; Aversive stimuli in the initial standard analysis. For each cluster, the time course of the signal was extracted using a sphere of 5 mm radius centered on the local maxima, and demeaned across time points. This generated a COPE map quantifying the effect of the PPI predictor for each task (trigger, aversive, neutral). These COPE maps were then processed at the group level as in the standard analysis, to yield corrected thresholded Z image statistics of the group differences for each task. Therefore, also in this case Z image statistics were thresholded using clusters determined by Z &gt; 3.1 and a corrected cluster significance (using Gaussian Random Fields) of p=0.05 (Worsley, 2001).

## Results

## Perceived unpleasantness in audio-visuals

Figure  1  shows  the  distribution  of  the  average  audio-visual  ratings,  across  stimuli  of  the  same category, in people with misophonia and in control participants. A two-way ANOVA with factors for stimuli and groups shows a significant interaction between the factors (F (2,111) = 20.94, p &lt; .001 ω  = 2 0.17) as well as a main effect of both stimuli (F (2,111) = 103.6, p &lt; .001 ω  = 0.47) and of group (F 2 (1,111) = 26.51, p &lt; .001 ω  = 0.074). Crucially, the two groups significantly differ only in the ratings for 2 Trigger  stimuli  (T (76) = 8.23,  p  &lt; 2.9e-9)  as  misophonia  sufferers  rate  trigger  sounds  as  more unpleasant, while there is no significant difference in perceived unpleasantness for Aversive (T (76) = 0.48, p = 0.63) or Neutral (T (76) = 0.21, p = 0.83) stimuli.

Fig. 1 - Audio-visual ratings during the fMRI task. Higher values indicate that the stimuli are perceived as more unpleasant. For each participant, we considered the average rating across stimuli in each category (Neutral, Aversive, Trigger). Boxplots display the median and the first and third interquartile. Diamonds indicate participants whose rating for that category was bigger than 1.5 times the interquartile range, the latter represented by the whiskers.

## Standard task-by-group fMRI analysis

In  the  Trigger  &gt; Aversive contrast,  people  with  misophonia featured significantly increased brain activity  in the bilateral  supplementary motor area (SMA) and mid-cingulate cortex (MCC), in early

. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted October 29, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.29.346650 doi: bioRxiv preprint visual regions (V1/V2) and in the right ventrolateral premotor cortex (vlPMC), with the latter cluster extending  in  the  dorsal  anterior  insula  and adjacent  frontal  operculum (aIC/FOP) (Figure 2).  No significantly  decreased activity was observed for this contrast. These differences were not found for the Trigger &gt; Neutral contrast at this threshold, although similar midline differences were observed with an initial cluster-forming threshold of Z &gt; 2.3. However, we didn't further consider the latter results  as  the  use  of  this  lenient  threshold  has  recently  been discouraged,  since  it  was shown to potentially yield excessive false positives and localization issues (Woo et al. , 2014).

Figure 2 Between-group differences in fMRI brain activity for the contrast Trigger &gt; Aversive. These images display the significant results in the contrast Misophonic participant [Trigger &gt; Aversive] &gt; Controls [Trigger &gt; Aversive]. Results are whole-brain corrected with a cluster forming threshold of Z &gt; 3.1 and corrected cluster significance of p = 0.05. Barplots display for each location the mean (+/- standard error) parameter estimates of each contrast (COPEs) in each group for all the voxels in a sphere of 5 mm radius centered on the local maxima.

## Psychophysiological interaction (PPI)

The PPI analysis showed that in people with misophonia, the presentation of Trigger audio-visuals increased not only the overall activity, but also the functional connectivity of MCC, SMA and vlPMC with  several  brain  regions,  including  the  lateral  and medial premotor and prefrontal  cortices,  the

. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted October 29, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.29.346650 doi: bioRxiv preprint primary auditory cortex (A1), and especially the lateral orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) (Figure 3). The PPI analysis for V1/V2 did not yield any significant results. The same PPI analysis for generic aversive and neutral stimuli did not yield any significant result.

Figure 3 Summary of the PPI findings for trigger stimuli in people with misophonia .  The presentation of Trigger stimuli prompts an increase in task-dependent functional connectivity between MCC, SMA, vlPMC and other brain regions. The seed region of the PPI analyses and the location of their significant effects in the rest of the brain  (PPI target regions) are  matched by color. Results are whole-brain corrected with a cluster forming threshold of Z &gt; 3.1 and corrected cluster significance of p = 0.05. No significant PPI results were found for V1/V2. This effect was significant only for people with misophonia and only during Trigger audio-visuals. Generic aversive and neutral audio-visuals did not elicit any significant PPI effects.

Figure 4 highlights the increased connectivity between MCC, SMA, vlPMC and the lateral OFC. It is remarkable that despite the different location of the seeds, the strongest increase of their functional connectivity with any other part of the brain was co-localized in a brain region including the ventral part of the inferior frontal gyrus, the adjacent frontal pole and the basal orbitofrontal cortex. The latter regions recapitulate the frontal projections of the uncinate fasciculus (see Figure 4, bottom-right). This effect  was  observed  only  in  people  with  misophonia and only during the  presentation  of  trigger stimuli.

Figure 4 Increased task-dependent synchronization between MCC, SMA, vlPFC and the lateral OFC during Trigger audio-visuals in people with misophonia - The overlay on the brain surface in the right part of the figure highlights the significant  results  from the PPI analysis (Figure 3) which were located in the OFC. This cortical territory receives the fronto-lateral projections of the uncinate fasciculus (bottom-right). The seed region of the PPI analyses and the location in the  brain of their significant effects are matched by color. A certain degree of transparency is applied to the result for the SMA (blue overlay) to show the overlap with the results from MCC (red) and vlPMC (green). The barplots on the left display,  for  each seed region, the mean (+/- standard error) parameter estimates of PPI connection strength across all the corresponding OFC voxels featuring a significant effect.

Besides  the  lateral  OFC, another particularly interesting result in the context of misophonia is the increased  task-dependent  interaction  between  MCC and a region  localized  in  the  Heschl  gyrus (primary auditory cortex - A1) and extending also to the posterior insular cortex. This effect, and the corresponding PPI parameter estimates of connection strength, are shown in Figure 5.

Figure 5 - Increased interaction between MCC and primary auditory cortex (A1) - The MCC seed region is the same shown in Figure 3 and 4. The barplot on the left displays the mean (+/- standard error) parameter estimates of connection strength across all the corresponding A1 voxels featuring a significant effect.

. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted October 29, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.29.346650 doi: bioRxiv preprint

## Discussion

Misophonia is a recently described behavioural condition (Jastreboff and Jastreboff, 2001), and so far its brain mechanisms have been investigated using neuroimaging only in three studies (Kumar et al. , 2017; Eijsker et al. , 2019; Schröder et al. , 2019). While the anterior insular cortex has emerged as a region  of  interest  for  the  perception  of  trigger  stimuli,  much less is  known with respect to  the interaction among all brain regions involved in the disproportionate negative emotional reaction to the trigger stimuli which characterizes misophonia.

In the present study we first replicate previous findings describing where in the brain trigger stimuli elicit an  increase  in  brain  activity  in  misophonia.  Then  by  investigating  their  task-dependent connectivity  we report  the  previously  undescribed  involvement of  the  lateral  orbitofrontal  cortex (OFC) and of the primary auditory cortex (A1). In the following we discuss our results in comparison with  previous  neuroimaging  evidence,  and elaborate  on why the atypical  functional  connectivity between premotor, cingulate and OFC cortices represents a good candidate to reflect the emotional reaction to trigger stimuli in misophonia.

## Comparison with previous neuroimaging studies

The first neuroimaging study on misophonia (Kumar et al. , 2017) highlighted a prominent increase of brain  activity  in  the  bilateral  anterior  dorsal  insular  cortex  when people  with  misophonia were listening to trigger vs. aversive or neutral sounds. We replicated the effect of trigger stimuli on insular activity  in misophonia, although not to the extent reported by (Kumar et al. , 2017), and only in the right  hemisphere.  Importantly,  in  our  paradigm  the  stimuli  were  preceded  by  a  short  textual description of the forthcoming stimulus, to isolate the effect of the sensory content of the stimulus with respect to its verbal associations. The contrast [text description] &gt; [audiovisual stimuli] did not result  in  significant  group differences,  however in both groups separately  this  contrast  showed a significant  higher  activity  in  the  left  anterior  insula  (See  Supplementary  Figure  1).  Given  the predominant left  hemispheric  lateralization  of  language  (Mazoyer et  al. ,  2014) as well as the left hemispheric lateralization of the insular cortex for linguistic, rather than emotional aspects of speech production  (Ackermann  and  Riecker,  2004,  2010),  our  result  suggest  that  left  and right  anterior insulae processed different aspects of the audiovisual stimuli - linguistic associations and emotional content,  respectively  -  and that  the misophonic reaction was selectively determined by non-verbal emotional  associations.  However,  our  paradigm was not designed to test  the  impact  of  different modalities in the generation of the misophonic response, therefore further investigation is needed to support this hypothesis.

Increased activity in the ventral anterior insula had also been previously reported when this region was manually selected a priori , however this result was not significant in the whole-brain corrected analysis (Schröder et  al. ,  2019). In our analysis we could not find an evidence of increased ventral insular activity  or functional connectivity during trigger stimuli, even without appropriate correction for multiple comparison. It is important to mention that the ventral anterior insula has very different

. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted October 29, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.29.346650 doi: bioRxiv preprint functional,  connectional  and cytoarchitectonic  properties  with  respect  to the dorsal anterior insula (Mesulam and Mufson, 1982; Kurth et al. , 2010; Cerliani et al. , 2012), and represents an important direct  gateway of sensory and autonomic information to the limbic system (Mesulam et  al. ,  1985; Stefanacci and Amaral, 2002; Heimer and Van Hoesen, 2006; Nieuwenhuys, 2012). Instead the dorsal anterior  insula  represents  a  major node of the  saliency  network,  together  with  the  mid-cingulate cortex,  and  is  involved  in  higher-order  representations  of  sensory,  cognitive  and  interoceptive information,  to  the  extent  that  they  are  related  to  changes  in  the  emotional  homeostasis  of  the organism and to emotional awareness (Craig, 2009, 2010). The limited effect of triggers on the ventral vs. dorsal insular activity is the first element suggesting that the emotional reaction in misophonia is mediated by high-order constructs, rather than by a direct auditory-limbic connection relaying only the  physical  properties  of  the  sound  (volume  and  frequency  spectrum).  Further  support  to  this hypothesis is provided - as we will discuss in the next paragraphs - by the involvement of the OFC and by a comparison between misophonia and hyperacusis.

Besides  the anterior dorsal insula, contrasting trigger with aversive stimuli also resulted in significantly higher brain activity in the medial premotor cortex (supplementary motor area - SMA), mid-cingulate  (MCC) and ventrolateral  premotor cortex  (vlPMC). The locations  of  the  increased activity correspond to those reported by Kumar and colleagues (see Table S1 in (Kumar et al. , 2017)). All of these regions are primarily responsible for planning and preparing motor behaviour and are likely to be related to the urge to avoid or react to trigger sounds in people with misophonia (Schröder et al. , 2013). Specifically, an increased activity in the premotor cortices reflects planning or inhibiting a motor response, while the mid-cingulate cortex signals that the behavioural response is associated with an autonomic response. Related to this, we recently showed that the response associated with a basic (negative) stimulus - heat-induced pain - results in an increased interaction between the anterior insula and the mid-cingulate - proportional to the urge to move - in neurotypical participants, while this  mid-cingulate  connectivity  is  not  increased  in  carriers  of  the  R221W mutation (of the nerve growth factor gene), in whom a painful stimulation does not elicit an autonomic response (Perini et al. , 2020). Therefore the increased activity in SMA, MCC and vlPMC is arguably reflecting the neural activity  involved  in  the  emotional  and behavioural  reaction  to  trigger  stimuli,  rather than in their perception, as an effect of the autonomic change induced by trigger stimuli, likely associated with the increased insular activity.

One notable difference  in  our  results  with  respect  to  previous  reports  is  the increased activity in primary visual regions (V1/V2). This is likely due to the fact that our stimuli were audio-visuals rather than only sounds as in (Kumar et al. , 2017). This choice was motivated by the purpose of providing in the MRI scanner a multimodal experience of trigger sounds, similar to real-life contexts. The cause of this  increased primary visual activity is however unclear. A previous study reports that autonomic changes  in  people  with  misophonia  were  elicited  by  sounds  but  not  by  corresponding  images (Edelstein et al. , 2013), while no study yet examined whether the multi-modal aspect of trigger stimuli would  contribute  to  amplify  the  emotional  response  in  misophonia  (Brout et  al. , 2018).  If  the interaction  between different  sensory  modalities  plays a role in eliciting the misophonic response, audio-visual  coupling  could  potentially  be manipulated  -  as  in  the  McGurk effect (McGurk and MacDonald, 1976) - to alleviate the symptoms of misophonia (Samermit et al. , 2019).

. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted October 29, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.29.346650 doi: bioRxiv preprint

## Increased orbitofrontal connectivity

The most important result of our study is represented by the increased interaction between premotor and  cingulate  cortices  with  the  orbitofrontal  cortex,  which  was  significant  only  in  people  with misophonia and only during trigger stimuli. Furthermore, the presentation of misophonic stimuli per se did not increase the overall brain activity in OFC, suggesting that this brain area is particularly involved  in  shaping  a  functional  unity  (synchronization)  of  brain  areas  during  the  misophonic response.

The lateral OFC is part of a major cortico-subcortical limbic network which anatomically connects the amygdala and the paralimbic temporal pole with the anterior insula, the cingulate cortex, the lateral OFC and the adjacent frontal pole via the uncinate fasciculus. This temporo-amygdala-orbitofrontal (TAO) network is responsible for the integration of visceral and emotional states with cognition and behaviour (Mesulam, 2000; Catani et al. , 2013).

Within the TAO network, the lateral OFC is involved in establishing high-level association between sensory  stimuli  and  behavioural  responses,  and  in  particular  in  updating  the  latter  according  to mutated environmental  conditions.  More specifically,  the  lateral  OFC is crucial  in  estimating the emotional consequences of a learned behavioural response to specific stimuli (Vogt, 2019 b ): lesion studies  have  shown that  damages  to  this  brain  region  impair  the  inhibition  or  correction  of  the behavioural  response  when a previously rewarded stimulus-behaviour  association  is  not  anymore rewarded  (reward-reversal  learning)  (Rolls,  2019).  This  suggests  that  the  lateral  OFC activity  is crucial  to  prevent  the  establishment  of  compulsive behavioural  patterns  which are not (anymore) favourable. In this respect a recent fMRI study on stop-signal inhibition on a large sample (N=1709) of healthy adolescents found that the activity of OFC - as well as of mid cingulate and dorsolateral prefrontal cortex - significantly increased in successful vs. failed behavioural inhibition (Deng et al. , 2017).  Furthermore,  a  symptom provocation study in patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) found that the lateral  OFC selectively  responds to OCD-relevant stimuli in comparison to generic aversive stimuli (Simon et al. , 2010).

In  the  specific  context  of  misophonia, the increased trigger-specific functional connectivity of the lateral OFC could reflect the attempt to downregulate the emotional response which is automatically prompted  by  the  trigger  stimuli,  given  the  role  of  this  brain  region  in  the  reappraisal  of  stimuli associated with negative emotions (Banks et al. , 2007). The automatic response prompted by trigger stimuli  might  originate  from  previously  learned  association  mediated  by  the  lateral  OFC, and facilitated by the hyperconnectivity between the anterior dorsal insula and the default mode network, as previously reported (Kumar et al. , 2017). Given the small number of studies which investigated the neural  mechanisms  of  misophonia  so  far,  these  hypotheses  remain  tentative.  Nevertheless,  the increased functional connectivity of the lateral OFC allows linking misophonia to neural mechanisms of compulsive behaviour and behavioural inhibition for further investigations.

Additional  insights  into  the  role  of  the  lateral  OFC in misophonia  are  provided  by  studies  on dysfunctions of the TAO network. Syndromes involving damage to this network - such as advanced

. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted October 29, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.29.346650 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Alzheimer and temporal lobe epilepsy - result in personality changes and other behavioural symptoms like  aggressivity, disinhibition, deepened cognitive and emotional responses, antisocial traits (Catani et al. , 2013). Historically, the most famous case of traumatic damage to this network is that of Phineas Gage (Harlow, 1868; Thiebaut de Schotten et al. , 2015). Patients with traumatic brain injury resulting in OFC lesions show socially inappropriate behaviour, impulsivity, reduced control of the emotional response and perseveration (Thiebaut de Schotten et al. , 2015). Most elements of the symptomatology of TAO syndromes are reminiscent of the behavioural manifestations in misophonia: people with this condition  are  well  aware of the disproportion between the stimuli and their compulsive emotional reaction,  characterized by anger, irritation, stress,  anxiety, which can yield to socially inappropriate behaviour and in extreme cases to aggressive responses (Rouw and Erfanian, 2018). In addition, a recent  study  examining a large sample of people reporting symptoms compatible with misophonia (N=575) showed that this condition has comorbid traits of obsessive-compulsive personality (26%) and mood disorders (10%) (Jager et  al. ,  2020).  While our results highlight altered TAO network activity  restricted  to the lateral  OFC cortex, these similarities between misophonia and neurological and neuropsychiatric syndromes grant further studies in the anatomical and functional connectivity between the regions connected within the TAO network.

## Direct vs. indirect auditory-limbic pathways underlying the emotional response in misophonia

Given that misophonia is associated with the exposure to sounds, it would be plausible to expect an alteration  of  the  activity  of  auditory  cortices  during  trigger  sounds in  people  suffering  from this condition. However, previous neuroimaging studies on misophonia failed to detect such effect in a whole-brain  corrected  analysis.  Only  one  study  examining  a  specifically  selected  region  of  the secondary  auditory  cortex  (lateral  superior  temporal  gyrus)  reported  significantly  increased  brain activity during trigger vs. generic aversive stimuli in people with misophonia (Schröder et al. , 2019).

Importantly,  increased  brain  activity  in  the  auditory  cortex  can be expected  by variations  in  the physical  properties  of  the  sounds  (such  as  volume)  in  neurotypical  individuals,  as  well  as  in neurological  patients  with  pathologically  increased  sensitivity  to  sound amplitude  (Lanting et  al. , 2008; Tyler et al. , 2014). However, misophonia appears to be unrelated to neurological syndromes or trauma, and audiological tests show that people with this condition have normal hearing capacities (Jager et al. , 2020). In addition, their emotional response appears to be independent from the volume of the trigger sounds.

In our analysis, we also failed to detect an increase in the brain activity of the auditory cortices of the superior temporal lobe. However the PPI analysis seeded in the MCC - whose activity was increased in trigger vs. generic aversive stimuli - revealed an increased task-dependent synchronization between MCC and the primary auditory cortex (A1) during the presentation of trigger stimuli.

The current model of misophonia proposes that this condition is associated with an altered interaction between the auditory and the limbic system (Jastreboff and Jastreboff, 2001). To our knowledge, the increased synchronization between MCC and A1 activity we report represents the first evidence of an

. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted October 29, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.29.346650 doi: bioRxiv preprint atypical activity  of primary auditory regions in misophonia. Importantly, such evidence is crucial to identify which among the possible direct and indirect neural pathways connecting auditory regions with the limbic system subserve the generation of the emotional response in misophonia. Given that people with misophonia most commonly qualify the emotional response as 'extreme annoyance/irritation' or 'anger/rage'  (Rouw  and  Erfanian,  2018),  and  given  the  presence  of monosynaptic connections between A1 and the amygdala (LeDoux et al. , 1991), such direct pathway could  represent  one suitable  neural  mechanism. Additionally,  it  was shown that both A1 and the amygdala  show  an  increased  activity  and  connectivity  during  generic  aversive  -  such  as  nails scratching  on a blackboard  -  vs.  neutral  sounds,  and that  their  reciprocal directional connectivity encodes both physical properties and subjective valence (perceived unpleasantness) of these generic aversive  sounds (Kumar et  al. ,  2012). A relation between physical properties (frequency range) of these sounds and their perceived unpleasantness of such sounds had been previously shown (Halpern et  al. ,  1986; Reuter and Oehler, 2011). However, when trigger sounds were contrasted with generic aversive sounds in people with misophonia, no significant increase in brain activity was detected in the amygdala  (Schröder et al. , 2019),  and  only  a  marginally  significant  increased  functional connectivity  between the amygdala and the anterior insula - rather than the auditory cortex - was reported (Kumar et al. , 2017).

Together with this previous evidence, our result showing increased task-related functional connectivity between  MCC,  A1  and  OFC  during  trigger  stimuli  presentation  in  people  with misophonia  make it  unlikely  that  the  neural  pathways subserving  the  emotional  and behavioural response in misophonia could be identified with a direct connection between the auditory cortex and the amygdala. Instead our results suggest that the emotional reaction to trigger sounds is subserved by indirect neural pathways connecting the auditory cortex with the dorsal anterior insula, the MCC and the OFC.  Importantly,  all  these  three  regions  are  crucial  in  establishing  high-order  cognitive associations between sensory stimuli and emotional or behavioural responses. Specifically, the MCC is specialized for feedback-mediated decision making such as in reward/punishment anticipation and error selection (Vogt, 2019 a ),  and together with the anterior insula is part of the saliency network which  is  crucial  to  integrate  sensory,  cognitive  and interoceptive  information  to  decide  the  most homeostatically relevant stimuli in determining behaviour (Seeley et al. , 2007).

## High-order vs. primary emotional associations in misophonia

One important open question in misophonia - related to the involvement of A1 in this behavioural condition - is whether the specificity of the stimuli triggering the excessive emotional response is due to the physical properties of the stimuli or to their subjective valence.

The absence of increased activity in A1 - processing the physical properties of auditory stimuli - and the involvement of OFC and MCC - crucial for the emotional estimation of the association between sensory stimuli and behavioural response -  deposes against the possibility that the physical properties of the auditory stimuli alone can explain why these stimuli and not others elicit the disproportionate emotional response seen in misophonia.

. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted October 29, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.29.346650 doi: bioRxiv preprint

The  clinical  literature  provides  large  evidence  to  frame  misophonia  as  a  dysfunction  related  to high-order  rather  than  basic  sensory  properties  of  trigger  stimuli.  This  condition  appears  to  be unrelated to neurological damage, and is not associated with hearing deficits  (Schröder et al. , 2013). Instead  its  symptoms  arise  during  childhood  or  adolescence,  and  increase  with  age (Rouw and Erfanian,  2018),  which  is  compatible  with  the  possibility  that  they  rest  on  learned  conceptual associations between specific innocuous sensory stimuli and emotionally distressing life experiences. Sufferers  experience  diminished  or  no distress  when they produce trigger sounds themselves, and occasionally  use  this  as  a  coping  strategy  (Edelstein et  al. ,  2013). The emotional reaction can be modulated by the social context, and amplified when trigger sounds are produced by significant others (Edelstein et al. , 2013; Bruxner, 2016). Symptoms can be alleviated by cognitive-behavioural therapy, while  they  are  insensitive  or  even exacerbated  by attempts  to habituation (Bernstein et  al. ,  2013, Schröder et al. , 2017 a ; Aazh et al. , 2019).

Another important source of evidence for the involvement of high-order constructs in misophonia is represented by the comparison with hyperacusis: a condition characterized by hyperresponsivity to non-noxious  auditory  stimuli  due  to  the  amplified  perception  of  their  volume  (Jastreboff  and Jastreboff,  2001; Song et  al. ,  2014). While misophonia and hyperacusis present a certain degree of comorbidity and  evoke  similar  negative  emotional  and  behavioural  reactions  (Jastreboff and Jastreboff,  2015), hyperacusis is characterized by hyperaesthesia for generic sounds, modulated by their  physical properties. Notably, hyperacusis appears to be associated with altered activity of the primary auditory cortex (Song et al. , 2014; Wong et al. , 2020). Instead misophonic triggers are very specific human-generated sounds, mostly produced with the mouth or the oropharyngeal tract and the intensity of the emotional response is independent from their volume.

The presence of  an altered  structural  or  functional  circuitry  linking  the  OFC with the insula, the amygdala and the MCC could represent the source of the behavioural manifestations of misophonia. Importantly, the fact that OFC is responsible for high-order, rather than primary associations between stimuli and emotional response, is compatible with the selectivity of misophonia for a limited set of stimuli, possibly related to previously learned negative associations (Peters and Büchel, 2010). Indeed increased task-related OFC connectivity - estimated by PPI analysis - has been previously recorded during  tasks  involving  high-order associations between the stimulus and its emotional content, for instance with monetary reward (Noonan et al. , 2011), during self-motivation (Bengtsson et al. , 2009) and in the downregulation of pain associated with monetary gain (Becker et al. , 2017), but not when exposed to intrinsically emotionally loaded stimuli such as pain (Perini et al. , 2020). Interestingly, it was  shown how the  OFC functional  connectivity  (with  the  amygdala)  is  instead  related  to  the reappraisal  of  stimuli  containing  negative  basic  emotions  (Banks et  al. , 2007),  which  requires establishing high-order associations to downregulate the primary emotional effect of the stimuli.

In summary, all the available evidence - including our results - lead to hypothesize that selectivity of misophonia for specific sounds, and the emotional reaction triggered by them, cannot be explained only considering the physical properties of the stimuli, but rather by high-order cognitive associations which are potentially related to previously established negative associations with the same stimuli. On the  other  hand,  there  is  strong  evidence  that  auditory  stimuli  commonly serve  as  'triggers'  in misophonia, rather than stimuli in other modalities. This specific relationship between the auditory system and misophonia still is largely unexplained.  For example, an accurate analysis of the specific

. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted October 29, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.29.346650 doi: bioRxiv preprint frequencies of the most common trigger stimuli - similar to what that carried out for generic stimuli by (Kumar et  al. ,  2012), has not yet been performed, and it will be crucial to understand whether a specific  mixture  of  frequencies  plays  a  role in understanding the specificity of trigger vs. generic aversive sounds.

## Differences between seed-based correlation and psychophysiological interaction (PPI)

One important  previous  neuroimaging  result  in  misophonia showed an increased task-dependent functional connectivity between the anterior dorsal insula and the medial regions of the default mode network (DMN), which is involved in internally directed high-order information processing such as social  and autobiographical memory (Callard and Margulies, 2014; Margulies et  al. ,  2016). It was suggested that this increased functional coupling could signal a difficulty in people with misophonia to  dissociate  the  sensory  stimulation  of  the  trigger  sounds  from  its  contextual  associations  and memories (Kumar et al. , 2017). In our analysis we used the same region of interest - the anterior right insula  from  the  SPM12 neuromorphometrics toolbox - to carry out a PPI analysis,  however we couldn't replicate the previously reported increased insula/DMN functional connectivity.

While  this  could  be  due  to  differences  in  the  paradigm (see  above 'Comparison with previous neuroimaging studies'), it is important to stress that the two methods used here and in (Kumar et al. , 2017) to probe task-dependent changes in functional connectivity isolate different properties of the interaction between brain regions. PPI estimates the effects of the interaction between the task and the seed region over and above the correlation between the activity of seed and target region (Friston et al. ,  1997; O'Reilly et  al. ,  2012; Di et  al. ,  2020) - e.g. anterior insula and DMN. Instead the latter correlation  is  precisely  what is  reported  in  the  weighted seed-based connectivity (wSBC) used in (Kumar et  al. , 2017).  While in wSBC only the time points where the stimulus is  presented  are considered - and in this sense the retrieved correlation is task-based - it cannot be excluded that the results are due not only to the task, but also to other sources of fMRI signal, such as resting-state or the effect of a third region driving the correlation between seed and target. While PPI is also affected by the latter issue, in PPI explicitly modelling out the signal of the seed region ensures that the change in  functional  connectivity  is  a  direct  function  of  task-related  activity,  and cannot be attributed to resting-state  signal or task-unrelated changes in signal-to-noise ratio (Friston, 2011; O'Reilly et al. , 2012).

This difference between the interpretation of wSBC and PPI results does not in any way compromise or diminish the importance of the result by Kumar and colleagues. Instead, it opens the possibility that the observed task-dependent increased connectivity between the anterior insula and the DMN might be due to structural differences in the functional organization of resting-state networks in people with misophonia; an hypothesis which is also supported by the co-localization of this functional atypicality with a higher myelination of the anterior cingulate cortex (Kumar et al. , 2017). A crucial test for this hypothesis will be to compare the spontaneous brain activity in the DMN in people with and without

. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted October 29, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.29.346650 doi: bioRxiv preprint misophonia:  an  analysis  for  which  specific  fMRI data  not  available  in  our  dataset  needs to  be acquired.

Related to this, also our results suggest that there might be differences in spontaneous brain activity in misophonia,  as  the  OFC did not display a change in the  overall  brain  activity  due to trigger vs. aversive stimuli, but only in its functional connectivity with other brain regions where trigger stimuli prompted changes in overall  brain  activity (SMA, MCC and vlPMC). As mentioned above in the Methods, the results of PPI can refer either to (1) the task-dependent modulation of the interaction between region A and region B, or to (2) the effect of the modulatory activity of region A onto region B during a task (See Fig. 5 in (Friston et al. , 1997)). In our case the lack of increased activity in the OFC during trigger vs. stimuli suggest that situation (2) is more likely to reflect the brain mechanisms influencing  the  behavioural  response in misophonia, and that in this condition OFC exerts a tonic influence  on SMA, MCC and vlPMC which results in higher activity during trigger stimuli in the latter  regions.  Again,  an analysis  of  resting-state  fMRI activity in misophonia would represent an important step to disentangle between the two possible situations.

## Conclusions

In  the  present  fMRI study we investigated the neural mechanisms underlying the disproportionate negative emotional response elicited by trigger stimuli in misophonia. Besides replicating previous evidence of the increased insular, premotor and mid-cingulate activity in misophonia during trigger stimuli, we found that in people with this condition trigger stimuli prompt an increased synchronization of premotor and mid-cingulate activity with the lateral OFC.

The involvement of the  OFC, crucial  for  establishing  and revising  specific  experience-dependent cognitive-emotional  associations,  represents  the  first  evidence  that  allows  to  shed  light  on  the selectivity  of  misophonia  for  particular  innocuous  auditory  stimuli.  Specifically,  the  increased functional  connectivity  of  this  region  with  premotor  and  mid-cingulate  cortex  might  reflect  a dysfunction in the neural mechanisms required to reappraise a previously learned negative emotional association with specific sounds.

The increased synchronization between these regions could furthermore promote the establishment and reinforcement  of  a  functional unit whose activity is automatically triggered by an appropriate stimulus,  generating  a  compulsive - and therefore difficult to prevent - emotional and behavioural response. While so far,  the critical role of the OFC in creating persistent responses at a particular task or  in  a  particular  situation  has  so  far  been  shown in  other  behavioural  conditions  (addiction, compulsive behavior,  (impaired)  decision making) such framework can help explain the persistent emotional and behavioral responses that are so characteristic of misophonia.

We also report the first evidence relating misophonia with the primary auditory cortex. This region did not show  an  increased  activity to trigger vs. aversive sounds,  but rather an increased synchronization  with  the  mid-cingulate  during  trigger  sounds.  This  finding,  together  with  the increased  interaction  between  mid-cingulate  and  OFC cortex,  supports  the  hypothesis  that  the emotional reaction in misophonia is unlikely to reflect a direct response of the limbic system to the

. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted October 29, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.29.346650 doi: bioRxiv preprint physical properties of the sounds alone. Rather it suggests that the emotional response is mediated by a  complex network of brain regions  processing  the  association between specific sounds and their subjective cognitive, emotional and autonomic valence in people with misophonia.

To further clarify the neural mechanisms of misophonia, we propose that further studies should focus on the direct comparison between misophonia and hyperacusis, since the latter condition presents the most similar pattern of symptoms, with the exception of the stimulus selectivity in misophonia. For these reasons, a sample of people with hyperacusis might represent the best control group to precisely determine the brain mechanisms which characterize misophonia.

## Funding

This study was financially supported by a grant from the REAM foundation (http://reamfoundation.org/) awarded to Romke Rouw.

## References

| Aazh H, Landgrebe M, Danesh AA, Moore BC. Cognitive Behavioral Therapy For Alleviating The Distress Caused By Tinnitus, Hyperacusis And Misophonia: Current Perspectives. Psychol Res Behav Manag 2019; 12: 991-1002.                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Ackermann H, Riecker A. The contribution of the insula to motor aspects of speech production: a review and a hypothesis. Brain Lang 2004; 89: 320-8.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Ackermann H, Riecker A. The contribution(s) of the insula to speech production: a review of the clinical and functional imaging literature. Brain Struct Funct 2010; 214: 419-33.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| Banks SJ, Eddy KT, Angstadt M, Nathan PJ, Phan KL. Amygdala-frontal connectivity during emotion regulation. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci 2007; 2: 303-12.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| Bauman N. Misophonia Physical Sensation Scale (MPRS) [Internet]. 2015Available from: Retrieved from https://misophoniatreatment.com                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
| Becker S, Gandhi W, Pomares F, Wager TD, Schweinhardt P. Orbitofrontal cortex mediates pain inhibition by monetary reward. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci 2017; 12: 651-61.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| Bengtsson SL, Lau HC, Passingham RE. Motivation to do well enhances responses to errors and self-monitoring. Cereb Cortex 2009; 19: 797-804.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| Bernstein RE, Angell KL, Dehle CM. A brief course of cognitive behavioural therapy for the treatment of misophonia: a case example [Internet]. the Cognitive Behaviour Therapist 2013; 6[cited 2020 Jul 27] Available from: https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/the-cognitive-behaviour-therapist/article/brief-course-of-cognit ive-behavioural-therapy-for-the-treatment-of-misophonia-a-case-example/32DCE5E570DD812E370C80 10EBAF3E38 |
| Brout JJ, Edelstein M, Erfanian M, Mannino M, Miller LJ, Rouw R, et al. Investigating Misophonia: A Review of the Empirical Literature, Clinical Implications, and a Research Agenda. Front Neurosci 2018; 12: 36.                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| Bruxner G. 'Mastication rage': a review of misophonia - an under-recognised symptom of psychiatric relevance? Australas Psychiatry 2016; 24: 195-7.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
| Callard F, Margulies DS. What we talk about when we talk about the default mode network. Front Hum Neurosci 2014; 8: 619.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     |
| Catani M, Dell'Acqua F, de Schotten MT. A revised limbic system model for memory, emotion and behaviour. Neuroscience &Biobehavioral Reviews 2013; 37: 1724-37.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
| Cauda F, Torta DM, Sacco K, Geda E, D'Agata F, Costa T, et al. Shared 'core' areas between the pain and other task-related networks. PLoS One 2012; 7: e41929.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
| Cerliani L, Thomas RM, Jbabdi S, Siero JC, Nanetti L, Crippa A, et al. Probabilistic tractography recovers a rostrocaudal trajectory of connectivity variability in the human insular cortex. Hum Brain Mapp 2012; 33: 2005-34.                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
| Craig AD. How do you feel--now? The anterior insula and human awareness. Nat Rev Neurosci 2009; 10: 59-70.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| Craig AD. The sentient self. Brain Struct Funct 2010; 214: 563-77.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |

Critchley HD. Neural mechanisms of autonomic, affective, and cognitive integration. J Comp Neurol 2005; 493: 154-66.

Deng W, Rolls ET, Ji X, Robbins TW, Banaschewski T, Bokde ALW, et al. Separate neural systems for behavioral change and for emotional responses to failure during behavioral inhibition [Internet]. Human Brain Mapping 2017Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/hbm.23607

- Di X, Zhang Z, Biswal BB. Understanding psychophysiological interaction and its relations to beta series correlation [Internet]. Brain Imaging and Behavior 2020Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11682-020-00304-8

Dozier TH. Treating the initial physical reflex of misophonia with the neural repatterning technique: A counterconditioning procedure [Internet]. 2015Available from: https://psycharchives.org/handle/20.500.12034/1605

Edelstein M, Brang D, Rouw R, Ramachandran V. Misophonia: physiological investigations and case descriptions. Front Hum Neurosci 2013; 7: 296.

Eijsker N, Schröder A, Smit DJA, van Wingen G, Denys D. Neural Basis of Response Bias on the Stop Signal Task in Misophonia. Front Psychiatry 2019; 10: 765.

Fitzmaurice G. The Misophonia Activation Scale (MAS-1) [Internet]. 2010Available from: Retrieved from http://www.misophonia-uk.org/the-misophonia-activation-scale.html

Fox MD, Snyder AZ, Vincent JL, Corbetta M, Van Essen DC, Raichle ME. The human brain is intrinsically organized into dynamic, anticorrelated functional networks. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2005; 102: 9673-8.

Friston KJ. Functional and effective connectivity: a review. Brain Connect 2011; 1: 13-36.

Friston KJ, Buechel C, Fink GR, Morris J, Rolls E, Dolan RJ. Psychophysiological and modulatory interactions in neuroimaging. Neuroimage 1997; 6: 218-29.

Gogolla N. The insular cortex. Curr Biol 2017; 27: R580-6.

Halpern DL, Blake R, Hillenbrand J. Psychoacoustics of a chilling sound. Percept Psychophys 1986; 39: 77-80.

Harlow JM. Recovery from the Passage of an Iron Bar Through the Head. Publ Mass Med Soc 1868: 327-47.

Heimer L, Van Hoesen GW. The limbic lobe and its output channels: implications for emotional functions and adaptive behavior. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2006; 30: 126-47.

Jager I, de Koning P, Bost T, Denys D, Vulink N. Misophonia: Phenomenology, comorbidity and demographics in a large sample. PLoS One 2020; 15: e0231390.

JASP Team. comJASP (Version 0.11.1)[Computer software] [Internet]. 2020Available from: https://jasp-stats.org/

Jastreboff MM, Jastreboff PJ. Components of decreased sound tolerance: hyperacusis, misophonia, phonophobia [Internet]. ITHS News Lett 2001; 2Available from: http://ww.tinnitus.org/DST_NL2_PJMJ.pdf

Jastreboff PJ, Hazell JWP. Tinnitus Retraining Therapy: Implementing the Neurophysiological Model. Cambridge University Press; 2004

Jastreboff PJ, Jastreboff MM. Decreased sound tolerance: hyperacusis, misophonia, diplacousis, and polyacousis. Handb Clin Neurol 2015; 129: 375-87.

Jenkinson M, Bannister P, Brady M, Smith S. Improved optimization for the robust and accurate linear

| registration and motion correction of brain images. Neuroimage 2002; 17: 825-41.                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Jenkinson M, Beckmann CF, Behrens TEJ, Woolrich MW, Smith SM. FSL. NeuroImage 2012; 62: 782-90.                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| Johnson PL, Webber TA, Wu MS, Lewin AB, Murphy TK, Storch EA. When selective audiovisual stimuli become unbearable: a case series on pediatric misophonia. Neuropsychiatry 2013; 3: 569-75.                                                                                                |
| Kumar S, Griffiths TD. Response: Commentary: The Brain Basis for Misophonia [Internet]. Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience 2017; 11Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fnbeh.2017.00127                                                                                            |
| Kumar S, von Kriegstein K, Friston K, Griffiths TD. Features versus feelings: dissociable representations of the acoustic features and valence of aversive sounds. J Neurosci 2012; 32: 14184-92.                                                                                          |
| Kumar S, Tansley-Hancock O, Sedley W, Winston JS, Callaghan MF, Allen M, et al. The Brain Basis for Misophonia. Curr Biol 2017; 27: 527-33.                                                                                                                                                |
| Kurth F, Zilles K, Fox PT, Laird AR, Eickhoff SB. A link between the systems: functional differentiation and integration within the human insula revealed by meta-analysis. Brain Struct Funct 2010; 214: 519-34.                                                                          |
| Lanting CP, De Kleine E, Bartels H, Van Dijk P. Functional imaging of unilateral tinnitus using fMRI. Acta Otolaryngol 2008; 128: 415-21.                                                                                                                                                  |
| LeDoux JE, Farb CR, Romanski LM. Overlapping projections to the amygdala and striatum from auditory processing areas of the thalamus and cortex. Neurosci Lett 1991; 134: 139-44.                                                                                                          |
| Margulies DS, Ghosh SS, Goulas A, Falkiewicz M, Huntenburg JM, Langs G, et al. Situating the default-mode network along a principal gradient of macroscale cortical organization. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2016; 113: 12574-9.                                                             |
| Mazoyer B, Zago L, Jobard G, Crivello F, Joliot M, Perchey G, et al. Gaussian mixture modeling of hemispheric lateralization for language in a large sample of healthy individuals balanced for handedness. PLoS One 2014; 9: e101165.                                                     |
| McGurk H, MacDonald J. Hearing lips and seeing voices. Nature 1976; 264: 746-8.                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| Mesulam M. Principles of Behavioural and Cognitive Neurology. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 2000                                                                                                                                                                                        |
| Mesulam M-M, -Marsel Mesulam M, Mufson EJ. The Insula of Reil in Man and Monkey. Association and Auditory Cortices 1985: 179-226.                                                                                                                                                          |
| Mesulam MM, Mufson EJ. Insula of the old world monkey. III: Efferent cortical output and comments on function. J Comp Neurol 1982; 212: 38-52.                                                                                                                                             |
| Mesulam MM, Mufson EJ. The insula of Reil in man and monkey. Architectonics, connectivity, and function. In: Jones P, editor(s). Cerebral Cortex. New York: Plenum Press; 1985                                                                                                             |
| Nieuwenhuys R. The insular cortex: a review. Prog Brain Res 2012; 195: 123-63.                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| J Neurosci 2011; 31: 14399-412.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| O'Reilly JX, Woolrich MW, Behrens TEJ, Smith SM, Johansen-Berg H. Tools of the trade: psychophysiological interactions and functional connectivity. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci 2012; 7: 604-9.                                                                                               |
| Perini I, Ceko M, Cerliani L, van Ettinger-Veenstra H, Minde J, Morrison I. Mutation Carriers with Reduced C-Afferent Density Reveal Cortical Dynamics of Pain-Action Relationship during Acute Pain [Internet]. Cereb Cortex 2020Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhaa078 |
| Perini I, Gustafsson PA, Hamilton JP, Kämpe R, Zetterqvist M, Heilig M. The salience of self, not social pain, is                                                                                                                                                                          |

encoded by dorsal anterior cingulate and insula. Sci Rep 2018; 8: 6165.

Peters J, Büchel C. Neural representations of subjective reward value. Behav Brain Res 2010; 213: 135-41.

Poline J-B, Kherif F, Pallier C, Penny W. Contrasts and classical inference. Statistical parametric mapping: the analysis of functional brain images 2007; 1: 126.

Reuter C, Oehler M. Psychoacoustics of chalkboard squeaking. J Acoust Soc Am 2011; 130: 2545-2545.

Rolls ET. The orbitofrontal cortex and emotion in health and disease, including depression. Neuropsychologia 2019; 128: 14-43.

Rouw R, Erfanian M. A Large-Scale Study of Misophonia. J Clin Psychol 2018; 74: 453-79.

Samermit P, Saal J, Davidenko N. Cross-Sensory Stimuli Modulate Reactions to Aversive Sounds. Multisens Res 2019; 32: 197-213.

Schröder AE, Vulink NC, van Loon AJ, Denys DA. Cognitive behavioral therapy is effective in misophonia: An open trial. J Affect Disord 2017; 217: 289-94.

Schröder A, Vulink N, Denys D. Misophonia: diagnostic criteria for a new psychiatric disorder. PLoS One 2013; 8: e54706.

Schröder A, van Wingen G, Eijsker N, San Giorgi R, Vulink NC, Turbyne C, et al. Misophonia is associated with altered brain activity in the auditory cortex and salience network. Sci Rep 2019; 9: 7542.

Schröder A, van Wingen G, Vulink NC, Denys D. Commentary: The Brain Basis for Misophonia [Internet]. Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience 2017; 11Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fnbeh.2017.00111

Seeley WW, Menon V, Schatzberg AF, Keller J, Glover GH, Kenna H, et al. Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for salience processing and executive control. J Neurosci 2007; 27: 2349-56.

Simon D, Kaufmann C, Müsch K, Kischkel E, Kathmann N. Fronto-striato-limbic hyperactivation in obsessive-compulsive disorder during individually tailored symptom provocation [Internet]. Psychophysiology 2010Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-8986.2010.00980.x

Smith SM. Fast robust automated brain extraction. Hum Brain Mapp 2002; 17: 143-55.

Song J-J, De Ridder D, Weisz N, Schlee W, Van de Heyning P, Vanneste S. Hyperacusis-associated pathological resting-state brain oscillations in the tinnitus brain: a hyperresponsiveness network with paradoxically inactive auditory cortex (vol 219, pg 1113, 2014). Brain Struct Funct 2014; 219: 1511.

Stefanacci L, Amaral DG. Some observations on cortical inputs to the macaque monkey amygdala: an anterograde tracing study. J Comp Neurol 2002; 451: 301-23.

Thiebaut de Schotten M, Dell'Acqua F, Ratiu P, Leslie A, Howells H, Cabanis E, et al. From Phineas Gage and Monsieur Leborgne to H.M.: Revisiting Disconnection Syndromes [Internet]. Cereb Cortex 2015Available from:

http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&amp;db=PubMed&amp;dopt=Citation&amp;list_uids=2 6271113

Tyler RS, Pienkowski M, Roncancio ER, Jun HJ, Brozoski T, Dauman N, et al. A review of hyperacusis and future directions: part I. Definitions and manifestations. Am J Audiol 2014; 23: 402-19.

Vogt BA. The cingulate cortex in neurologic diseases: History, Structure, Overview. Handb Clin Neurol 2019; 166: 3-21.

Vogt BA. Chapter 3 - Cingulate cortex in the three limbic subsystems. In: Vogt BA, editor(s). Handbook of

. CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license perpetuity. It is made available under a preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in The copyright holder for this this version posted October 29, 2020. ; https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.29.346650 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Clinical Neurology. Elsevier; 2019. p. 39-51

Wong E, Radziwon K, Chen G-D, Liu X, Manno FA, Manno SH, et al. Functional magnetic resonance imaging of enhanced central auditory gain and electrophysiological correlates in a behavioral model of hyperacusis. Hear Res 2020; 389: 107908.

Woo C-W, Krishnan A, Wager TD. Cluster-extent based thresholding in fMRI analyses: pitfalls and recommendations. Neuroimage 2014; 91: 412-9.

Woolrich MW, Behrens TE, Beckmann CF, Jenkinson M, Smith SM. Multilevel linear modelling for FMRI group analysis using Bayesian inference. Neuroimage 2004; 21: 1732-47.

Woolrich MW, Jbabdi S, Patenaude B, Chappell M, Makni S, Behrens T, et al. Bayesian analysis of neuroimaging data in FSL. Neuroimage 2009; 45: S173-86.

Worsley KJ. 14 Statistical analysis of activation images. Functional MRI: An introduction to methods 2001: 251.

Wu MS, Lewin AB, Murphy TK, Storch EA. Misophonia: incidence, phenomenology, and clinical correlates in an undergraduate student sample. J Clin Psychol 2014; 70: 994-1007.