ARTICLE
Autism, aspect-perception, and neurodiversity
Janette Dinishak
Philosophy, University of California Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, US
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the appeal, made by some philoso-
phers, to Wittgenstein ’s notion of aspect-blindness in order
to better understand autistic perception and social cogni-
tion. I articulate and assess di ﬀerent ways of understanding
what it means to say that autists are aspect-blind. While
more attention to the perceptual dimensions of autism is
a welcome development in philosophical explorations of
the condition, I argue that there are signi ﬁcant problems
with attributing aspect-blindness to autists. The empirical
basis for the attribution of aspect-blindness to autists is
questionable, but, even if it turns out that future empirical
work on autistic perception and social cognition decisively
supports the attribution of some forms of aspect-blindness
to autists, the descriptive and explanatory fruitfulness of the
notion of aspect-blindness is limited in important ways. To
better capture autistic experience, we should broaden our
framework to include conceptualizing autists as engaging in
forms of aspect-perception.ARTICLE HISTORY
Received 13 April 2018
Accepted 18 September 2018
KEYWORDS
Seeing aspects;
aspect-blindness;
Wittgenstein; autism;
neurodiversity
1. Introduction
Recently there has been an upsurge in two-way interactions between
philosophy and psychopathology. On the one hand, there is substantial
interest in incorporating empirical results about various psychiatric con-
ditions (e.g. addiction, autism, depression, schizophrenia, and psychopa-
thy) into philosophical debates. The thought is that re ﬂection on forms of
psychopathology can illuminate our understanding of the “normal. ”On
the other hand, philosophers use philosophical positions and concepts to
further our understanding of psychiatric conditions.
This paper examines an instance of the second kind of interaction
between philosophy and psychopathology: the appeal, made by some
philosophers (Overgaard, 2006 ; Proudfoot, 2013 ; Stawarska, 2010 ), to
Wittgenstein ’s notion of aspect-blindness to characterize autists ’diﬃculties
understanding others ’mental states. My aim is twofold. The ﬁrst aim is to
articulate di ﬀerent ways of understanding what it might mean to say that
CONTACT Janette Dinishak jdinisha@ucsc.edu Philosophy, University of California Santa CruzPHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY
2019, VOL. 32, NO. 6, 876 –899
https://doi.org/10.1080/09515089.2019.1632426
© 2019 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group

autists are aspect-blind. The second is to critically assess the appeal to
aspect-blindness to characterize autism. I argue that there are signi ﬁcant
problems with the current construal of the relationship between autism
and aspects. The empirical basis for the attribution of aspect-blindness to
autists is questionable. However, even if it turns out that future empirical
work on autistic perception and social cognition decisively supports the
attribution of some forms of aspect-blindness to autists, the descriptive and
explanatory fruitfulness of the notion of aspect-blindness is limited in
important ways. Exclusive focus on aspect-blindness prematurely closes
oﬀa whole host of intriguing possibilities for conceptualizing autists as
engaging in aspect- perception . We should broaden our framework for
understanding autistic experience so that we can begin to investigate
these underexplored possibilities.
The discussion proceeds as follows. First, I give overviews of aspect-
perception, aspect-blindness, and autism and separate out several ways of
understanding the recent appeals to the notion of “aspect-blindness ”to
characterize features of autistic experience. Next, I critically assess the
appeal to “aspect-blindness ”to understand autistic experience, focusing
my critical attention on what I call “the aﬀective impoverishment con-
strual. ”Here I argue that relevant empirical evidence on perception and
social cognition in autism does not decisively support the attribution of
this form of aspect-blindness to autists. Finally, I suggest that philosophers
should broaden their framework for understanding autistic experience to
include the notion of “aspect-perception ”and brie ﬂy and tentatively
explore some ﬁrst steps toward doing so. I conclude with some methodo-
logical re ﬂections for the investigation of autism.
2. Aspect-perception
A simple example that is often treated as paradigmatic of aspect-perception
is the well-known “duck-rabbit ”ﬁgure.1
PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY 877

It can be seen as a duck, and it can be seen as a rabbit. However, it cannot
be seen as both, at the same time. The two aspects “interfere with ”one
another: When I see the ﬁgure as a duck, the parts of the drawing on the
left side of the ﬁgure are seen as a bill. When I see the ﬁgure as a rabbit,
those same parts are seen as ears. If I see the ﬁgure as a duck and
experience a “change of aspect, ”the rabbit-aspect “lights up ”and the bill
“becomes ”rabbit ears. Although I recognize that the drawing has not
changed, once I undergo the perceptual shift, I see the drawing di ﬀerently
than I did before the shift.
Aspect-change experiences had while viewing ambiguous ﬁgures such as
the duck-rabbit are the most well-known and well-studied in philosophy
and psychology, but there are many di ﬀerent kinds of aspects and many
diﬀerent ways of experiencing them. The concept ‘aspect-perception ’picks
out a motley collection of interrelated phenomena,2but there are some
features, found in many cases of aspect-perception, that might be taken as
characteristic.3Oftentimes aspect-perception requires mastery of a
technique.4Which requisite abilities one needs in order to be capable of
aspect-perception of a given kind on a given occasion may di ﬀer from case
to case. For example, some aspects cannot be perceived unless the percei-
ver makes a “conceptual connection. ”5Only if the perceiver knows or is
interested in such-and-such and brings the knowledge or interest to bear
on her experience, or if she makes thiscomparison (e.g. between the duck-
rabbit ﬁgure she sees now and a rabbit in a favorite comic strip), can she
have the relevant aspect experience. Some aspects can be “summoned up
by thoughts ”6while others are evoked by eye movements.7Some kinds of
aspect-perception require imagination (e.g. seeing a triangle as hanging
from its apex or as having fallen over,8seeing a cloud as a hippopotamus).
Other kinds of aspect-perception would seem to involve a kind of sensi-
tivity and attunement, for example, sensing the solemnity of a melody.9
The idea of “aspect-blindness ”prompts us to explore what it would be
like to lack the ability to have aspect-perception experiences. For example,
the aspect-blind would not experience the perceptual shift from seeing the
duck-aspect to seeing the rabbit-aspect or vice versa while viewing the
duck-rabbit. That is, they would not have the experience that is expressed
by saying “Iseethat it has not changed, and yet I see it di ﬀerently ”even
though they may know that the duck-rabbit ﬁgure can be seen both as
a duck and as a rabbit and they are able to see both aspects. We can
distinguish another possible form of aspect-blindness that is not a matter
of blindness to change of aspect but, instead, a matter of being unable to
notice an aspect. For example, someone might be unable to see a likeness
between two faces, to shift from seeing meaningless lines to seeing a face in
a puzzle-picture, or to see a wooden crate as a dollhouse. Like blindness to
change of aspect, the inability to notice an aspect is partly characterized by878 J. DINISHAK

an experiential di ﬀerence between (merely) knowing that an aspect is there
to be seen and actually seeing it (i.e. either seeing aspects change or
noticing an aspect, depending on the kind of aspect-perception experience
that is in question).
I must make a note about the role Wittgenstein ’s thought plays in this
paper. A lot of what Wittgenstein meant by “seeing an aspect, ”“aspect-
blindness, ”and related concepts in his elusive and subtle discussions of
aspect-perception is unclear. While it is very interesting, uncovering what
Wittgenstein meant by these notions is for another occasion. Nothing
I want to argue here depends on a rich interpretation of Wittgenstein or
on Wittgenstein being right. That being said, some lines of thought in the
positive proposal (see Section 6 ) and the conclusion resonate with
Wittgenstein ’s.
3. Autism
Having sketched initial characterizations of aspect-perception and
aspect-blindness, I will now brie ﬂy introduce autism. Autism is char-
acterized as a neuro-developmental condition, and it is diagnosed via
behavioral criteria in the DSM –5(Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders, 5th Edition ), entry “autism spectrum disorder. ”The
behavioral criteria are taken to indicate de ﬁcits: di ﬃculties with social
initiation and response (e.g. little or no eye contact, atypical gestural
communication), linguistic challenges (e.g. misunderstanding pragmatic
or social uses of language), and restrictive, repetitive, or stereotyped
behavior, interests, or activities (e.g. spinning objects, perseverative
speech, rocking back and forth).
Those diagnosed with autism can vary tremendously in their beha-
viors and characteristics that are deemed relevant for diagnosis. For
example, some autists make little or no eye contact while others do.
Some autists do not speak or have limited speech while others develop
expressive and receptive language but have di ﬃculty using these lan-
guage skills to interact socially. Additionally, some autists describe
themselves as “passing ”–that is, as being able to pass as “neurotypical ”
(e.g. through intensive training that teaches them how to behave like
neurotypicals do), even though they carry an autism diagnosis and
identify as autistic. Research on autism has exploded in recent decades,
but there are few uncontested facts about the condition. Although we
have some clues about possible environmental triggers, the biological
underpinnings of autism, and gene –environment interactions and their
eﬀects on development, ultimately, the causes of autism are unknown.
Not surprisingly, given the enormous behavioral and neuro-PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY 879

developmental variability and complexity of autism, its cognitive and
behavioral phenotypes are still works in progress.
4. Philosophical portrayals of aspect-blindness in autism
Before I articulate the various ways some philosophers appeal to the notion
of‘aspect-blindness ’to characterize autism, some preliminary observations
are in order. First, it would be misguided to treat the existing references to
aspect-blindness in autism in the philosophical literature as anything
resembling developed accounts of the relation between autism and aspect-
blindness or as full-on arguments defending the claim that autists are
aspect-blind. The suggestion that autists are aspect-blind is often made
in passing or limited to a footnote mention (e.g. Bax, 2009 ; Overgaard,
2006 ). Given this, in what follows, I will approach the existing mentions as
invitations for further development and critical re ﬂection. My ﬁrst task,
then, is to consider more carefully what it might mean to say that autists
are aspect-blind. Second, the suggestion that autists are aspect-blind is
made in contexts of discussion where the main philosophical agenda is
something other than understanding autism in its own right (e.g. Bax,
2009 ; Overgaard, 2006 ; Proudfoot, 2013 ; Stawarska, 2010 ). In such con-
texts, autism mainly functions as a putative real-life example of aspect-
blindness or as a comparison case. The primary focus of this paper, by
contrast, is to improve progress in our understanding of autism itself by
considering whether and how an appeal to the notions of ‘aspect-blindness ’
and ‘aspect-perception ’can illuminate dimensions of autistic experience
that call for description. Third, in light of the two preliminary observations
just mentioned, my explorations in what is to come should be taken more
as an attempt made in good faith to start a conversation on underexplored
topics which deserve our concerted e ﬀort and sustained attention, rather
than as a contribution to an already existing philosophical debate on the
issues at hand.
What is it that philosophers have in mind when they claim that autists
suﬀer from aspect-blindness? Their starting point is that autists have well-
documented but poorly understood social di ﬃculties that are somehow
due to di ﬃculties understanding others ’mental states. Then, it is proposed
that di ﬃculties understanding others ’mental states can be thought of as
a form of aspect-blindness. On this line of thinking, autists are unable to
see a person ’s narrowed eyes and downward turned mouth as an expres-
sion of anger or to hear a voice as joyful, for example. They are thereby
said to be “blind ”to the angry facial expression or “deaf ”to the joyfulness
in the voice, even though their eyesight or hearing is not defective.
Construals of aspect-blindness in autism narrowly focus on blindness to
emotions expressed in human behavior, with facial expressions serving as880 J. DINISHAK

the paradigmatic example. Yet, despite this common focus, each construal
depicts what it means to be “blind ”to emotional expressions in a di ﬀerent
way. In what follows, I identify three ways it is understood. Note that these
characterizations are not mutually exclusive. In fact, they overlap and
intermix. I disentangle them in order to sensitize the reader to di ﬀerent
dimensions of the idea that autists are aspect-blind.10
4.1. A ﬀectively impoverished seeing
One construal of the aspect-blind hypothesis is framed in terms of compar-
isons between congenitally blind, typical, and autistic individuals.
Congenitally blind people, unlike autists and typical individuals, are visually
impaired but compensate for this impairment in other ways (e.g. through
touch and hearing) that enable them to form and engage in social relations,
albeit in unusual ways. Typically-developing individuals have intact vision
and a capacity for “mindsight. ”11That is, they can see other people and even
objects and events “with feeling ”; their perception has an a ﬀective
dimension.12For example, a teacher sees a student ’s furrowed brow as
a manifestation of the student ’s confusion. By contrast, in autists, it is
claimed, seeing is dissociated from feeling, or a ﬀectively “neutralized, ”and
this is understood to impair their ability to see the emotional signi ﬁcance of
people and things. This impairment is then understood as a matter of being
blind to (at least some) “aspects ”of human faces and behavior.
4.2. Lack of Gestalt perception
Another way blindness to psychological aspects in autism is speci ﬁed is
in terms of an inability to perceive Gestalten .13That is, those with this
form of aspect-blindness would be able to see the parts of another
person ’s face (e.g. a mouth turned upward in a particular way and
cheeks lifted), but see them as meaningless, disconnected bits rather
than as component parts of a meaningful, circumscribed whole or
Gestalt (i.e. a smiling, joyful face). They can only, with di ﬃculty, build
a meaningful whole from their fragmentary perceptions of facial anat-
omy. By contrast, one who can see the relevant aspects immediately
perceives the meaningful whole (e.g. the angry face) while the physical
shapes and colors are not as readily noticed.
4.3. Soul-blindness
A third way aspect-blindness in autism is characterized is in terms of
“soul-blindness. ”14The soul-blind see other people ’s behavior (and their
own) in a mechanical way –in terms of “measurable actions and reactions ”PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY 881

(Bax, 2009 , p. 73) –rather than as expressive of psychological phenomena
(e.g. pain or joy). This way of seeing human behavior (their own and
others ’) is characterized as a form of treating others as soulless beings (e.g.
as objects or automata).
I have just articulated three portrayals of what it might mean to say that
autists are aspect-blind, each of which needs to be examined. Unfortunately,
I cannot address all of them here. My focus in the next section is assessing
the empirical backing for the ﬁrst of these: the a ﬀective-impoverishment
construal of aspect-blindness in autism. I have chosen this focus because the
aﬀective-impoverishment construal connects most readily and substantially
with a central topic in both the science of social cognition in autism and in
personal accounts of autism –that of characterizing and explaining autists ’
atypical eye contact. Thus, it can serve as a helpful illustration of how we
might go about assessing the idea that autists are aspect-blind.
5. Assessing the a ﬀective impoverishment construal
Before assessing the a ﬀective-impoverishment construal, I must acknowl-
edge an important worry that exists regarding these portrayals of autists as
aspect-blind: They seem to encourage a de ﬁcit view of autism, whereby one
conceptualizes autists primarily (or even solely) in terms of their perceived
deﬁciencies, dysfunctions, and limitations see Dinishak ( 2016 ) for more
discussion of the de ﬁcit view of autism.. There are pressing ethical con-
cerns about de ﬁcit approaches, particularly about those that focus on
supposed de ﬁciencies in emotion, a ﬀect, and social motivation (Jaswal &
Akhtar, 2018 )..
The aﬀective impoverishment construal characterizes autists ’seeing as
aﬀectively “neutralized, ”and “dissociated from feeling, ”resulting in
a“socially anesthetized view of the world. ”15Such characterizations bring
to mind the dangerously misleading yet persistent “lack of empathy ”
portrayal of autism. Both capacities (aspect-perception and empathy) are
characterized as de ﬁning marks of humanity. For example, aspect-
perception is said to answer to “a fundamental aspect of the human
condition, ”to play a crucial role in the human “form of life, ”16and is
understood to be a phenomenon that captures humans ’basic relation to
the world.17Characterizing aspect-perception as an expression of one ’s
own humanity and an awareness of others ’humanity implies that those
who are aspect-blind lack something which is fundamental to being
human. For example, those blind to the psychological signi ﬁcance of
human behavior are described as “incapable of seeing the very subjectivity
or humanity of [their] fellow beings. ”18Their behavior and their under-
standing of others ’behavior is described as mechanical, robotic.19882 J. DINISHAK

Like the “lack of empathy ”portrayal of autism, these ways of construing
aspect-blindness in autism may perpetuate stereotypes of autists as unfeel-
ing, uncaring, and detached. They neglect the likelihood that unusual
behaviors and other atypicalities conceal autists ’interest in others and
their desire for human contact. There is the accompanying danger that
these kinds of de ﬁcit attributions could lead to excluding autists from
certain activities or roles at school, at home, or in the workplace.
These worries warrant serious attention, but my concerns here are
diﬀerent. The focus of my assessment is the descriptive and explanatory
fruitfulness of attributing aspect-blindness to autists for understanding
autistic experience, not the ethical viability of this attribution.
As noted above, my assessment of the empirical backing for the attribu-
tion of aspect-blindness to autists will focus on the a ﬀective-
impoverishment construal. I argue that the empirical backing for attribu-
tions of this form of aspect-blindness is questionable at best, as psycholo-
gical studies on and hypotheses concerning relevant “autistic ”behaviors
are mixed. Furthermore, many ﬁrst-person accounts of how autists experi-
ence eye contact run contrary to this construal.
To assess whether the a ﬀective-impoverishment characterization of
autists ’face-perception is empirically sound, one must investigate
autists ’looking, face-scanning, and eye-tracking, behaviors which are
taken to be integral to face-perception in humans. Face-perception is
thought to play a key role in the understanding of others ’thoughts,
feelings, and so forth. In the west, at least, it is believed that a lot of
visual information about people ’sf e e l i n g sa n dt h o u g h t si sc a p t u r e di n
their faces, especially in their eyes. Many studies show that autists look
at faces for less time than non-autistic individuals do, and they look at
diﬀerent parts of the face as compared to non-autistic individuals
(Falck-Ytter & von Hofsten, 2011 ). In an oft-cited study (Klin, Jones,
Schultz, Volkmar, & Cohen, 2002 ) researchers recorded autists ’scanning
behavior while viewing an emotional scene of the ﬁlmWho ’sA f r a i do f
Virginia Woolf and found that autists spent more time looking at the
actors ’mouths than at their eyes.
This is just one of many studies that have shown that autists do not look
at the eyes as often, at the same time, or as long as typical individuals do.
In fact, these and other kinds of atypical eye-contact-related behaviors are
well-documented across a variety of domains. They are observed in experi-
mental, clinical, and everyday settings. The contentious issue is what these
behavioral di ﬀerences tell us about autists ’social cognition. In this con-
nection, the relevant question for our purposes is whether autists ’looking
and scanning behavior decisively supports the attribution of aspect-
blindness, understood as a ﬀectively impoverished seeing. That is, doPHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY 883

these behaviors indicate that autists ’face perception is somehow “emo-
tionally anesthetized ”or“aﬀectively impoverished ”?
To get some traction on this question, let ’s examine two prominent and
competing psychological hypotheses posited to explain autists ’looking and
scanning behavior: the gaze-indi ﬀerence and gaze-aversion hypotheses.
According to the gaze-indi ﬀerence hypothesis, autists fail to look at the
eyes because, in some sense, they do not appreciate the psychological
signiﬁcance of the eyes. Proponents of this view describe autists as not
interested in social stimuli (Grelotti, Gauthier, & Schultz, 2002 )o ra s
insensitive to the social signals in others ’eyes (Moriuchi, Klin, & Jones,
2017 ). In other words, autists tend to ignore the most emotionally salient
region of the face because these regions are not engaging or salient for them.
This hypothesis is in keeping with a common portrayal of behaviors asso-
ciated with autism –these behaviors as indicative of interpersonal indi ﬀer-
ence to others (Hadjikhani, Joseph, Snyder, & Tager-Flusberg, 2017 ).
Atﬁrst blush, the gaze-indi ﬀerence hypothesis would seem to align with
the idea that autists ’face-perception is a ﬀectively impoverished. However,
on closer examination, key characterizations of the a ﬀective-
impoverishment construal (e.g. failing to “see faces as infused with emo-
tional signi ﬁcance, ”“aﬀectively impoverished ”and “emotionally anesthe-
tized ”seeing) are ambiguous. For example, do these phrases mean that
autists see faces as totally devoid of emotional signi ﬁcance, or does it mean
that they struggle to see the particular emotional signi ﬁcance of others ’
facial expressions? On the second understanding, autists would see the
emotional signi ﬁcance of faces in some sense. They would see a face as
manifesting some feeling or other but would struggle to accurately detect
what is being expressed –for example, whether on a given occasion
another person ’s eyes express sadness or longing. Thus, despite ﬁrst
impressions, it is unclear whether the gaze-indi ﬀerence hypothesis sup-
ports the a ﬀective-impoverishment construal of aspect-blindness in autism.
Iturn now to a competing explanation of autists ’eye contact behaviors:
the gaze-aversion hypothesis. On this hypothesis, autists actively avoid eye
contact, and they do not look at faces at the same time, as often, or for as
long as typical individuals, nor do they look at the same facial regions as
typical individuals do because it is overwhelming, painful, or otherwise
disturbing or uncomfortable for them to do so (Hutt & Ounsted, 1966 ;
Kliemann, Dziobek, Hatri, Steimke, & Heekeren, 2010 ). Eye contact avoid-
ance is taken to indicate implicit awareness of the social signi ﬁcance of eye
contact. Autists recognize the social signi ﬁcance of eye contact but have
negative reactions to it that motivate them to avoid it. Recall that the gaze-
indiﬀerence hypothesis suggests that autists exhibit interpersonal indi ﬀer-
ence to others or a lack of socio-a ﬀective sensitivity. The gaze-aversion
hypothesis, by contrast, suggests that autists experience socio-a ﬀective884 J. DINISHAK

oversensitivity. Thus, it would seem to directly con ﬂict with the a ﬀective-
impoverishment construal.
Consistent with the gaze-aversion hypothesis, autists appear to have
a stronger skin-conductance reaction to direct gaze (Joseph, Ehrman,
McNally, & Keehn, 2008 ; Tanaka & Sung, 2013 ). Further, recent imaging
work shows heightened activation of the amygdala, a part of the brain that
plays a key role in processing emotions, during gaze ﬁxation (Dalton et al.,
2005 ; Kleinhans et al., 2010 ). When constrained to look in the eyes, autists
show abnormally high activation in the subcortical system (Hadjikhani
et al., 2017 ). Thus, autists may, in fact, have a heightened emotional
response to direct eye contact, not an impoverished one.
All in all, results of experimental studies of autists ’looking and scanning
behavior are mixed. There is no scienti ﬁc consensus concerning whether
these behaviors demonstrate that autists have heightened or diminished
socio-a ﬀective sensitivity. Moreover, there are questions concerning how
to understand precisely how a ﬀectively impoverished seeing manifests in
the relevant kinds of behaviors –thus, how to understand the relation
between the behavioral manifestations of a ﬀectively impoverished seeing
and empirical work on autists ’atypical socio-a ﬀective sensitivity during face-
perception.
In addition, many autobiographical accounts and other self-reports by
autists on how they experience eye contact in social interaction suggest
that they experience socio-a ﬀective oversensitivity when engaging in direct
eye contact. Some autists may experience the “overwhelming presence of
another ”(Cole, 1999 , p. 90) when they meet another person ’s gaze. One
autist describes the experience of direct eye contact this way: “I actually
hear you better when I am not looking at you . . . eye contact is . . .
uncomfortable ”(Lawson, 1998 , p. 11). Another says the following: “I can
look but it ’s not pleasant ”(Kedar, 2012 , p. 49). Another says information
falls out of the eyes onto you “like a bombardment ”(Endow, 2017 , n.p.),
and another says “it can be a physical pain; it feels like burning with too
many emotions, and I just can ’t take it in all at once ”(Howard, 2016 , n.p.).
To conclude this section, existing empirical data from experimental
psychology and personal accounts of autistic experience in social interac-
tion do not decisively support the attribution of aspect-blindness to autists,
where aspect-blindness is understood as a ﬀectively impoverished seeing.
6. Rethinking the application of aspect-perception concepts to autism
Next, I explore the possibility of broadening the framework for under-
standing sensory-perceptual di ﬀerences associated with autism to include
the notion of ‘aspect-perception. ’What might motivate theorists of autism
to conceptualize autists as engaging in forms of aspect- perception ratherPHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY 885

than primarily or exclusively framing autistic experience in terms of
aspect-blindness? Perhaps, most importantly, a framework that features
aspect-perception takes seriously the idea that autists have a point of view
on the world which is not simply a matter of missing the things that are
perceived by those labeled as “normal. ”Their perceptual experience is not
understood merely as the absence of forms of perceptual experience
typically possessed by individuals, nor is it understood simply in terms
of a variation in the quantities of features, traits, abilities, or characteristics
possessed by non-autists. While both aspect-blindness and aspect-
perception can support an understanding of some autistic sensory-
perceptual di ﬀerences in terms of qualitative variation –as diﬀerences in
kind, not just degrees –aspect-perception allows for the capture of more
kinds of qualitative di ﬀerences than aspect-blindness does.
In addition, an emphasis on aspect-perception could help theorists
develop and assess a provocative idea that lies at the heart of the autism
rights movement: that some forms of atypical neurological “wiring ”in
humans, such as autism, are positive variations (Blume, 1998 ). Proponents
of the neurodiversity perspective, as it applies to autism, advance the claim
that autism is an ineliminable aspect of an autistic person ’s identity that
should be accepted, respected, supported, and even celebrated, rather than
eliminated.20Framing some of autists ’sensory-perceptual di ﬀerences in
terms of alternate forms of aspect-perception could give us a way to
conceptualize some of those di ﬀerences as fundamental, ineliminable
ways of being in the world, ways that, at least in some cases, confer
aesthetic, epistemic, and pragmatic advantages and bene ﬁts and are thus,
in that sense, positive.
7. Sensory-perceptual di ﬀerences associated with autism
Autists ’neurodiversity manifests in the wide range of sensory, movement,
perceptual, and cognitive di ﬀerences that are documented through self-
report and research studies. These di ﬀerences are multifarious and often
idiosyncratic. Sensory-perceptual features, in particular, illustrate the
diverse range of phenomena: They are evidenced across modalities (audi-
tory, visual, somatosensory, gustatory, olfactory, and vestibular) (Baranek,
Little, Parham, Ausderau, & Sabatos-DeVito, 2014 ), and they occur in
some forms and to some extent in most autists regardless of their intellec-
tual ability (Leekam, Nieto, Libby, Wing, & Gould, 2007 ).
In a moment, I will brie ﬂy describe some of the reported sensory-
perceptual di ﬀerences documented in autism that are all but unexplored
by philosophers who link autism and aspect-perception (or, rather,
aspect-blindness). My aim here is modest: to begin to investigate
whether these sensory-perceptual features can be fruitfully described as886 J. DINISHAK

forms of aspect-perception or as requisite capacities for forms of aspect-
perception. I will do this primarily by identifying questions about these
phenomena and their interrelations, which we should answer if the
broad, guiding question is how to understand the relations between
autism, aspect-perception, and aspect-blindness. Before I begin, a few
cautions are in order. First, I am not claiming that all autists and only
a u t i s t se x p e r i e n c et h e s ek i n d so fd i ﬀerences. Second, the impact of these
diﬀerences on autists ’development and everyday social functioning is
not well understood.
7.1. Sensory sensitivities
Many autists experience either increased (hyper-) or decreased (hypo-)
sensitivity to incoming stimuli. These sensitivities can vary from hypo- to
hyper-sensitivity even within the same individual (Baranek et al., 2014 ),
and they may result in di ﬀerent reactions to the same stimuli. Many autists
can experience particular sounds, smells of food, tastes, or textures of
clothing as intensely painful or pleasurable. One autist recalls
a childhood memory of the pain and anxiety he experienced from a hyper-
sensitivity to certain sounds: “My mom took me through a drive-thru
carwash once when I was in grade school and I was terri ﬁed. The brushes
sounded to me like the sound of intense machine-gun ﬁre, but I could not
communicate well enough to explain why I got so upset ”(quoted in
Robledo, Donnellan, & Strandt-Conroy, 2012 , p. 4).
What I want to underscore here is that autists ’hyper-sensitivities may
enable an enhanced ability to perceive sensory stimuli, an ability that may
be requisite for some forms of aspect-perception. Moreover, some of these
hyper-sensitivities constitute or contribute to forms of talent when they
confer epistemic, aesthetic, or pragmatic advantages. In the auditory
domain, for example, some autists have superior pitch recognition, better
discrimination of musical tones, or enhanced perception of speci ﬁc fre-
quencies of sounds that are not easily discernible by others (Bonnel et al.,
2003 ; Heaton, Davis, & Happé, 2008 ).
Hyper-sensitivities in the auditory and visual modalities that confer
epistemic, aesthetic, or pragmatic advantages are perhaps the most com-
mon. In Look Me in the Eye (Robison, 2007 ), autistic autobiographer John
Elder Robison provides a vivid example of increased sensitivity in the
tactile modality. He describes the pragmatic bene ﬁts of his hyper-
sensitive sense of touch for bike repair:
[It] allowed me to sense the condition of mechanical things through my hands. And
the more I practiced, the better my ability to sense machinery became.PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY 887

As I turned the pedals on an old bike I ’d feel tiny bumps as grains of sand passed
through the gears . . . I ’d feel little grabs as I pedaled through tight spots, where the
chain might not be properly oiled. I could even feel sloppiness when the crank
bearings were too loose. I learned to feel every moving part of the bicycle with just
a few simple touches. (p. 233)
The language Robison uses here is suggestive of aspect-perception. He
describes his experience in terms of sensing machinery and the condition
of mechanical things and feeling sloppiness through touch.
7.2. Perceptual processing in autism
In addition to di ﬀerences in sensory sensitivity that may enhance their
ability to perceive sensory stimuli, autists appear to have di ﬀerences in
perceptual processing as well, and these di ﬀerences a ﬀord autists with
advantages when performing some perceptual tasks. Many research studies
have demonstrated that autists ’performance in some perceptual domains
is superior to that of comparison groups, especially when the perceptual
task requires attention to minor changes in an environment, in details,
parts, speci ﬁc features, or in local information. Autists are superior at
picking out individual features from some larger entity. For example,
autists consistently perform at a level superior to non-autists on visual
search tasks (Joseph, Keehn, Connolly, Wolfe, & Horowitz, 2009 ), the
Block Design test (Shah & Frith, 1993 ) and Embedded Figures tasks
(Mottron, Dawson, Souliéres, Hubert, & Burack, 2006 ). Autists can com-
plete jigsaw puzzles just as easily with the picture facedown as when it is
face-up (Frith & Hermelin, 1969 ). Some studies suggest that they are less
susceptible to some kinds of visual illusions (Happé, 1996 ). Autists ’super-
ior performance on these tasks is thought to be due to enhanced local
processing. While typical individuals focus on global information by
default, autists appear to focus on local information by default and do
not automatically attend to the “gist ”of what they perceive.
What bearing might these empirical data have on our understanding of
whether and how the notions of ‘aspect-blindness ’and ‘aspect-perception ’
can be fruitfully applied to describe atypicalities in autists ’perceptual
experiences in this domain? Are there conceptual grounds for describing
autists ’enhanced perception of speci ﬁc parts and ﬁne details in these
settings as a form of alternate aspect-perception?
One consideration in favor of an a ﬃrmative answer is that autistic and
non-autistic perceivers view the same ﬁgures and diagrams under the same
conditions, and, yet, they have di ﬀerent visual experiences of those dia-
grams and ﬁgures. As with cases of disparities in aspect-seeing in typical
individuals, we might say that, in one sense, what autistic and non-autistic
participants see in these cases is the same (after all, they are viewing the888 J. DINISHAK

same stimuli), but in another sense of “what is seen, ”what autists and non-
autists see is not the same. Yet, questions remain regarding how to
characterize the relevant experiential disparities. Autists appear to be less
likely to see the details as interrelated parts of a comprehensive whole or
Gestalt . Are autists thereby Gestalt -blind? While autists may not sponta-
neously and automatically attend to the “gist ”of the diagram or ﬁgure as
readily as typical individuals do, interestingly and importantly, research
suggests that they are capable of global processing and attending to the
“gist ”when prompted to do so (Koldewyn, Jiang, Weigelt, & Kanwisher,
2013 ). Given these empirical results, we should not automatically conclude
that autists have a weakness in global processing and are thereby unable to
attend to the Gestalt as a byproduct of their enhanced local processing.
Moreover, whether autists exhibit a local processing bias would seem to
depend on the nature of the stimuli and the task. There is no simple
equation between “autistic ”and “local processor ”(D’Souza, Booth,
Connolly, Happé, & Karmilo ﬀ-Smith, 2016 ).
However we decide to conceptualize autists ’atypicalities in these
domains, our ways of framing them should be sensitive to potential
diﬀerences between (1) a lack or incapacity in xand (2) a preference or
style for ysuch that xis not the perceiver ’s spontaneous, automatic, or
default way of perceiving. Moreover, these empirical data raise intriguing
questions about the possible role and signi ﬁcance of spontaneity in aspect-
perception experience. If a perceiver is less inclined to spontaneously see
a picture as a comprehensive whole or to undergo perceptual reversals
when viewing ambiguous ﬁgures such as the duck-rabbit, is this a form of
incapacity? Is needing to be prompted to see the Gestalt or to change
aspects a form of incapacity? If it is a form of incapacity, is this incapacity
fruitfully conceptualized as a form of aspect- blindness ?
7.3. Synesthesia
A third kind of atypical sensory-perceptual phenomenon documented in
autists is synesthetic experiences or synesthesia-like experiences.
Synesthesia occurs when the stimulation of one sensory modality (indu-
cer) triggers a response in either a second modality or in a di ﬀerent
facet of the same modality (concurrent). It can be conceptualized as the
occurrence of a conscious perceptual experience with a lack of normal
sensory stimulation (Ward, 2013 ). So-called colored hearing, visual
experiences of colors triggered by hearing musical notes (Baron-
Cohen, Wyke, & Binnie, 1987 ), and particular tastes triggered by hearing
or reading certain words (Ward & Simner, 2003 ) illustrate multi-modal
synesthesia. Music can have colors, words can have taste, and tastes can
have shapes. For example, a man with taste-shape synesthesia cookingPHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY 889

chicken remarks, “I wanted the taste of this chicken to be a pointed
shape, but it came out all round ”(Cytowic & Wood, 1993 ,p .4 ) .V i s u a l
experiences of colors triggered by the visual perception of black text or
digits illustrates uni-modal synesthesia, which, for example, could entail
seeing the numeral ﬁve as blue.
The prevalence of synesthesia is thought to be higher in autists than in
the general population. For example, a recent study (Baron-Cohen et al.,
2013 ) of the prevalence of grapheme-color synesthesia (where viewing
numbers or letters triggers experiences of colors) in autists suggests that
synesthesia is signi ﬁcantly more common in autistic adults than in typical
adults, at a rate three times greater (18.9%) than in the typical sample
(7.22%), based on self-report.
Autists appear to experience not only common forms of synesthesia like
grapheme-color synesthesia but also less prevalent forms. For example,
Jim, an autistic adult, experiences a mixing of touch and sound. Jim
reports that “touching the lower part of his face produces a sound-like
sensation in addition to the tactile sensation ”(Cesaroni & Garber, 1991 ,
p. 305). F.C., a savant autistic adult, experiences a kind of month –emotion
or number –emotion correspondence that combines emotion and physical
sensation. In a case study (Bouvet et al., 2014 ), F.C. reports that some
numbers can be “nice or not nice ”and that numbers can “matter or not
matter ”(p.6). The researchers reported that “the evocation (or the vision)
of certain numbers causes F.C. a physical sensation, as sometimes he
reacted to certain numbers as though to a tickle ”(p.6). F.C. also refers to
months of the year to verbalize his emotions and sensations.
These phenomena cast doubt on the claim that autists have a ﬀectively
impoverished perception since many kinds of synesthetic experience have
an aﬀective dimension. But how, if at all, are these experiences related,
conceptually or otherwise, to aspect-perception? To get traction on this
question, we need to improve our understanding of the interrelations
between sensory hyper-sensitivities, extra attention to detail, and synesthe-
sia. Are autists ’sensory hyper-sensitivities a basis for their extra attention
to detail?21Are these sensitivities a basis for their synesthetic experiences?
More generally, in what sense, if any, do extra attention to detail, sensory
hyper-sensitivity, and synesthesia facilitate forms of aspect-perception? Are
hyper-sensitivity and extra attention to detail requisite for some forms of
aspect-perception?
7.4. Aspect-perception in the psychological domain?
In this exploration of autists ’sensory-perceptual di ﬀerences, I have been
suggesting that there is a need for more careful and thoroughgoing re ﬂec-
tion on how to characterize those di ﬀerences in ways that allow for890 J. DINISHAK

perceptual presence, not just absence, and in ways that capture the diver-
sity and complexity of the di ﬀerences between autistic and typical indivi-
duals. This, I think, is also apparent in the psychological domain, in the
ways autists achieve interpersonal understanding, the very domain that is
cited by philosophers as one in which autists are aspect-blind.
Consider, for example, how Donna Williams, an autistic adult, describes
her perception of mood:
I could tell mood from a foot better than from a face. I could sense the slightest
change in regular pace and intensity of movement of foot. I could sense any
asymmetry in rhythm that indicated erraticness and unpredictability . . . Facial
expression, by comparison, was so overlaid with stored expression, full of so many
attempts to cover up or sway impression22that the foot was much truer. I used
sound in the same way, even breathing. Intonation aside, I could sense change in
regular rhythm, pace, intensity and pitch. (quoted in Cole, 1999 , p. 96)
Here we have a description of a way of achieving understanding of
a person ’s mood through perceiving non-verbal behavior that is less
ocular-, face-, and head-centric than more typical methods (e.g. seeing
emotions in facial expressions). However, Williams ’report is not
a description of a point of view that is simply missing things which typical
individuals perceive, nor is it a description merely of a lack or exaggeration
of what typical people do. What sense-modalities Williams relies on most,
what aspects of expressive behavior she orients to and attends to, di ﬀer in
kind. Williams reports sensing the tempo and rhythm of breath, voice, and
foot movement, qualities of kinesthetic behavior, as expressive of
a person ’s mood.
Like typical individuals, Williams describes her experience in face-to-
face encounter as one where she perceives mental states in expressive
behavior, as a perception of psychological aspects, if you will. However,
the kinds of non-verbal, expressive behavior that are most infused with
meaning for her are not the ones that are commonly the focus of perceiv-
ing the mental in expressive behavior.
Compare Williams ’description of coming to understand another ’s
mood through non-verbal behavior with Daniel Tammet ’s(2006 ), another
personal account of understanding others as an autistic adult:
Numbers are my ﬁrst language, one I often think and feel in. Emotions can be hard
for me to understand or know how to react to, so I often use numbers to help me. If
a friend says they feel sad or depressed, I picture myself sitting in the dark hollow-
ness of number 6 to help me experience the same sort of feeling and understand
it . . . By doing this, numbers actually help me get closer to understanding other
people. (p. 7)
While Williams uses non-verbal cues during in-person encounters to help
her understand others ’moods, Tammet uses his ﬁrst language, numbers,PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY 891

to simulate, in his imagination, the feeling-in-context that he wishes to
understand. For many, numbers connote the impersonal, yet for Tammet,
numbers could not be more personal, more imbued with feeling. He has an
idiosyncratic form of imaginative simulation that involves number –emo-
tion synesthesia as a basis for empathetic identi ﬁcation with those whose
feelings he wishes to understand, but it is unclear whether those whose
mental states Tammet understands through this technique are or need to
be perceptually present. This gives us reason to refrain from conceptualiz-
ing the technique as a form of aspect-perception, although perhaps it is or
could be a requisite ability for aspect-perception in face-to-face social
encounters.
My third example involves understanding non-human animals. Temple
Grandin ( 1995 ), an autistic adult, noticed aspects in cattle behavior that
others did not, which helped her to design more humane slaughterhouses.
She believes that her autism results in heightened sensory perceptions that
allow her to imagine how an animal will feel moving through a system.
Here she describes some of her observations of cattle behavior and how
they improved her slaughterhouse designs:
It is the little things that make them balk and refuse to move, such as seeing a small
piece of chain hanging down from an alley fence . . . Cattle will also balk and refuse
to walk through an alley if they can see people up ahead . . . This is one of the
reasons that I designed curved single- ﬁle alleys with solid sides. They help keep
cattle calmer . . . (pp. 142 –149)
It is clear from our examples in this section that many autists experience
their sensory-perceptual atypicalities as conferring various kinds of advan-
tages. Yet, as Jim Sinclair ( 1998 ), another autistic adult with synesthesia
and sensory hyper-sensitivity, notes, there can be a kind of trade-o ﬀ
between the advantages and disadvantages of such atypicalities. While
tinted lenses improve the functional use of Sinclair ’s vision for some
tasks, it is at the expense of what he calls “meaning in perception. ”
Sinclair writes:
Sensory sensitivities can be painful and can prevent enjoyment of some aspects of
normal social involvement –but I gain so much beauty and meaning from the way
my senses work! My hearing is oversensitive and this is bothersome at times, but
I wouldn ’t change it because I don ’t want to lose the colors of voices and the tactility
of music. (n.p.)
Let’s take stock. Am I claiming that aspect-perception should be the main
methodology for investigating sensory-perceptual di ﬀerences associated
with autism? On the contrary. I want to leave it open that the aspect-
blindness hypothesis may capture something important about autists ’
sensory-perceptual experience. However, we need to rethink how we are
pursuing this hypothesis, given the empirical and conceptual issues I draw892 J. DINISHAK

attention to in problematizing the notion of “aspect-blindness ”as applied
to autism. I am suggesting that if we are going in this direction, thinking
about connecting autism and aspects, it is, at the very least, plausible, even
promising, to explore aspect-perception in understanding autism, and as
such, it would be better to include aspect-perception in a descriptive and
explanatory framework for understanding autism that appeals to aspect
concepts. Whether “aspect-perception ”applies to all or only to some
subset of sensory-perceptual di ﬀerences associated with autism is some-
thing that we need to explore. How far a framework for understanding
autism that includes aspect-perception will take us we do not know yet, but
we should pursue it, all the while keeping in mind the empirical and
conceptual issues about aspect-blindness and aspect-perception.
8. Conclusion
In conclusion, a focus on perception is a welcome development in autism
studies, and both autism studies and the neurodiversity movement would
beneﬁt greatly from a deeper understanding of the phenomena of aspect-
perception. However, I want to stress that we must proceed cautiously,
both with the notion of “aspect-blindness ”and with the notion of “aspect-
perception. ”One key reason for caution concerns the nature of aspect-
perception: It allows for experiential disparities between perceivers without
any corresponding di ﬀerences in sensory input. That is, it is possible for
multiple perceivers viewing the same object at the same time and under the
same viewing conditions to perceive that object under di ﬀerent aspects, or
for one perceiver to notice an aspect that goes unnoticed by the other
perceiver. For example, both perceivers see two faces, but only one per-
ceiver notices the likeness between the two faces. The failure to see the
likeness is not explicable in terms of defective or compromised sight, yet
aspect-perception is a genuinely perceptual experience. An epistemic con-
sequence of this feature of aspect-perception and autists ’fundamental
unlike-mindedness is that autists may perceive aspects which non-autists
do not and even cannot perceive. If non-autists cannot perceive these
aspects themselves, it raises the question of whether non-autists can per-
ceive autists perceiving them.
Thus, we should stay continually aware of the possibility of our own
blindness when we investigate autism. Having the thought “I could be
blind too ”on our minds more often might help us understand some
features of autism that we could not otherwise understand. Such metho-
dological humility constitutes an awareness of and openness to the like-
lihood that we might be missing something, in part because autistic
diﬀerences make for unfamiliar variability in their forms of expressiveness
and sensory-perceptual experience. We must learn to be open to thesePHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY 893

modes of expression and appreciate that faithfully depicting atypical
experience depends on this kind of openness and learning.
In this connection, cultivating our imaginative capacities is crucial.
Wittgenstein writes that we tend to imagine “the feeble-minded ( Den
Schwachsinnigen ) under the aspect of the degenerate, the essentially
incomplete, as it were in tatters. And so under that of disorder instead of
a more primitive order. ”He suggests that imagining them under the aspect
of a more primitive order “would be a far more fruitful way of looking at
them ”(1967 ,§372). Related sentiments can be gleaned from some of
Wittgenstein ’sr eﬂections on color-blind people: “We speak of ‘colour-
blindness ’and call it a defect . But there could easily be several di ﬀering
abilities, none of which is clearly inferior to the others ”(1980a, §31) and
“not every deviation from the norm must be a blindness, a defect ”
(Ibid., §9).
“Feeble-minded ”and related terms are deeply problematic, and we
should be wary of characterizing the mentally atypical as somehow more
primitive than the mentally typical. However, Wittgenstein ’s suggestion –
that it would be more fruitful to imagine some forms of unlike-mindedness
under the aspect of an alternate order rather than a disorder –should be
heeded. Wittgenstein ’s observations on the notion of “defect ”here also
align with the idea that modeling our understanding of autists ’sensory-
perceptual experience on “normal ”perceptual experience can only go so
far toward capturing the content and character of autists ’perceptual
experience of people, objects, environments, interactions, situations, and
so forth. Some sensory-perceptual experiences autists undergo by virtue of
their di ﬀerences are better conceptualized as forms in their own right, with
their own qualitatively distinctive phenomenology, rather than merely as
quantitatively degenerate forms of aspect-perception in non-autists.
All in all, a satisfactory account of autism, one that understands autists ’
ways of being and their sensory-perceptual experiences from within their
worlds, is going to require studying personal accounts of autism see
Dinishak ( in press ) for a discussion of the roles of autobiographical
accounts of autism in the science of autism., careful thinking, wisdom,
and perhaps most importantly, imagination . Imagination is only one of the
tools needed, but it is a crucial resource for improving the understanding
of kinds of di ﬀerences that are unfamiliar and remote from one ’s own
experience. Two central tasks for future work on this dimension of the
project are (1) to identify the di ﬀerent kinds and roles of imagination
necessary for improving progress in our understanding of autism; (2) to
identify how non-autists should cultivate their imaginative capacities in the
light of (1). Regarding (1), one role for imagination is that it can encourage
forms of openness and sensitivity to di ﬀerence that facilitate learning about
autists ’modes of expression and sensory-experience, which have894 J. DINISHAK

unfamiliar variability. As for (2), personal accounts of autism can help
non-autists cultivate their emotional responses to and ways of conceiving
of autists. Narratives, in particular, are important for understanding di ﬀer-
ences which are remote from one ’s own experience. They expose us to the
kinds of di ﬀerences we seek to understand and provide appropriate back-
ground for contextualizing those di ﬀerences and embedding them in
relevant contexts (Gallagher, 2014 ). More radically, as Hacking ( 2009 )
argues, it may be that autism narratives create ways to express experiences.
If this is right, then “autism narratives are not just stories or histories,
describing a given reality. They are creating the language in which to
describe the experience of autism, and hence helping to forge the concepts
in which to think autism ”(p. 1).
Notes
1.The duck-rabbit ﬁgure appears in Joseph Jastrow ’sFact and Fable in Psychology
(Jastrow, 1900 ). It was Wittgenstein ’s use of it, however, that drew considerable
philosophical attention. Many contemporary discussions of aspect-perception trace
back to Wittgenstein ’s remarks about the duck-rabbit ﬁgure and related phenomena,
as they are found in Philosophical Investigations (hereafter PI),“Wittgenstein, 1967,
1980b, 1980c, 2009a, and 2009b. The duck-rabbit in particular appears at in
Wittgenstein, 2009b, 118.
2.The relevant phenomena extend beyond the visual modality to the auditory mod-
ality and perhaps to other modalities as well (e.g. the tactile).
3.The overview of aspect-perception provided here is merely a meager sampling of the
relevant concepts and phenomena. It is not intended to provide a representative, let
alone exhaustive, taxonomy of the many kinds of experiences and possible experi-
ences one might call “aspect-perception. ”
4.Wittgenstein, 2009b, §222.
5.Wittgenstein, 1980c, §510.
6.Wittgenstein, 1980b, §1036.
7.Ibid., §997.
8.Wittgenstein, 2009a, §200c.
9.Wittgenstein, 2009b, §233.
10.Notice that all these construals are committed to the idea that autists are “blind ”to
theangry facial expression or to the joyfulness in a voice, for example, even though
their eyesight and hearing are not defective. Two presuppositions underlie this
claim. I note them but do not assess them here. The ﬁrst is that (at least some)
psychological phenomena can be perceived in face-to-face social encounters and
that, ordinarily, people do perceive such phenomena. The second concerns the
relation between perceiving emotional expressions and aspect-perception, namely,
that perceiving emotional expressions is a kind of aspect-perception and, corre-
spondingly, that the inability to perceive these expressions is a form of aspect-
blindness.Both presuppositions are contentious. Regarding the ﬁrst presupposition,
there is much theoretical debate concerning how best to describe and explain how
we come to understand others ’mental states (e.g. through inference, perception, or
both) and whether and how our mental attributions (e.g. “Sarah is angry, ”“BobPHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY 895

wants more co ﬀee”) are justi ﬁed (e.g. inferentially or non-inferentially). A common
line of thought in both philosophy and psychology is that to access other minds,
humans have to infer unobservable mental states from overt behavior, which is
observable and thus perceptible. Recently, however, the idea that at least some of our
access to other minds is perceptual has begun to receive serious consideration and
theoretical attention. Proponents of perceptual models claim that we can, at least in
some cases, immediately perceive the mental states of other people. See Gallagher
(2004 ) and Krueger and Overgaard ( 2012 ), for example. Regarding the second
presupposition, this is an under-theorized topic, one that tends to be taken up in
the context of Wittgenstein interpretation, and here interpreters disagree whether
Wittgenstein holds that psychological concepts (e.g. ‘sadness, ’‘joyfulness, ’‘timidity ’)
are aspect concepts. For discussion, see Mulhall ( 1990 ) and Baz ( 2000 ), who
challenges Mulhall ’s interpretation.
11.Stawarska ( 2010 ),p. 273.
12.Ibid., p. 274.
13.See Overgaard ( 2006 ),Footnote 12, p. 70, for example.
14.This characterization, found in Bax ( 2009 ),borrows from discussions of soul-
blindness in Cavell (1979). Bax ( 2009 ) suggests that “severe ”autists and sociopaths
are examples of the soul-blind. Cavell (1979) does not cite autism or sociopathy as
illustrations of soul-blindness, however.
15.Stawarska ( 2010 ,p. 274).
16.Baz ( 2000 ).
17.Mulhall ( 1990 ).
18.Bax ( 2009 , p. 73).
19.For example, see Mulhall ( 1990 ),Bax ( 2009 ), and Proudfoot ( 2013 ).
20.Importantly, to embrace the neurodiversity perspective is not to embrace the view
that all facets of being autistic are positive. Proponents of neurodiversity grant that
some facets of autism are experienced as impairing by some autists in some physical
and social environments and that either remediation of these aspects, social change,
or both are desirable responses in such cases.
21.See Baron-Cohen, Ashwin, Ashwin, Tavassoli, and Chakrabarti ( 2009 )for discussion
of potential links between hyper-systemizing, hyper-attention to detail, and sensory
hyper-sensitivities in autism.
22.In her best-selling memoir, Nobody Nowhere (Williams, 1992 ), Williams further
describes how she was overwhelmed by perceiving faces.
Acknowledgments
I am greatly indebted to Nameera Akhtar, Jonathan Ellis, Caitlin Hamblin-Yule, Gurpreet
Rattan, and two anonymous reviewers for helpful comments on prior drafts of this paper.
Parts of it were presented to the Institute of Philosophy at the University of Iceland and
the philosophy departments at the University of British Columbia and the University of
Toronto. I am grateful to participants for their feedback.
Disclosure statement
No potential con ﬂict of interest was reported by the author.896 J. DINISHAK

Notes on contributor
Janette Dinishak is Assistant Professor at University of California Santa Cruz –Philosophy
References
Baranek, G. T., Little, L. M., Parham, D., Ausderau, K. K., & Sabatos-DeVito, M. G. ( 2014 ).
Sensory features in autism spectrum disorders. In F. Volkmar, R. Paul, K. Pelphrey, &
S. Rogers (Eds.), Handbook of autism and pervasive developmental disorders (4th ed., pp.
378 –408). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Baron-Cohen, B., Wyke, M., & Binnie, C. ( 1987 ). Hearing words and seeing colours: An
experimental investigation of a case of synaesthesia. Perception ,16, 761 –767.
Baron-Cohen, S., Ashwin, E., Ashwin, C., Tavassoli, T., & Chakrabarti, B. ( 2009 ). Talent in
autism: Hyper-systemizing, hyper-attention to detail and sensory hypersensitivity.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of B ,364, 1377 –1383.
Baron-Cohen, S., Johnson, D., Asher, J., Wheelwright, S., Fisher, S., Gregersen, P., &
Allison, C. ( 2013 ). Is synaesthesia more common in autism? Molecular Autism ,4,1–6.
Bax, C. ( 2009 ).Subjectivity after wittgenstein: wittgenstein ’s embodied and embedded subject
and the debate about the death of man . Amsterdam: institute for logic. Language, and
Computation.
Baz, A. ( 2000 ). What ’s the point of seeing aspects? Philosophical Investigations ,23,9 7 –121.
Blume, H. ( 1998 , September). Neurodiversity. Retrieved from https://www.theatlantic.
com/magazine/archive/1998/09/neurodiversity/305909/
Bonnel, A., Mottron, L., Peretz, I., Trudel, M., Gallun, E., & Bonnel, A.-M. ( 2003 ).
Enhanced pitch sensitivity in individuals with autism: A signal detection analysis.
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience ,15, 226 –235.
Bouvet, L., Donnadieu, S., Valdois, S., Caron, C., Dawson, M., & Mottron, L. ( 2014 ).
Veridical mapping in savant abilities, absolute pitch, and synesthesia: An autism case
study. Frontiers in Psychology ,5. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00106
Cesaroni, L., & Garber, M. ( 1991 ). Exploring the experience of autism through ﬁrsthand
accounts. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders ,21, 303 –313.
Cole, J. ( 1999 ).About Face . Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.
Cytowic, R., & Wood, F. ( 1993 ).The man who tasted shapes . New York: Putnam.
D’Souza, D., Booth, R., Connolly, M., Happé, F., & Karmilo ﬀ-Smith, A. ( 2016 ). Rethinking
the concepts of ‘local or global processors ’: Evidence from Williams syndrome, down
syndrome, and autism spectrum disorders. Developmental Science ,19, 452 –468.
Dalton, K., Nacewicz, B., Johnstone, T., Schaefer, H., Gernsbacher, M., Goldsmith, H., . . .
Davidson, A. ( 2005 ). Gaze ﬁxation and the neural circuitry of face processing in autism.
Nature Neuroscience ,8, 519 –526.
Dinishak, J. ( In press ). The Value of Giving Autistic Testimony a Substantial Role in the
Science of Autism. Behavioral and Brain Sciences.
Dinishak, J. ( 2016 ).“The De ﬁcit View and Its Critics. ”. Disability Studies Quarterly, 36(4),
http://dsq-sds.org/article/view/5236/4475 .
Endow, J. ( 2017 ). Spectrum: A Story of the Mind. Retrieved from http://www.pbs.org/
education/blog/spectrum-a-story-of-the-mind
Falck-Ytter, T., & von Hofsten, C. ( 2011 ). How special is social looking in ASD: A review.
Progress in Brain Research ,189, 209 –222.
Frith, U., & Hermelin, B. ( 1969 ). The role of visual and motor cues in normal, subnormal,
and autistic children. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry ,10, 153 –163.PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY 897

Gallagher, S. ( 2004 ). Understanding interpersonal problems in autism: interaction theory
as an alternative to theory of mind. Philosophy, Psychiatry, & Psychology ,11, 199 –217.
G a l l a g h e r ,S .( 2014). An education in narratives. Educational Philosophy and Theory ,46(6),
600 –609.
Grandin, T. ( 1995 ).Thinking in pictures . New York: Doubleday.
Grelotti, D., Gauthier, I., & Schultz, R. ( 2002 ). Social interest and the development of
cortical face specialization: What autism teaches us about face processing.
Developmental Psychobiology ,40, 213 –225.
Hacking, I. ( 2009 ). Autistic autobiography. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society,
Biological Sciences ,364, 1467 –1473.
Hadjikhani, N., Joseph, R., Snyder, J., & Tager-Flusberg, H. ( 2017 ). Abnormal activation of
the social brain during face perception in autism. Human Brain Mapping ,28, 441 –449.
Happé, F. G. ( 1996 ). Studying weak central coherence at low levels: Children with autism
do not succumb to visual illusions. A research note. Journal of Child Psychology and
Psychiatry ,37, 873 –877.
Heaton, P., Davis, R. E., & Happé, F. G. ( 2008 ). Research note: Exceptional absolute pitch
perception for spoken words in an able adult with autism. Neuropsychologia ,46,
2095 –2098.
Howard, R. ( 2016 ). 16 People with Autism Describe Why Eye Contact Can Be Di ﬃcult.
Retrieved from https://themighty.com/2016/0 2/why-eye-cont act-can-be-di ﬃcult-for-
people-with-autism/
Hutt, C., & Ounsted, C. ( 1966 ). The biological signi ﬁcance of gaze aversion with particular
reference to the syndrome of infantile autism. Systems Research and Behavioral Science ,
11, 346 –356.
Jastrow, J. ( 1900).Fact and Fable in Psychology . Boston and New York: Houghton: Mi ﬄin and
Company.
Jaswal, V. & Akhtar, N. ( 2018 ). Appearing Socially Uninterested: Challenging Assumptions
about Social Motivation in Autism. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 19, 1 –84.
Joseph, R. M., Ehrman, K., McNally, R., & Keehn, B. ( 2008 ). Aﬀective response to eye
contact and face recognition ability in children with ASD. Journal of the International
Neuropsychological Society ,14, 947 –955.
Joseph, R. M., Keehn, B., Connolly, C., Wolfe, J. M., & Horowitz, T. S. ( 2009 ). Why is
visual search superior in autism spectrum disorder? Developmental Science ,12,
1083 –1096.
Kedar, I. ( 2012 ).Ido in autismland: climbing out of autism ’s silent prison . Washington, DC:
Sharon Kedar.
Kleinhans, N., Richards, T., Weaver, K., Johnson, L. C., Greenson, J., Dawson, G., &
Aylward, E. ( 2010 ). Association between amygdala response to emotional faces and
social anxiety in autism spectrum disorders. Neuropsychologia ,48, 3665 –3670.
Kliemann, D., Dziobek, I., Hatri, A., Steimke, R., & Heekeren, H. ( 2010 ). Atypical re ﬂexive
gaze patterns on emotional faces in autism spectrum disorders. Journal of Neuroscience ,
30, 12281 –12287.
Klin, A., Jones, W., Schultz, R., Volkmar, F., & Cohen, D. ( 2002 ). Visual ﬁxation patterns
during viewing of naturalistic social situations as predictors of social competence in
individuals with autism. Archives of General Psychiatry ,59, 809 –816.
Koldewyn, K., Jiang, Y. J., Weigelt, S., & Kanwisher, N. ( 2013 ). Global/Local processing in
autism: Not a disability, but a disinclination. Journal of Autism and Developmental
Disorders ,43, 2329 –2340.
Krueger, J., & Overgaard, S. ( 2012 ). Seeing subjectivity: Defending a perceptual account of
other minds. ProtoSociology ,47, 239 –262.898 J. DINISHAK

Lawson, W. ( 1998 ).Life behind glass: A personal account of autism spectrum disorder .
Lismore, Australia: Southern Cross University Press.
Leekam, S. R., Nieto, C., Libby, S. J., Wing, L., & Gould, J. ( 2007 ). Describing the sensory
abnormalities of children and adults with autism. Journal of Autism and Developmental
Disorders ,37, 894 –910.
Moriuchi, J. M., Klin, A., & Jones, W. ( 2017 ). Mechanisms of diminished attention to eyes
in autism. American Journal of Psychiatry ,174,2 6 –35.
Mottron, L., Dawson, M., Souliéres, I., Hubert, B., & Burack, J. ( 2006 ). Enhanced percep-
tual functioning in autism: An update, and eight principles of perception. Journal of
Autism and Developmental Disorders ,36,2 7 –43.
Mulhall, S. ( 1990 ).On being in the world: Wittgenstein and Heidegger on seeing aspects .
London: Routledge.
Overgaard, S. ( 2006 ). The problem of other minds: Wittgenstein ’s phenomenological
perspective. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences ,5,5 3 –73.
Proudfoot, D. ( 2013 ). Can a robot smile? Wittgenstein on facial expression. In T. P. Racine
& K. Slaney (Eds.), A Wittgensteinian perspective on the use of conceptual analysis in
psychology (pp. 172 –194). New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Robison, J. E. ( 2007 ).Look me in the eye: My life with asperger ’s. New York: Random
House.
Robledo, J., Donnellan, A., & Strandt-Conroy, K. ( 2012 ). An exploration of sensory and
movement di ﬀerences from the perspective of individuals with autism. Frontiers in
Integrative Neuroscience ,6. doi: 10.3389/fnint.2012.00107
Shah, A., & Frith, U. ( 1993 ). Why do autistic individuals show superior performance on
the block design task? Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry ,34, 1351 –1364.
Sinclair, J. ( 1998 ). Is Cure a Goal? Retrieved from http://autismmythbusters.com/general-
public/home/cure/is-cure-a-goal-jim-sinclair/
Stawarska, B. ( 2010).Mutual gaze and intersubjectivity. I n S. Gallagher & D. Schmicking (Eds.),
Handbook of phenomenology and cognitive science (pp. 269 –282). Dordrecht: Springer.
Tammet, D. ( 2006 ).Born on a blue day: inside the extraordinary mind of an autistic savant .
New York: Free Press.
Tanaka, J. W., & Sung, A. ( 2013 ). The “Eye Avoidance ”hypothesis of autism face
processing. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders ,46, 1538 –1552.
Ward, J. ( 2013 ). Synesthesia. Annual Report Psychology ,64,4 9 –75.
Ward, J., & Simner, J. ( 2003 ). Lexical-gustatory synaesthesia: Linguistic and conceptual
factors. Cognition ,89, 237 –261.
Williams, D. ( 1992 ).Nobody nowhere . London: Doubleday.
Wittgenstein, L. (1967). Zettel . (G. E. M. Anscombe, Trans.). Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Wittgenstein, L. (1980a). Remarks on colour (Originally published in 1977) (G.E.M.
Anscombe, Ed., L.L. McAlister & M.Schättle, Trans.). Oxford: Blackwell.
Wittgenstein, L. (1980b). Remarks on the philosophy of psychology . (G. E. M.Anscombe,
Trans.), Vol. I. Oxford: Blackwell.
Wittgenstein, L. (1980c). Remarks on the philosophy of psychology . (C. G.Luckhardt
& M. A. E. Aue, Trans.), Vol. II. Oxford: Blackwell.
Wittgenstein, L. (2009a). Philosophical investigations 4 t he d .( G .E .M .A n s c o m b e ,P .M .S .H a c k e r
& J. Schulte, Trans.) (Originally published in 1953). Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.
Wittgenstein, L. (2009b). Philosophy of psychology –A fragment. P. M. S. Hacker &
J. Schulte Eds., Philosophical investigations 4thed. 182 –243. (G. E. M. Anscombe,
P. M. S. Hacker, & J. Schulte, Trans.). (ed.). Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, pp. (Originally
published in 1953).PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY 899

Copyright
of
Philosophical
Psychology
is
the
property
of
Routledge
and
its
content
may
not
be
copied
or
emailed
to
multiple
sites
or
posted
to
a
listserv
without
the
copyright
holder's
express
written
permission.
However,
users
may
print,
download,
or
email
articles
for
individual
use.