fpsyg-11-01041 June 10, 2020 Time: 20:44 # 1
HYPOTHESIS AND THEORY
published: 12 June 2020
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.01041
Edited by:
Marjan Persuh,
Borough of Manhattan Community
College, United States
Reviewed by:
Karl Friston,
University College London,
United Kingdom
Peter Beim Graben,
Brandenburg University of Technology
Cottbus–Senftenberg, Germany
*Correspondence:
Todd E. Feinberg
todd.feinberg@mountsinai.org
Jon Mallatt
mallatt@wsu.edu
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Consciousness Research,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Psychology
Received: 21 February 2020
Accepted: 27 April 2020
Published: 12 June 2020
Citation:
Feinberg TE and Mallatt J (2020)
Phenomenal Consciousness
and Emergence: Eliminating
the Explanatory Gap.
Front. Psychol. 11:1041.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.01041
Phenomenal Consciousness and
Emergence: Eliminating the
Explanatory Gap
Todd E. Feinberg1*and Jon Mallatt2*
1Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, Psychiatry and Neurology, New York, NY, United States,2The University
of Washington, WWAMI Medical Education Program, The University of Idaho, Moscow, ID, United States
The role of emergence in the creation of consciousness has been debated for over a
century, but it remains unresolved. In particular there is controversy over the claim that a
“strong” or radical form of emergence is required to explain phenomenal consciousness.
In this paper we use some ideas of complex system theory to trace the emergent
features of life and then of complex brains through three progressive stages or levels:
Level 1 (life), Level 2 (nervous systems) , and Level 3 (special neurobiological features) ,
each representing increasing biological and neurobiological complexity and ultimately
leading to the emergence of phenomenal consciousness, all in physical systems. Along
the way we show that consciousness ﬁts the criteria of an emergent property—albeit
one with extreme complexity. The formulation Life + Special neurobiological features
!Phenomenal consciousness expresses these relationships. Then we consider the
implications of our ﬁndings for some of the philosophical conundrums entailed by the
apparent “explanatory gap” between the brain and phenomenal consciousness. We
conclude that consciousness stems from the personal life of an organism with the
addition of a complex nervous system that is ideally suited to maximize emergent
neurobiological features and that it is an example of standard (“weak”) emergence
without a scientiﬁc explanatory gap. An “experiential” or epistemic gap remains,
although this is ontologically untroubling.
Keywords: animal consciousness, explanatory gap, evolution, complex systems, physicalism, neurobiology, weak
emergence, multiple realizability
INTRODUCTION
Despite some of life’s unique features (Mayr, 2004) all basic life processes remain in principle
explainable within the constraints of normal physics and chemistry. However, while the scientiﬁc
basis of life is no longer a philosophical or scientiﬁc mystery, in the case of consciousness—more
speciﬁcally in the case of subjective experience (phenomenal consciousness, primary consciousness,
raw “feelings” or irreducible “qualia”) – there appears to be what philosopher Levine (1983) called
an “explanatory gap” between the subjective experiences and the physical brain:
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 1 June 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 1041

fpsyg-11-01041 June 10, 2020 Time: 20:44 # 2
Feinberg and Mallatt Consciousness and Emergence
However, there is more to our concept of pain than its causal
role, there is its qualitative character, how it feels; and what is left
unexplained by the discovery of C-ﬁber ﬁring is why pain should
feel the way it does ! For there appears to be nothing about C-ﬁber
ﬁring which makes it naturally “ﬁt” the phenomenal properties of
pain, any more than it would ﬁt some other set of phenomenal
properties. The identiﬁcation of the qualitative side of pain with
C-ﬁber ﬁring (or some property of C-ﬁber ﬁring) leaves the
connection between it and what we identify it with completely
mysterious. One might say, it makes the way pain feels into merely
brute fact (Levine, 1983, p. 357).
In this paper, we discuss the critical role emergence plays
in creating phenomenal consciousness and how this role helps
explain what appears to be a scientiﬁc explanatory gap between
the subjective experience and the brain, but which is actually not
a scientiﬁc gap at all.
Note that we only consider basic, phenomenal consciousness
(having any experience at all), not any higher types like reﬂective
consciousness, self-consciousness, or higher-order cognition
(Nagel, 1974, 1986; Block, 1995; Chalmers, 1995, 1996; Metzinger,
2003; Revonsuo, 2010; Churchland, 2013; Carruthers, 2016).
WHAT IS EMERGENCE?
General Features
Among the aforementioned features of life that Mayr (1982,
2004) discussed, the feature of emergence stands out as especially
important for analyzing the creation of consciousness and
the explanatory gap within a scientiﬁc framework. Emergence
occurs when novel entities and functions appear in a system
through self-organization. Our focus is on emergence in
evolving complex systems as revealed by systems theory
(Salthe, 1985; Morowitz, 2002; Ellis, 2006). We especially
cover biology and neurobiology, although emergence can also
apply to physical systems, mathematical and informational
systems, philosophy, developmental psychology, and many other
disciplines. For example, see the center manifold theorum
of Carr (1981), the synergetics ﬁeld of Haken (1983) and
Tschacher and Haken (2007), the philosophical treatnents of
Bedau and Humphreys (2008), the human-development focus
of Beckermann et al. (2011) and Witherington (2011), and
the general treatments by Simon (1973), Clayton (2006) and
Clayton and Davies (2006).
Modern formulations of emergence stem from eﬀorts to
understand the nature of lifein the early part of the twentieth
century, when it was realized that both the then-dominant
hypotheses were scientiﬁcally inadequate: namely, vitalism (a
mysterious life force) and reductionism (life can be explained
mechanically as the mere sum of its parts) (Davies, 2006). With
the concept of emergence, scientists could relinquish the idea
of vital forces and also deny that life properties can be fully
reduced to the mechanics of their parts. Instead they embraced a
layered picture of nature consisting of ascending and interacting
levels of increasing organizational complexity ( Figure 1 ), with
each higher level depending in part upon, but inexplicable in
terms of, the properties of lower levels alone [adapted from
FIGURE 1 | Emergence through a hierarchy in a complex system. Lower
levels combine to make the higher levels. New features emerge (E) in the
system as more levels are added. The many connections are reciprocal, as
shown by the back-and-forth arrows, both between and within levels. Also
seeTable 1 . Figure © Mount Sinai School of Medicine.
Witherington (2011), after Broad (1925)]. Emergentism gained
traction later in the century when complexity theory and
detailed computer simulations generated many emergent features
(Clayton and Davies, 2006).
Here in this “What Is Emergence?” section we summarize the
general features of emergence in complex systems ( Figure 1 ).
Then in the next section, “A Model for the Emergence of
Consciousness, ” we will analyze how these general features
contribute to the emergence of consciousness.
The following six features are often recognized as present in
all emergent phenomena ( Table 1 ).
Features 1 and 2
Emergence occurs in complex systems in which novel properties
emerge through the aggregate functions of the parts of that
system. In the less complex of the complex systems, subatomic
particles aggregate into atoms, which form molecules, etc.
from which emerge all the nonliving chemical and geological
processes. Favorite examples of such systems are the gravitational
interactions among the heavenly bodies of the solar system, the
turbulent ﬂow of water, and weather systems (Morowitz, 2002;
Nunez, 2016). Although we focus on complex living systems,
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 2 June 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 1041

fpsyg-11-01041 June 10, 2020 Time: 20:44 # 3
Feinberg and Mallatt Consciousness and Emergence
TABLE 1 | Major features of emergence in general.
1. Emergence is a property of complex systems , with many interacting parts
a. The interactions are processes , so processes are important (not just the physical parts)
2.Aggregate system functions that are not present in the parts alone
a. Whole is more than the simple sum of the parts; is not reducible to its individual parts
3.Hierarchical arrangement of different levels
a. Novel properties emerge in the system as higher levels are added
b. Emergent properties are novel properties
c. More novelty emerges if the system elaborates or evolves further
d. If the hierarchical system elaborates, there is more specialization of its parts and levels, both structurally and functionally
4.Reciprocal connections exist among structures within and between levels of the neural hierarchy
a.Circular causality : Lower levels bring about the higher levels, which then inﬂuence the lower levels (Salthe, 1985: Rothschild, 2006; Bedau, 2008; Nunez, 2016;
Koch, 2019); and structures within the same level also inﬂuence each other via extensive reciprocal connectivity
5.Constraints :
a. The whole—and the emergent features of the system—constrain what the parts can do or be, and vice versa
b. External environment also constrains the whole and parts
c. Increasing a system’s complexity (more emergence) involves pruning the possibilities (Morowitz, 2002) to only those that let the system persist
6. There are multiple routes to an emergent end-phenomenon, from different sets of lower-level features (Bedau, 2008, pp. 181–182; Koch, 2019, pp. 122–124)
these “simpler” systems ﬁt the criteria for emergence and should
not be forgotten.
A theoretical consequence for aggregate system functions is
that the novel emergent functions cannot be explained by the
parts alone , but rather must be explained by the properties of
the parts and their interactions (Pattee, 1970; Allen and Starr,
1982; Salthe, 1985; Ahl et al., 1996; Bedau, 1997, 2008; Mayr,
2004; Clayton and Davies, 2006; Bedau and Humphreys, 2008;
Beckermann et al., 2011).
Features 3 and 4
Hierarchical arrangements are particularly important in emergent
systems because they allow reciprocal connections between levels
where each higher or additional level gives the system novel
emergent properties that are based on that level’s unique features
as well as its interactions with the pre-existing (lower) levels on
which it is built (Pattee, 1970; Allen and Starr, 1982; Mayr, 1982;
Salthe, 1985; Ahl et al., 1996). For example, for our body to stay
alive (highest level), our heart, its pumping muscle cells, and the
energy-producing mitochondria in these cells (lower levels) must
all interact reciprocally for the blood to be pumped.
This feedback entails circular causality between the levels
of the system (Nunez, 2016; also see Haken, 1983). That is,
emergence not only involves bottom-up causation by which the
parts at the lower levels interact to cause novel (emergent)
features at the higher levels, but it also involves top-down
causation wherein the higher levels inﬂuence (constrain) the
lower levels by making the lower levels subserve the whole
system. For example, in a multicellular animal or plant, the
organ and tissue components cannot act in ways that cause the
organism to disassemble into its cells.
Circular causality is nicely incorporated in the Contextual
Emergence Theory (Atmanspacher and beim Graben, 2009;
Atmanspacher, 2012, 2015) and the Biological Relativity Theory
(Noble et al., 2019). Both these theories emphasize top-down
more than bottom-up causation, which is helpful for balance
because it corrects past overemphases on the bottom-up causes inemergence (Witherington, 2011). Contextual emergence theory
(CE), which is a scheme for describing a system’s relationships
by comparing its higher and lower levels, oﬀers additional
insights. For example, CE shows that reductionist physicalism
fails to explain nonlinear physical systems because their higher-
level conditions (the “contingent context”) inﬂuence or stabilize
or constrain the system’s lower-level mechanics, so the latter
alone cannot explain the emergent properties (Bishop and
Atmanspacher, 2006; beim Graben, 2014).
Feature 5
Emergence goes hand in hand with constraint. The system
requirements themselves constrain what the parts can do:
a living body cannot survive, for example, if some of its
cells deprive others of vital resources (e.g. as occurs with a
cancer) just as the external environment (e.g. extreme heat,
cold, and aridity etc.) imposes constraints upon anything living
under such conditions. And increasing a system’s complexity
(meaning new levels and features emerge) involves pruning the
possibilities to only those that let the system persist (Morowitz,
2002). As an example of this pruning, animals move and
they evolved fast, Na+-based action potentials that signal
neuromuscular-based mobility, whereas land plants are sessile
autotrophs with rigid cell walls that prevent anything like
neuronal branching or the extensive cell-to-cell communication
of neural networks (Taiz et al., 2020). Therefore, even though
land plants have evolved into enormously complex organisms
they cannot use neuromuscular signaling like animals can.
Stated in our terms, that option has been “pruned from”
the plant lineage.
Feature 6
Finally, an end phenomenon may emerge through multiple,
alternate routes . Two examples of this are traﬃc jams that can
stem either from road construction or bad weather or a glut of
vehicles (Bedau, 2008); and water waves that can stem from wind
or an earthquake or a rock thrown into the water.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 3 June 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 1041

fpsyg-11-01041 June 10, 2020 Time: 20:44 # 4
Feinberg and Mallatt Consciousness and Emergence
Bedau (2008, p. 181) called this alternate-routes feature
“macro explanatory autonomy, ” and it is akin to the
psychological concept of multiple realizability (which says a
given mind state can have diﬀerent causes: Bickle, 2019). It
also matches the biological concept of convergent evolution of
similar traits in diﬀerent clades of organisms (Stayton, 2015;
Natarajan et al., 2016).
Another argument that multiple routes/multiple realizability
is a feature of all complex systems comes from the above-
mentioned contextual emergence theory. The argument is that
the component parts of one system (“individual states, L i”) are
allowed to diﬀer in some ways from those in a second system that
has the same emergent function (same “ensemble property, ” such
as consciousness), as long as the diﬀering parts also share the key
similarities that contribute to the emergent function (i.e. when the
two sets of parts “are indistinguishable with respect to a particular
ensemble property:” Atmanspacher, 2015: p. 360).
Weak Versus Strong Emergence and
Consciousness
The view that consciousness is an emergent process is not
new (Lewes, 1877; Broad, 1925; Feigl, 1958; Popper and Eccles,
1977; Sperry, 1990; Searle, 1992; Scott, 1995; Bedau, 1997, 2008;
Kim, 1998, 2006; Andersen et al., 2000; Feinberg, 2001, 2012;
Van Gulick, 2001; Chalmers, 2006; Clayton and Davies, 2006;
Thompson, 2007; Bedau and Humphreys, 2008; Beckermann
et al., 2011; Deacon, 2011; Nunez, 2016; Mallatt and Feinberg,
2017). The important question for the nature of consciousness
is:what sort of emergence are we talking about? And what are its
implications for the explanatory gap?
While opinions vary on the relationship between emergence
and consciousness, there are two main opposing schools of
thought. One says that the operations of standard, scientiﬁc
emergence that we have outlined ( Table 1 ) can fully explain
the emergence of consciousness. This is often described as
the “weak emergence” theory (Bedau, 1997, 2008) or what
Searle called emergence1 (Searle, 1992; Feinberg, 2001, 2012;
Feinberg and Mallatt, 2016a). In this view, consciousness
is or will be in the future fully understandable as an
emergent property of micro-level brain process and the causal
relations between them.
The other position is called strong emergence (Bedau,
1997, 2008; Chalmers, 2006; Clayton, 2006; Revonsuo,
2010) or emergence2 (Searle, 1992) or radical emergence
(Feinberg, 2001; Van Gulick, 2001). It claims that no
known properties of neurons could ever scientiﬁcally
reconcile the diﬀerences between subjective experience
and the brain; i.e. that the explanatory gap can never
be closed. Antti Revonsuo nicely summarizes this
position:
Supporters of strong emergent materialism point to the
fundamental diﬀerences between the subjective psychological
reality and the objective physical (or neural) reality. The former
includes qualitative experiences that feel like something and exist
only from the ﬁrst-person point of view; the latter consists of
physical entities and causal mechanisms that involve nothing
FIGURE 2 | Organisms at the three emergent levels in the evolution of
consciousness. Below, the colony of one-celled choanoﬂagellates shows how
multicellular animals may have originated. Figure © Mount Sinai School of
Medicine.
subjective or qualitative about them and exist from the third-
person point of view or objectively. Nothing we can think about
or imagine could make an objective physical process turn into or
“secrete” subjective, qualitative “feels.” It is like trying to squeeze
wine out of pure water: it is just not there, and there can be
no natural mechanism (short of magic) that could ever turn the
former into the latter (Revonsuo, 2010, p. 30).
Next, we will explore the central role that emergence plays
in the creation of consciousness. We then derive a “weak” or
standard model and argue that the emergence of consciousness
is simply a matter of the degree of standard emergence, not a
diﬀerent kind of emergence. Finally we analyze how and why the
role of emergence in the creation of consciousness contributes to
theappearance of a scientiﬁc explanatory gap that does not exist,
but also that there is an experiential distinction or “gap” between
ﬁrst-person and third-person points of view.
A MODEL FOR THE EMERGENCE OF
CONSCIOUSNESS
Our model for the natural emergence of consciousness (Feinberg
and Mallatt, 2013, 2016a,b, 2018a, 2019) has three levels.
These are Level 1 (life), Level 2 (nervous systems) , and
Level 3 (special neurobiological features of consciousness) that
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 4 June 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 1041

fpsyg-11-01041 June 10, 2020 Time: 20:44 # 5
Feinberg and Mallatt Consciousness and Emergence
TABLE 2 | Three emergent levels in the evolution of consciousness, and the new features at each level (adapted from Feinberg and Mallatt, 2019).
Level 1. Life
A. Simplest system that has life is the cell, with bacteria and archaea being the simplest cells
B. First appearance: 3.7 billion years ago
C. Emergent structures: macromolecules (proteins, nucleic acids, sugars, lipids), organelles, cells
D. Emergent processes:
The strong boundary condition of embodiment : semipermeable membrane encloses cell contents to concentrate the chemical reactions and keep the reaction
products from diffusing away (Morowitz, 2002)
Information-based organization, directed by DNA/genes, and coded to specify the chemical reactions; the gene-coded “purpose” of Mayr (2004)
Metabolism, to convert food to energy (ATP) and make new cellular materials; efﬁcient use of energy and of vital molecules slows entropy (energy waste lost as heat)
Self-upkeep and goal-directed properties (Mayr, 2004; Godfrey-Smith, 2019)
Growth and self-replication/reproduction
Sensitivity and movement
Homeostasis: maintaining a constant internal environment in response to changes in the external environment
Adaptation to the environment
Evolution; natural selection becomes the pruning process that limits the possibilites of evolutionary change and of what features emerge in the system from this
level onward (Morowitz, 2002)
E. Adaptive advantage of this emergence: world’s ﬁrst self-perpetuation of complex systems over time
Level 2. Nervous systems, From Reﬂexes Through the Level of Simple, Core Brains (Not Conscious)
A. Organisms possessing it: most invertebrate animals; for example, most worms
B. First appearance: 580 million years ago
C. Emergent structures: multicellular animal body with different cell types including neurons, neural reﬂex arcs, sensory receptors, motor effectors (muscles, glands);
nerve nets, then a consolidation into central and peripheral nervous system; some of the animals have a simple brain with movement-patterning circuits; the sensory
receptors are mechano-, chemo- and photoreceptor cells
D. Emergent processes:
Speed: neurons transmit signals fast enough to control the actions of a large, multicellular body in response to sensory stimuli
Connectivity: reﬂex arcs and neuron networks coordinate all the parts of a large body
Core-brain processes:
Control complex reﬂexes for inner-body homeostasis
Basic motor programs and central pattern generators for rhythmic locomotion, feeding, and other stereotyped movements
Set the level of arousal
E. Adaptive advantages of this emergence: Sustains a large body that can move far through the environment, following sensory stimuli to ﬁnd food, safety, and mates
Level 3. Consciousness
A. Organisms possessing it: vertebrates, arthropods, cephalopod molluscs
B. First appearance: 560–520 million years ago
C and D. Emergent structures and processes: the special neurobiological features of consciousness:
Neural complexity (more than exists in a simple, core brain)
Brain with many neurons ( >100,000?)
Many subtypes of neurons
Elaborated sensory organs
Image-forming eyes, receptor organs for touch, hearing, smell
Neural hierarchies with neuron-neuron interactions
Extensive reciprocal communication in and between the pathways for the different senses
Brain has many neural computing modules and networks that are distributed but integrated (separate but highly interconnected), leading to local functional
specialization plus global coherence (Nunez, 2016; Mogensen and Overgaard, 2017) (see Figure 3 )
Synchronized communication by brain-wave oscillations; neural spike trains form representational codes
The higher levels allow the complex processing and unity of consciousness
Higher brain levels exert more inﬂuence on the lower levels such as motor neurons, for increased top-down causality
Hierarchies that let consciousness model events a fraction of a second in advance (Clark, 2013; Gershman et al., 2015; Jylkkä and Railo, 2019; Solms, 2019)
Pathways that create mapped mental images or affective states
Neurons are arranged in topographic sensory maps of the outside world and body structures
Valence coding of good and bad, for affective states
Feed into premotor brain regions to motivate, choose, and guide movements in space
Brain mechanisms for selective attention and arousal
Memory, short-term or longer
(Continued)
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 5 June 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 1041

fpsyg-11-01041 June 10, 2020 Time: 20:44 # 6
Feinberg and Mallatt Consciousness and Emergence
TABLE 2 | Continued
E. Adaptive advantages of this emergence:
Consciousness organizes large amounts of sensory information into a detailed, uniﬁed simulation of the world, so the subject can choose the best behavioral
responses
This is a large, effective, expansion of the basic life-property of sensing the environment and responding
With mental maps, one can navigate through space even when no sensory stimuli for guidance are present
Consciousness ranks all the sensed stimuli by importance, by assigning affects to them (good, bad), thereby simplifying decisions on how to respond
(Cabanac, 1996)
Consciousness provides behavioral ﬂexibility: adjusts fast to new stimuli so it deals well with the changing challenges of new environments
FIGURE 3 | Some special neurobiological features of conscious systems,
shown by the human brain and nervous system. These features include
elaborate sensory organs (e.g. eye), neural hierarchical levels from the spinal
cord upward, extensive reciprocal communication between neural processing
centers (the rectangular boxes and the connecting arrows), and processing
centers for image-based versus affective consciousness (green versus purple
boxes). For more, see Table 2 ,Level 3 .(A)Consciousness relies on
processing centers that are widely distributed but integrated. While neural
processing goes on within the centers, communication also occurs among
the centers, leading to both local functional specialization and global
coherence. (B)Schematic drawing showing processing within a center. The
center has subcenters for subprocessing operations that are subsequently
integrated to produce the center’s outputs. Abbreviations in (A)are CPGs:
central pattern generators for various stereotyped movements; L Hab: lateral
habenula; Median raphe r.: median raphe region of the reticular formation; N
Acc: nucleus accumbens; PAG: periaqueductal gray; Sup coll: superior
colliculus (optic tectum) of midbrain; VTA: ventral tegmental area of the
midbrain. Figure © Mount Sinai School of Medicine.
evolved in sequence and represent increasing biological and
neurobiological complexity ( Table 2 ). Each level displays novel
emergent features, plus the features that emerged in the levels
below it, plus the general features of all complex systems.Figure 2 shows some organisms at each level in the progression
to consciousness, and Figure 3 shows some of the special
features of consciousness at Level 3. We will now cover
Table 2 step by step.
Level 1. General Life Functions
Living systems are replete with examples of emergent system
features (Mayr, 1982, 2004; Salthe, 1985; Morowitz, 2002;
Rothschild, 2006; Van Kranendonk et al., 2017). Even the simplest
one-celled life involves chemical reactions far more complex than
in any known nonliving system, and fossils indicate that life on
Earth has been around for a long time – arising in seas, springs
or ponds at least 3.7 billion years ago. From simple organic
molecules must have arisen a boundary membrane, providing
embodiment to form a protocell. This boundary enclosed and
contained the molecules that used energy for vital processes
(the catalytic and substrate molecules for metabolism ) plus the
information molecules RNA and DNA that instructed these
processes and allowed the protocells to sustain and reproduce
themselves (England, 2013). Only those protocells that sustained
themselves long enough and reproduced often enough avoided
the destructive vicissitudes of the external environment. This
led to a competition for survival that favored those cells that
most eﬃciently maintained their internal chemistry ( homeostasis
based on cooperating subcellular systems) and also were best
adapted to the external environment. This was the ﬁrst organic
evolution by natural selection and it has driven life’s adaptations
over billions of years, including the emergence of increased
complexity in higher organisms. Natural selection also limited
(constrained) the directions that living organisms could take,
to those changes that are compatible with organic-based and
water-based life.
From this, we reiterate that life itself is an emergent process
created by the constituent parts of the organism. So for instance
the life of a single cell is an aggregate emergent feature of the
atoms, molecules, proteins, membranes, ribosomes, etc. of which
it is composed and their interactions.
Evolution proceeded over billions of years in one-celled
organisms. Then more complexity emerged in some marine
cells about 1.5 billion years ago when one type (perhaps
akin to today’s microbes called archaea) engulfed a species
of bacterium that was especially eﬃcient at extracting energy
from nutrients, so those bacteria became the energy-producing
mitochondria within a new, larger, symbiotic system called
the eukaryotic cell. Some eukaryote cells joined into large,
multicellular groups – likely because larger organisms are
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 6 June 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 1041

fpsyg-11-01041 June 10, 2020 Time: 20:44 # 7
Feinberg and Mallatt Consciousness and Emergence
harder for predators to kill and eat—that evolved into the
ﬁrst animals 700 or 600 million years ago. These ﬁrst animals
may have resembled immotile sponges, but the ability to
move followed because movement oﬀered great advantages for
reaching the best places in the environment for food, mates,
and safety. All this led to selection for a specialization of cells
within the multicellular body, for a division of labor, into
muscle cells, gut-digestive cells, sex cells – and nerve cells to
coordinate the activities of the muscle and all the other cell
types . For accounts of this evolutionary sequence of emergent
features, see Lane and Martin (2010), Feinberg and Mallatt
(2016a), Brunet et al. (2019), Brunk and Martin (2019), and
Watson (2019).
Level 2. Nervous Systems, Reﬂexes,
Core Brains
Judging from modern cnidarians (jellyﬁsh and their kin:
Figure 2 ) and some simple marine worms, the ﬁrst nervous
systems were nerve networks distributed over the body,
without any central or brain-like structures. The neurons
communicated quickly (nerve ﬁbers carry their signals at
0.5 to 100 m per second) and tightly (with synapses), to
produce fast reﬂexes and eﬀective movements. Thus, the
whole body participated in receiving sensory stimuli and
in the resulting motor reactions. The animals at this stage
had sensory mechanoreceptor cells for touch stimuli, basic
chemoreceptor cells for tastes and scents, and photoreceptor
cells for light intensity (but no visual images in this eye-
less stage).
Then around 580 to 520 million years ago the worm
ancestors gave rise to many groups of animals, including
most of the invertebrate groups and the vertebrates. In
many of these descendant lineages, parts of the nerve net
condensed and enlarged for information processing, most
so in the head region that received sensory information
ﬁrst as the animal moved forward through its environment;
and from these neural enlargements there extended nerve
cords that carried motor commands along the body
axis. These were the ﬁrst brain and nerve cord of an
incipient central nervous system. Many living invertebrates
reﬂect this incipient stage (e.g. roundworms, earthworms,
ﬂatworms, sea slugs, and the ﬁsh-like cousin of vertebrates
called amphioxus: Figure 2 ). Such invertebrates have
relatively simple “core brains” that integrate sensory
information, adjust inner-body processes (digestion, sex
activity of the gonads, hormone secretion), and set the
animal’s overall level of arousal (placid, excitable). Core
brains also contain basic motor programs for rhythmic
locomotion, feeding movements, and other stereotyped
actions. For accounts of the sequence of emerging
neural features just described, see Feinberg and Mallatt
(2016a), Bosch et al. (2017), Shigeno et al. (2017), Lacalli
(2018), and Arendt et al. (2019).
Elaborate neural connections and many behaviors emerged
at this core-brain stage, but it is not conscious. We deduce
this because it is entirely reactive and therefore, reﬂexive. The
invertebrates at this stage sense and follow stimuli that areessential to their survival, but if they lose the sensory trail — with
no more stimuli to react to — they cannot go further and resort to
systemic but untargeted searching to try to relocate the stimulus.
See the evidence for this from foraging roundworms by Klein and
Barron (2016) and Feinberg and Mallatt (2018a). Consciousness
evolved to solve this problem of becoming lost, and it involved
acquiring a new set of emergent features.
Level 3. the Special Neurobiological
Features of Consciousness
How We Deduced These Features
The special neurobiological features of complex brains, combined
with the more basic life functions, reﬂexes, and core brain, create
consciousness ( Table 2 ,Level 3 ). Before putting these special
features into an emergent evolutionary scenario, we should tell
how we derived them. They are our versions of the “neural
correlates of consciousness” or NCCs, namely our minimal set
of neuronal traits that are collectively suﬃcient for consciousness
(Edelman et al., 2005; Searle, 2007; Seth, 2009; Koch, 2019).
NCCs are the traits that all investigators must establish before
they can study consciousness any further. Whereas most other
investigators base their correlates on studies of the mammalian
or human cerebral cortex — as if consciousness only emerged
with or in the cortex — we instead derived our correlates
from two fundamental assumptions (Feinberg and Mallatt, 2013,
2016a, 2018a, 2019): (1) If an animal has neural pathways
that carry mapped, point-by-point signals from the sensed
environment, from diﬀerent senses (e.g. vision, touch, hearing),
and if these sensory maps converge in the brain, then that animal
consciously experiences a uniﬁed, mapped, multisensory image
of the environment; and (2) If an animal shows complex operant
learning, i.e. learning and remembering from experience to avoid
harmful stimuli and to approach helpful stimuli, then that animal
has the negative and positive feelings of aﬀective consciousness
(also see Bronfman et al., 2016 and Ginsburg and Jablonka, 2019).
The only animals that meet these two criteria are the vertebrates,
arthropods, and cephalopod molluscs (octopus, squid, cuttleﬁsh)
(Figure 2 ). After recognizing this, we sought and tallied the other
novel neural features shared by all three of these taxa, to complete
our list of special features in Table 2 ,Level 3 .
The Special Features Are Emergent Features
The special features of consciousness in Table 2 ,Level 3 ﬁt all the
criteria for emergence in Table 1 . Consciousness ﬁts Features 1
and 3 of Table 1 because it is a novel process that comes from
acomplex, hierarchical system of living and nervous elements,
with its novelty attained through addition of the special neural
features; and it is not present in the system’s parts such as in
an individual neuron nor the ancestral, core brain (Feature 2
inTable 1 ).
With consciousness, there is more elaboration, specialization
and subdivision of the hierarchy’s parts (Feature 3d in
Table 1 ). The ﬁrst example of this is that the senses
of vertebrates, arthropods and cephalopods are much
more elaborate than the simple ancestral photorecepters,
mechanoreceptors and chemoreceptors, in including image-
forming eyes, ears for hearing, taste buds, and olfactory organs
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 7 June 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 1041

fpsyg-11-01041 June 10, 2020 Time: 20:44 # 8
Feinberg and Mallatt Consciousness and Emergence
(Feinberg and Mallatt, 2016a). Second, the sensory pathways
have more levels (levels added to the hierarchy), namely the
brain’s higher-processing and motor-command centers. The best
example of this is that the vertebrate brain has new levels in its
highest part (forebrain) that were not present in prevertebrates
as judged from the brains of our invertebrate cousins, the
amphioxus and tunicates (sea squirts). More speciﬁcally, only
the vertebrates have an enlarged and complex cerebrum in
their forebrain.
As a third example of the great elaboration and specialization
associated with consciousness, the more-advanced animal brains
have the largest numbers of neuron types , with highly complex
interactions (Strausfeld, 2012; Feinberg and Mallatt, 2016a;
Hodge et al., 2019). As a fourth example, the brains of conscious
animals have many more brain regions than do the ancestral
core brains. Some of these added regions process the extensive
sensory inputs. In vertebrates, for instance, visual information
is extensively processed in the retina, thalamus, parts of the
cerebrum, and optic tectum; and in arthropods in the retina,
lamina, medulla, lobula and central complex of the brain
(Strausfeld, 2012; Feinberg and Mallatt, 2016a). As another
illustration of extreme regional specialization, the core of the
vertebrate brain has elaborated a dizzying number of centers
for aﬀective (emotional) consciousness: the habenula, basal
forebrain, periaqueductal gray, parts of the reticular formation
and more ( Figure 3 ; Berridge and Kringelbach, 2015; Feinberg
and Mallatt, 2016a; Hu, 2016; Feinberg and Mallatt, 2018a;
Siciliano et al., 2019; Szõnyi et al., 2019).
The special neural features of consciousness include the
emergent feature of more reciprocal connections (Feature 4 in
Table 1 ). For this, the functional centers communicate back and
forth through extensive interconnections ( Figure 3 ), commonly
by synchronized oscillatory signals or reverberations (Lamme,
2006; Koch et al., 2016; Feinberg and Mallatt, 2018a; Koch, 2019).
Lack of extensive cross-communication is thought to be why
some of our complex brain regions operate nonconsciously; an
example is the cerebellum, which nonconsciously smooths and
coordinates our body movements (Tononi and Koch, 2015).
The related property of circular causality (Feature 4a) is
more pronounced in conscious than in core-brain systems.
For example, the lower levels that receive sensory input
inﬂuence the higher brain levels that in turn dictate motor
output, and they do so far more extensively than in the
more reﬂex-dominated nervous systems of nonconscious animals
(Grillner and El Manira, 2020).
Extensive reciprocal communication also allows
consciousness to be an eﬀective prediction device , modeling
events a fraction of a second into the future so the subject is
always prepared in advance. Stated brieﬂy, all this crosstalk lets
the hierarchy continuously sense the current events, make the
predictions, and perpetually adjust these predictions to optimize
the behaviors the hierarchy signals. Predictive processing is
a large focus of consciousness research nowadays, and we
explain more about it in our book, Consciousness Demystiﬁed
(Feinberg and Mallatt, 2018a).
Consciousness and the neural features that support it come
with constraints (Feature 5 in Table 1 ). The complex neuralprocesses are energy expensive. Due to this cost constraint,
(1) a conscious individual cannot attend to every stimulus
that is sensed but must instead use selective attention (see for
instance Tsuchiya and Koch, 2008; Chica et al., 2010; Block, 2012;
Tsuchiya and Van Boxtel, 2013; Koch, 2019) that might miss
some important stimuli; (2) some brain processes must run on
automatic without consciousness, such as those for swallowing
and well-practiced motor skills; (3) many bilaterian animals never
evolved consciousness due to its cost, having instead evolved
shortcuts for survival, defense and ﬁnding food (e.g. the tiny-
brained, ﬁlter-feeding clams in their protective shells).
As for the multiple routes feature of emergent phenomena
(Feature 6 in Table 1 ), this is exactly what we found for
consciousness (Feinberg and Mallatt, 2016a,b, 2018a), in the
above-mentioned form called the multiple realizability of a
mental state. For example, the complex brains of vertebrates,
arthropods, and cephalopods – each of which has all the special
features of consciousness – evolved independently of one another
from a brainless ancestral state (Northcutt, 2012), meaning their
consciousnesses evolved by three diﬀerent routes ( Figure 4 ). As
another example of the multiple realizability of consciousness,
in mammals the mapped, conscious images of the sensed world
primarily involve a diﬀerent part of the brain (cerebral cortex)
than does the aﬀective consciousness of emotions (subcortical
brain regions) (Panksepp, 2004, 2016; Denton, 2005; Merker,
2007; Damasio, 2010; Aleman and Merker, 2014; Berridge and
Kringelbach, 2015; Feinberg and Mallatt, 2016a).
Signiﬁcantly, we have reported this “diversity” of the conscious
substrates in the past (Feinberg and Mallatt, 2016a,b, 2018a,
2019), but we only recently recognized it as the multiple-routes
and multiple-realizability feature, and therefore as a hallmark of
emergence in complex systems in general (Bedau, 2008).
Dating When the Special Features Emerged
From the evidence that consciousness is conﬁned to vertebrates,
arthropods, and cephalopods, it is easy to deduce when
consciousness emerged and to see that it did so rapidly,
in evolutionary terms. The earliest arthropod, vertebrate and
cephalopod fossils are from Cambrian rocks, products of the
“Cambrian explosion” that produced all 30+ known phyla of
bilaterian animals between about 540 and 500 million years
ago (Erwin and Valentine, 2013). This explosion is thought
to have been sparked by the evolution of the ﬁrst predatory
animals (the earlier, ancestral worms had fed on sea-ﬂoor
scum), leading to an adaptive arms race that yielded many
distinct taxa with diﬀerent defensive and predatory strategies.
Judging from their modern relatives with similar locomotory and
sensory morphologies, the Cambrian arthropods, vertebrates,
and cephalopods were highly active and far-ranging animals
that could navigate through space to ﬁnd food and mates, and
avoid danger. By this reasoning, they all must have had the
mapped mental images of the environment that signify conscious
awareness. Consciousness was a big advance that also contributed
to the further (later) success of these taxa: arthropods have
always been an extremely diverse and abundant phylum, and
vertebrates include the largest animals with the biggest brains,
at the top of the food chain. For documentation of these ideas,
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 8 June 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 1041

fpsyg-11-01041 June 10, 2020 Time: 20:44 # 9
Feinberg and Mallatt Consciousness and Emergence
FIGURE 4 | The phylogenetic “bush of life” showing that consciousness (as three-leaved stems) emerged independently in three different lines of animals. Figure ©
Mount Sinai School of Medicine.
see Plotnick et al. (2010), Trestman (2013), Feinberg and Mallatt
(2016a), Godfrey-Smith (2016), Godfrey-Smith (2019), Klein and
Barron (2016), and Ginsburg and Jablonka (2019).
To summarize, this section shows that consciousness evolved
in some animals along with an elaboration of their body
plans, and it did so in the Cambrian Period as a key
adaption in the history of life on Earth. Many special neural
features evolved with it, and these features ﬁt the criteria
of emergent features in general ( Table 1 ). This close ﬁt
implies our special features of consciousness really are emergent
features. Yet these features are highly elaborated extensions
of those in simpler brains so they reﬂect huge increases in
emergent novelties.
EMERGENCE, CONSCIOUSNESS, AND
THE EXPLANATORY GAP: SOME
PHILOSOPHICAL IMPLICATIONS
The Case for the Weak (Natural)
Emergence of Consciousness
We have argued, by comparing the general features of
emergence ( Table 1 ) with the features that appeared
during the evolution of consciousness ( Table 2 ), that
consciousness is a naturally emergent feature of life
and complex brains. We summarize this formulation as
Life + Special neurobiological features ! Phenomenal
consciousness . The neural-reﬂexive stage (Level 2) serves as
an evolutionary and neurobiological bridge between Lifeand the
Special features .However, as we noted above, the idea that consciousness is
an emergent process is not new. The important question here
is whether we are correct in concluding that consciousness
is produced by “standard” emergent principles that are
amenable to standard scientiﬁc investigation, and is
thus an example of weak emergence. In other words,
can we explain the emergence of consciousness in a
seamless way with no scientiﬁc explanatory gap between life
and consciousness?
We will now argue that the two main factors – life and the
special features – make crucial contributions to the creation
of consciousness but at the same time they contribute to the
(mistaken) appearance of a scientiﬁc explanatory gap where none
actually exists.
Life Is Crucial to Explaining the
Subjective Aspect of “Feeling”
First we consider the role of life. Note that in Levine’s
(1983) view and that of many philosophers of consciousness
(Broad, 1925; Nagel, 1974, 1986; Chalmers, 1995, 1996;
Shear, 1999) it is the subjective ,personal nature of
consciousness that makes it so perplexing and mysterious
and makes strong emergence seem like a reasonable –
if not a default – position. So how can the personal
subjective nature of consciousness be explained by objective
neurobiological science?
First, because consciousness is built upon the emergence
of life in any single organism, and because both life and
consciousness are system features of embodied organisms , then
it follows that conscious feelings (perceptions, “qualia, ” etc.)
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 9 June 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 1041

fpsyg-11-01041 June 10, 2020 Time: 20:44 # 10
Feinberg and Mallatt Consciousness and Emergence
are system functions of certain complex, personal brains, and
each feeling is a personal system-feature of that individual
living organism just as life itself is an embodied personal
system-feature of the organism. Therefore, life provides the
natural initial conditions for the emergence of subjective
consciousness (Feinberg, 2012; Feinberg and Mallatt, 2016a,b,
2018a). In short, life means embodiment, which means
an individual body, which ultimately allows an individual
perspective (subjectivity).
But as Thompson (2007) notes, the explanatory gap by no
means goes away simply because consciousness is a feature of life.
Not all living organisms or body organs are conscious (see Mallatt
and Feinberg, 2017), so life only partly ﬁlls that gap. To ﬁnish
ﬁlling the gap, the special neurobiological features of conscious
brains are needed to explain what is unique about consciousness.
These features are personal but also novel.
Some Brains Are Ideally and Uniquely
Suited to Create Novel Emergent
Features
Our main ﬁnding so far is the remarkable correspondence
between the special features of conscious brains listed in Table 2 ,
Level 3 and the general features of emergence in allcomplex
systems listed in Table 1 . The special features not only correspond
to the general features but markedly extend them, to levels
of much greater complexity. This provides good evidence that
consciousness is complex, with complex causes, and is not simply
caused by one fundamental, or psychic, force of nature as some
have claimed (Chalmers, 1996; Velmans, 2008; Skrbina, 2009;
Goﬀ et al., 2017).
Another way to say this is that when we compare
Table 1 with Table 2 ,Level 3 , we ﬁnd that the neural
hierarchies for consciousness are ideally suited to maximize
emergent novelty.These neural hierarchies have large
numbers of tightly and reciprocally connected neural levels
and centers, which interact extensively, and enhanced
neuron-neuron communications that maximize the
distributed yet interconnected neural levels ( Figure 3 ).
They also have an enormously increased diﬀerentiation
of neuron subtypes in the setting of enhanced aggregate
functioning. This is much more elaborate than in less-
complex systems because of its greater number of
interacting parts.
Thus, while it has been proposed that consciousness requires
a strong type of emergence that is diﬀerent in kind from
standard (weak) emergence, we see that the emergence of
consciousness is simply a matter of a greater magnitude of
standard emergence with an accompanying exponential increase
in novel emergent properties. Such a large quantitative increase
gives the impression of a qualitative explanatory gap between
the brain and consciousness when there actually is none. This
See Jordan and Ghin (2006: p. 64) for another perspective on why the novel
emergent features for consciousness can accumulate and then accelerate over
evolutionary time in living, self-sustaining, systems. Their basic idea is that every
adaptive advance sets the stage (the context) for novelty at the next higher level,
while this context also stabilizes the lower levels.realization, along with the personal point of view that comes from
embodied life, is our solution to the longstanding problem of the
explanatory gap. But we will see later that a diﬀerent gap remains,
though that gap is fully explainable as well.
Consciousness, Emergence and
Downward Causation
Another assumption that contributed to the idea of an
explanatory gap is the view that consciousness emerges “at
the top” of the neural hierarchy. According to one version
of this view, the “mental properties” that emerge at the
highest level can then cause “physical changes” in a downward
fashion upon the material brain. (For a discussion of this and
other accounts of downward causation and consciousness, see
Emmeche et al., 2000).
In a prototypical example of this kind of theory, Nobel
laureate Sperry (1984, 1990) argued that the “mysterious” features
of consciousness are radically/strongly emergent, non-material
features of the brain:
... consciousness was conceived to be a dynamic emergent of
brain activity, neither identical with, nor reducible to, the neural
events of which it is mainly composed. Further, consciousness
was not conceived as an epiphenomenon, inner aspect, or other
passive correlate of brain processing, but rather to be an active
integral part of the cerebral process itself, exerting potent causal
eﬀects in the interplay of cerebral operations. In a position of
top command at the highest levels in the hierarchy of brain
organization, the subjective properties were seen to exert control
over the biophysical and chemical activities at subordinate levels.
It was described initially as a brain model that puts “conscious
mind back into the brain of objective science in a position of
top command ... a brain model in which conscious, mental,
psychic forces are recognized to be the crowning achievement ...
of evolution (Sperry, 1990, p. 382).
And:
For the subjective qualities we look higher in the system at
organizational properties that are select and special to operations
at the top levels of the brain hierarchy (Sperry, 1984, p. 671).
Feinberg (2001) pointed out the error in this analysis. While
consciousness is clearly an emergent feature of complex brains, it
is asystem feature , and as such does not emerge at the “top” or any
other “point” of the neural hierarchy . It is a product of the entire
system and many levels contribute.
The view of a strongly emergent – but immaterial – feature
that somehow “pops out” at the summit of the nervous
system contributes to the idea of an explanatory gap (see
the Revonsuo, 2010, quote above) that in reality does not
exist (Feinberg, 2001). It also contributes to the mistaken,
dualistic, claim that immaterial consciousness miraculously
controls the material brain.
Consciousness, Multiple Realizability,
and Emergence
We have provided evidence for the multiple realizability of
consciousness, which is the idea that a given mental state
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 10 June 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 1041

fpsyg-11-01041 June 10, 2020 Time: 20:44 # 11
Feinberg and Mallatt Consciousness and Emergence
FIGURE 5 | Phenomenal consciousness is an emergent system function that relies on neural hierarchies and also on embodied life ( Table 2 ,Level 1 ) and special
neurobiological features ( Table 2 ,Level 3 ). Our formulation summarizes this: Life + Special neurobiological features !Phenomenal consciousness. Figure © Mount
Sinai School of Medicine.
can have diﬀerent causes. This concept was put forth by
Putnam (1967). He introduced it as a rebuttal of the strictly
reductionist idea that the mental is identical to the physical.
Such a reductionist identity could allow just one physical cause
for a mental state, not multiple causes, so multiple realizability
was an eﬀective rebuttal. Its appeal led many physicalist
philosophers to become nonreductive physicalists (Kim, 1992;
Bickle, 2019).
However, extensive analyses of the multiple-realizability
concept over the decades have led some scholars to
question its premise that a multiply realizable mental
state is a single entity or “kind” (Block, 1980; Kim, 1992;
Endicott, 1993). For example, pain in insects does not
have the same physical basis as pain in humans, so these
two types of pain could actually be called two distinct
entities. This challenge would mean that every multiply
realizable mental state is a composite or conjunction
of states (if from diﬀerent species), and in being a
mixture is not amenable to scientiﬁc analysis—which
Kim (1992) claimed prevents psychology from being a
scientiﬁc discipline.
Our ﬁndings refute this challenge for the particular
mental state of consciousness. We found that every multiply
realizable conscious system—in vertebrates versus arthropods
versus cephalopods, and for aﬀective- versus image-based
consciousness—has a large number of physical featuresin common , all of which are listed in Table 2 ,Level 3 .
The commonalities are so numerous that consciousness,
we argue, despite its variations, can indeed be treated
as a single mental kind. Another criterion for a mental
state to be a single kind is if all its variations have the
same causal powers (Kim, 1992), and we demonstrated
this too, in that the conscious state causes active, directed
behaviors in all the conscious taxa (see above). The many,
unifying regularities we uncovered for the conscious state
are not coincidental or trivial, but instead comprise a
suite of essential adaptations, convergently molded by the
selective evolutionary constraints needed for highly mobile
animals to operate proactively in a directed manner in
complex environments.
These considerations demonstrate the value of multiple
realizability in consciousness studies and psychology in general—
and we have shown that multiple realizability comes directly
from the multiple-routes feature of all emergent systems
(Table 1 , Feature 6).
Consciousness, Emergence, and the
“Experiential Gap”: Being Versus
Describing
While we ﬁnd no scientiﬁc explanatory gap between the brain
and subjective experience from the standpoint of biology and
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 11 June 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 1041

fpsyg-11-01041 June 10, 2020 Time: 20:44 # 12
Feinberg and Mallatt Consciousness and Emergence
FIGURE 6 | Some kinds of knowledge can only be obtained by experience.
Knowing is of two types, experiential (left) and descriptive (right). An observer
cannot fully know an experience (X at the right) without directly experiencing it,
even though the experience is generated physically by neurons in a living brain
(center column). The distinction here between ﬁrst- and third- person points of
view does not entail dualism between the brain and the mind or require a
“non-physical” explanation for phenomenal consciousness. Also see Feinberg
and Mallatt (2018b). Figure © Mount Sinai School of Medicine.
neurobiology, we acknowledge that there remains an experiential
(“point of view”) gap between objective scientiﬁc explanations
of the brain and subjective experiences of consciousness. The
question is whether this gap causes a problem for a complete
science of consciousness.
To illustrate the experiential gap, C. D. Broad argued that even
if an omniscient “mathematical archangel” could fully explain
the chemistry of ammonia and the functions of the brain, the
archangel still could not predict the subjective smell of ammonia:
He [the archangel] would know exactly what the microscopic
structure of ammonia must be; but he would be totally unable to
predict that a substance with this structure must smell as ammonia
does when it gets into the human nose. The utmost that he could
predict on this subject would be that certain changes would take
place in the mucous membrane, the olfactory nerves and so on.
But he could not possibly know that these changes would be
accompanied by the appearance of a smell in general or of the
peculiar smell of ammonia in particular, unless someone told him
so or he had smelled it for himself (Broad, 1925, p. 71).
We fully agree with Broad that no amount of explanation
of the neurobiology of the brain can eliminate the need
for the subjective aspect of personal experience, any more
than describing one’s ﬁrst-person experience can substitute
for having that experience. And we agree that no amount
of indirect knowledge or description of brain functions
can be equated with, fully capture or can substitute for
“something it is like to be, ” phenomenal consciousness , the
ﬁrst-person versus third-person point of view , or knowledge
by acquaintance versus knowledge by description (Russell,
1910, 1912, 1914; Nagel, 1974, 1986; Jackson, 1982, 1986;
Levine, 1983; Velmans, 1991; Searle, 1992, 2007; Conee,
1994; Block, 1995; Chalmers, 1995, 1996; Metzinger, 1995,
Metzinger, 2003; Tye, 2002; Revonsuo, 2006; Teller, 2011;Carruthers, 2016; Choifer, 2018; Hasan and Fumerton, 2019;
Nida-Rümelin and O Conaill, 2019).
So how do we scientiﬁcally reconcile the experiential divide
between these ﬁrst- and third- person points of view without
invoking any dualism between the brain and the mind? How can
the divide be compatible with physicalism? (See for instance the
“knowledge argument” against physicalism: Jackson, 1982, 1986;
Conee, 1994; Nida-Rümelin and O Conaill, 2019).
Here is our answer. If it is true, as we propose, that
the personal life of an embodied organism is an emergent
process of a physical system ( Table 1 and Table 2 ,Level 1 ),
then subjectivity is a critical but biologically natural
element of what we experience as a phenomenal state;
and if it is also true, as we propose, that the addition
of the special neurobiological features of complex brains
(Table 2 ,Level 3 ) provides the biologically natural elements
necessary for the hierarchical emergence of phenomenal
consciousness, then we have enumerated all the prerequisites
that are required for the natural emergence of subjective
experience ( Figure 5 ).
Thus we ﬁnd that the distinction between being and
experiencing versus observing and describing is accounted
for by phenomenal consciousness as an emergent feature
of living complex brains ( Figure 6 ). This means the
“knowledge by description” of phenomenal consciousness –
as sought by Broad’s archangel—is diﬀerent from direct
“knowledge by acquaintance” or phenomenal knowledge
because some kinds of knowledge can only be obtained
through experience, even in a completely physical world
(Conee, 1994). By this account, the “experiential gap” does not
violate physicalism, nor does it support the strong emergence
of consciousness.
CONCLUSION
In summary, our proposed solution to the explanatory gap is
that ﬁrst, the emergence of phenomenal consciousness has a
scientiﬁc explanation that adheres to and is consistent with
the principles of emergence in the rest of nature. A close
consideration of the special features of conscious systems
(Table 2 ,Level 3 ) shows these features ﬁt all the criteria of
emergent features of complex systems in general ( Table 1 ),
thereby conﬁrming that consciousness is a complex-systems
phenomenon, and that it is not just one thing arising from one
cause, such as a new “fundamental” physical force of nature
(Chalmers, 1995, 1996).
Second, our formulation for consciousness as a physically
emergent process is Life + Special neurobiological features !
Phenomenal consciousness , in which the (personal) Life aspect is
the ultimate basis of subjectivity and the Special features aspect is
the necessary additional basis of conscious experiences. We show
how this formulation explains consciousness as an instance of
standard, weak emergence without a need for strong emergence
or a scientiﬁcally unbridgeable explanatory gap.
Third, with the natural emergence of consciousness
thus explained, the only remaining gap is a mere
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 12 June 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 1041

fpsyg-11-01041 June 10, 2020 Time: 20:44 # 13
Feinberg and Mallatt Consciousness and Emergence
“experiential gap” between ﬁrst-person experience and third-
person description that poses no obstacle for a naturalistic
explanation of consciousness.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
TF focused more on the neurobiology, theory and philosophy. JM
focused more on the neurobiological and evolutionary aspects.Both authors contributed to the emergent features and their
relation to consciousness.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Jill K. Gregory at the Instructional Technology,
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai for the professional
artwork of the ﬁgures.
REFERENCES
Ahl, V., Allen, T. F., and Allen, T. F. H. (1996). Hierarchy Theory: A Vision,
Vocabulary, and Epistemology . New York, NY: Columbia University Press.
Aleman, B., and Merker, B. (2014). Consciousness without cortex:
a hydranencephaly family survey. Acta Paediatr. 103, 1057–1065.
doi: 10.1111/apa.12718
Allen, T. F., and Starr, T. B. (1982). Hierarchy: Perspectives for Ecological
Complexity . Chicago, IL: University of Chicago.
Andersen, P. B., Emmeche, C., Finnemann, N. O., and Christiansen, P. V. (2000).
Downward Causation :Minds, Bodies and Matter . Aarhus: Aarhus University
Press.
Arendt, D., Bertucci, P. Y., Achim, K., and Musser, J. M. (2019). Evolution of
neuronal types and families. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 56, 144–152. doi: 10.1016/j.
conb.2019.01.022
Atmanspacher, H. (2012). Identifying mental states from neural states under
mental constraints. Interface Focus 2, 74–81. doi: 10.1098/rsfs.2011.
0058
Atmanspacher, H. (2015). Contextual emergence of mental states. Cogn. Process.
16, 359–364. doi: 10.1007/s10339-015-0658-0
Atmanspacher, H., and beim Graben, P. (2009). Contextual emergence.
Scholarpedia 4:7997. doi: 10.4249/scholarpedia.7997
Beckermann, A., Flohr, H., and Kim, J. (eds) (2011). Emergence or Reduction?
Essays on the Prospects of Nonreductive Physicalism . New York, NY: Walter de
Gruyter.
Bedau, M. A. (1997). Weak emergence. Philos. Perspect. 11, 375–399. doi: 10.1111/
0029-4624.31.s11.17
Bedau, M. A. (2008). “Downward causation and the autonomy of weak emergence, ”
inEmergence: Contemporary Readings in Philosophy and Science , eds M. A.
Bedau and P. Humphreys (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press), 155–188.
Bedau, M. A., and Humphreys, P. (2008). Emergence: Contemporary Readings in
Philosophy and Science . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
beim Graben, P. (2014). Contextual emergence of intentionality. J. Conscious. Stud.
21, 75–96. doi: 10.1007/s12124-010-9117-8
Berridge, K. C., and Kringelbach, M. L. (2015). Pleasure systems in the brain.
Neuron 86, 646–664. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2015.02.018
Bickle, J. (2019). Multiple Realizability. Encyclopedia of Cognitive Science . Available
online at: https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2019/entries/multiple-
realizability (accessed May 14, 2020).
Bishop, R. C., and Atmanspacher, H. (2006). Contextual emergence in the
description of properties. Found. Phys. 36, 1753–1777. doi: 10.1007/s10701-
006-9082-8
Block, N. (1980). Troubles with functionalism. Read. Philos. Psychol. 1, 268–305.
Block, N. (1995). On a confusion about a function of consciousness. Behav. Brain
Sci.18, 227–247. doi: 10.1017/S0140525X00038188
Block, N. (2012). The grain of vision and the grain of attention. Thought J. Philos.
1, 170–184. doi: 10.1002/tht3.28
Bosch, T. C., Klimovich, A., Domazet-Lošo, T., Gründer, S., Holstein, T. W., Jékely,
G., et al. (2017). Back to the basics: cnidarians start to ﬁre. Trends Neurosci. 40,
92–105. doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2016.11.005
Broad, C. D. (1925). The Mind and its Place in Nature . London: Routledge.
Bronfman, Z. Z., Ginsburg, S., and Jablonka, E. (2016). The transition to minimal
consciousness through the evolution of associative learning. Front. Psychol.
7:1954. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2016.01954Brunet, T., Larson, B. T., Linden, T. A., Vermeij, M. J., McDonald, K., and
King, N. (2019). Light-regulated collective contractility in a multicellular
choanoﬂagellate. Science 366, 326–344. doi: 10.1101/661009
Brunk, C. F., and Martin, W. F. (2019). Archaeal histone contributions to the origin
of eukaryotes. Trends Microbiol. 27, 703–714. doi: 10.1016/j.tim.2019.04.002
Cabanac, M. (1996). On the origin of consciousness, a postulate and its corollary.
Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 20, 33–40. doi: 10.1016/0149-7634(95)00032-A
Carr, J. (1981). Applications of Centre Manifold Theory . Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Carruthers, P. (2016). Higher-Order Theories of Consciousness. Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Available online at: https://plato.stanford.edu/
archives/fall2016/entries/consciousness-higher/ (accessed May 14, 2020).
Chalmers, D. J. (1995). Facing up to the problem of consciousness. J. Conscious.
Stud. 2, 200–219.
Chalmers, D. J. (1996). The Conscious Mind: In Search of a Fundamental Theory .
New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Chalmers, D. J. (2006). “Strong and weak emergence, ” in The Re-Emergence of
Emergence: The Emergentist Hypothesis from Science to Religion , eds P. Clayton
and P. Davies (Oxford: Oxford University Press), 244–254.
Chica, A. B., Lasaponara, S., Lupiáñez, J., Doricchi, F., and Bartolomeo, P.
(2010). Exogenous attention can capture perceptual consciousness: ERP and
behavioural evidence. Neuroimage 51, 1205–1212. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.
2010.03.002
Choifer, A. (2018). A new understanding of the ﬁrst-person and third-person
perspectives. Philos. Pap. 47, 333–371. doi: 10.1080/05568641.2018.1450160
Churchland, P. M. (2013). Matter and Consciousness . Cambridge, MA: MIT press.
Clark, A. (2013). Whatever next? Predictive brains, situated agents, and the
future of cognitive science. Behav. Brain Sci. 36, 181–204. doi: 10.1017/
S0140525X12000477
Clayton, P. (2006). “Conceptual foundations of emergence theory, ” in The Re-
Emergence of Emergence: The Emergentist Hypothesis from Science to Religion ,
eds P. Clayton and P. Davies (Oxford: Oxford University Press), 1–31.
Clayton, P., and Davies, P. (2006). The Re-Emergence of Emergence: The Emergentist
Hypothesis from Science To Religion . Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Conee, E. (1994). Phenomenal knowledge. Aust. J. Philos. 72, 136–150. doi: 10.
1080/00048409412345971
Damasio, A. (2010). Self Comes to Mind: Constructing the Conscious Brain .
New York, NY: Vintage.
Davies, P. (2006). “Preface, ” in The Re-Emergence of Emergence :The Emergentist
Hypothesis from Science to Religion , eds P. Clayton and P. Davies (Oxford:
Oxford University Press), ix–xiv.
Deacon, T. W. (2011). Incomplete Nature: How Mind Emerged from Matter .
New York, NY: WW Norton and Company.
Denton, D. (2005). The Primordial Emotions: The Dawning of Consciousness .
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Edelman, D. B., Baars, B. J., and Seth, A. K. (2005). Identifying hallmarks of
consciousness in non-mammalian species. Conscious. Cogn. 14, 169–187. doi:
10.1016/j.concog.2004.09.001
Ellis, G. (2006). “On the nature of emergent reality, ” in The Re-Emergence of
Emergence: The Emergentist Hypothesis from Science to Religion , eds P. Clayton
and P. Davies (Oxford: Oxford University Press), 79–107.
Emmeche, C., Køppe, S., and Stjernfelt, F. (2000). “Levels, emergence, and three
versions of downward causation, ” in Downward Causation. Minds, Bodies
and Matter , eds P. B. Andersen, C. Emmeche, N. O. Finnemann, and P. V.
Christiansen (Århus: Aarhus University Press), 13–34.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 13 June 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 1041

fpsyg-11-01041 June 10, 2020 Time: 20:44 # 14
Feinberg and Mallatt Consciousness and Emergence
Endicott, R. P. (1993). Species-speciﬁc properties and more narrow reductive
strategies. Erkenntnis 38, 303–321.
England, J. L. (2013). Statistical physics of self-replication. J. Chem. Phys.
139:121923. doi: 10.1063/1.4818538
Erwin, D. H., and Valentine, J. W. (2013). The Cambrian Explosion: The
Construction of Animal Biodiversity . Greenwood Village, CO: Roberts and Co.
Feigl, H. (1958). The ‘Mental’ and the ‘Physical’ . Minneapolis, MN: University of
Minnesota Press.
Feinberg, T. E. (2001). Why the mind is not a radically emergent feature of the
brain. J. Conscious. Stud. 8, 123–145.
Feinberg, T. E. (2012). Neuroontology, neurobiological naturalism, and
consciousness: a challenge to scientiﬁc reduction and a solution. Phys.
Life Rev. 9, 13–34. doi: 10.1016/j.plrev.2011.10.019
Feinberg, T. E., and Mallatt, J. (2013). The evolutionary and genetic origins of
consciousness in the Cambrian Period over 500 million years ago. Front.
Psychol. 4:667. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00667
Feinberg, T. E., and Mallatt, J. (2016a). The Ancient Origins of Consciousness: How
the Brain Created Experience . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Feinberg, T. E., and Mallatt, J. (2016b). The nature of primary consciousness: a new
synthesis. Conscious. Cogn. 43, 113–127. doi: 10.1016/j.concog.2016.05.009
Feinberg, T. E., and Mallatt, J. (2018a). Consciousness Demystiﬁed . Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Feinberg, T. E., and Mallatt, J. (2018b). Unlocking the “Mystery” of
Consciousness. Scientiﬁc American, Observations . Available online at:
https://blogs.scientiﬁcamerican.com/observations/unlocking-the-mystery-
of-consciousness (accessed January 13, 2020).
Feinberg, T. E., and Mallatt, J. M. (2019). Subjectivity “demystiﬁed”: neurobiology,
evolution, and the explanatory gap. Front. Psychol. 10:1686. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.
2019.01686
Gershman, S. J., Horvitz, E. J., and Tenenbaum, J. B. (2015). Computational
rationality: a converging paradigm for intelligence in brains, minds, and
machines. Science 349, 273–278. doi: 10.1126/science.aac6076
Ginsburg, S., and Jablonka, E. (2019). The Evolution of the Sensitive Soul: Learning
and the Origins of Consciousness . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Godfrey-Smith, P. (2016). “Animal evolution and the origins of experience” in How
Biology Shapes Philosophy: New Foundations for Naturalism , ed. D. L. Smith
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press), 23–50.
Godfrey-Smith, P. (2019). Evolving Across the Explanatory Gap. Philosophy,
Theory, and Practice in Biology . Available online at: https://quod.lib.umich.
edu/cgi/t/text/text-idx?cc=ptpbio;c=ptb;c=ptpbio;idno=16039257.0011.001;g=
ptpbiog;rgn=main;view=text;xc=1 (accessed October 11, 2018).
Goﬀ, P., Seager, W., and Allen-Hermanson, S. (2017). Panpsychism. The Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Available online at: https://plato.stanford.edu/
archives/win2017/entries/panpsychism/ (accessed May 14, 2020).
Grillner, S., and El Manira, A. (2020). Current principles of motor control, with
special reference to vertebrate locomotion. Physiol. Rev. 100, 271–320. doi:
10.1152/physrev.00015.2019
Haken, H. (1983). Synergetics: An Introduction. Non-Equilibrium Phase Transition
and Self-Organization in Physics . Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Hasan, A., and Fumerton, R. (2019). Knowledge by Acquaintance vs. Description.
The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Available online at: https://plato.
stanford.edu/archives/sum2019/entries/knowledge-acquaindescrip/ (accessed
May 14, 2020).
Hodge, R. D., Bakken, T. E., Miller, J. A., Smith, K. A., Barkan, E. R., Graybuck,
L. T., et al. (2019). Conserved cell types with divergent features in human versus
mouse cortex. Nature 573, 61–68. doi: 10.1038/s41586-019-1506-7
Hu, H. (2016). Reward and aversion. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 39, 297–324. doi: 10.
1146/annurev-neuro-070815-014106
Jackson, F. (1982). Epiphenomenal qualia. Philos. Q. 32, 127–136. doi: 10.2307/
2960077
Jackson, F. (1986). What Mary didn’t know. J. Philos. 83, 291–295. doi: 10.2307/
2026143
Jordan, J. S., and Ghin, M. (2006). (Proto-) consciousness as a contextually
emergent property of self-sustaining systems. Mind Matter 4, 45–68.
Jylkkä, J., and Railo, H. (2019). Consciousness as a concrete physical phenomenon.
Conscious. Cogn. 74, 102779. doi: 10.1016/j.concog.2019.102779
Kim, J. (1992). Multiple realization and the metaphysics of reduction. Philos.
Phenomenol. Res. 52, 1–26.Kim, J. (1998). Mind in a Physical World: An Essay on the Mind–Body Problem and
Mental Causation . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kim, J. (2006). “Being realistic about emergence, ” in The Re-Emergence of
Emergence :The Emergentist Hypothesis from Science to Religion , eds P. Clayton
and P. Davies (Oxford: Oxford University Press), 190–202.
Klein, C., and Barron, A. B. (2016). Insects have the capacity for subjective
experience. Anim. Sent. 9, 1–19. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1520084113
Koch, C. (2019). The Feeling of Life Itself . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Koch, C., Massimini, M., Boly, M., and Tononi, G. (2016). Neural correlates of
consciousness: progress and problems. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 17, 307–321. doi:
10.1038/nrn.2016.22
Lacalli, T. (2018). Amphioxus neurocircuits, enhanced arousal, and the origin of
vertebrate consciousness. Conscious. Cogn. 62, 127–134. doi: 10.1016/j.concog.
2018.03.006
Lamme, V. A. (2006). Towards a true neural stance on consciousness. Trends Cogn.
Sci.23, 571–579. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2006.09.001
Lane, N., and Martin, W. (2010). The energetics of genome complexity. Nature 467,
929. doi: 10.1038/nature09486
Levine, J. (1983). Materialism and phenomenal properties: the explanatory gap.
Pac. Philos. Q. 64, 354–361. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-0114.1983.tb00207.x
Lewes, G. H. (1877). Problems of Life and Mind . London: Trübner & Company.
Mallatt, J., and Feinberg, T. E. (2017). Consciousness is not inherent in but
emergent from life. Anim. Sent. 1, 1–7.
Mayr, E. (1982). The Growth of Biological Thought: Diversity, Evolution, and
Inheritance . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Mayr, E. (2004). What Makes Biology Unique? Considerations on the Autonomy of a
Scientiﬁc Discsipline . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Merker, B. (2007). Consciousness without a cerebral cortex: a challenge for
neuroscience and medicine. Behav. Brain Sci. 30, 63–81. doi: 10.1017/
S0140525X07000891
Metzinger, T. (2003). Being No One: The Self-Model Theory of Subjectivity .
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Metzinger, T. (ed.) (1995). Conscious Experience . Thorverton: Imprint Academic.
Mogensen, J., and Overgaard, M. (2017). Reorganization of the connectivity
between elementary functions–A model relating conscious states to neural
connections. Front. Psychol. 8:625. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2017.00625
Morowitz, H. J. (2002). The Emergence of Everything: How the World Became
Complex . New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Nagel, T. (1974). What is it like to be a bat? Philos. Rev. 83, 435–450.
Nagel, T. (1986). The View from Nowhere . New York, NY: Oxford University press.
Natarajan, C., Hoﬀmann, F. G., Weber, R. E., Fago, A., Witt, C. C., and Storz,
J. F. (2016). Predictable convergence in hemoglobin function has unpredictable
molecular underpinnings. Science 354, 336–339. doi: 10.1126/science.aaf9070
Nida-Rümelin, M., and O Conaill, D. (2019). Qualia: The Knowledge Argument.
The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Available online at: https://plato.
stanford.edu/archives/win2019/entries/qualia-knowledge/ (accessed May 14,
2020).
Noble, R., Tasaki, K., Noble, P. J., and Noble, D. (2019). Biological relativity requires
circular causality but not symmetry of causation: so, where, what and when are
the boundaries? Front. Physiol. 10:827. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2019.00827
Northcutt, R. G. (2012). Evolution of centralized nervous systems: two schools of
evolutionary thought. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 109(Suppl. 1), 10626–10633.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.1201889109
Nunez, P. L. (2016). The New Science of Consciousness . Amherst, NY: Prometheus
Books.
Panksepp, J. (2004). Aﬀective Neuroscience: The Foundations of Human and Animal
Emotions . New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Panksepp, J. (2016). The cross-mammalian neurophenomenology of primal
emotional aﬀects: from animal feelings to human therapeutics. J. Comp. Neurol.
524, 1624–1635. doi: 10.1002/cne.23969
Pattee, H. H. (1970). “The problem of biological hierarchy, ” in Towards a
Theoretical Biology 3, Drafts , ed. C. H. Waddington (Edinburgh: Edinburgh
University Press), 117–136.
Plotnick, R. E., Dornbos, S. Q., and Chen, J. (2010). Information landscapes and
sensory ecology of the Cambrian Radiation. Paleobiology 36, 303–317. doi:
10.1666/08062.1
Popper, K. R., and Eccles, J. C. (1977). The Self and its Brain . New York, NY:
Springer.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 14 June 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 1041

fpsyg-11-01041 June 10, 2020 Time: 20:44 # 15
Feinberg and Mallatt Consciousness and Emergence
Putnam, H. (1967). “Psychological predicates, ” in Art, Mind, and Religion , eds
W. H. Capitan and D. D. Merrill (Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh
Press), 37–48.
Revonsuo, A. (2006). Inner Presence: Consciousness as a Biological Phenomenon .
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Revonsuo, A. (2010). Consciousness: The Science of Subjectivity . Hove: Psychology
Press.
Rothschild, L. J. (2006). “The role of emergence in biology, ” in The Re-Emergence of
Emergence :The Emergentist Hypothesis from Science to Religion , eds P. Clayton
and P. Davies (Oxford: Oxford University Press), 151–165.
Russell, B. (1910). Knowledge by acquaintance and knowledge by description”.
Proc. Arist. Soc. 11, 108–128.
Russell, B. (1912). The Problems of Philosophy . New York, NY: Henry Holt and
Company.
Russell, B. (1914). On the nature of acquaintance. Monist 24, 161–187.
Salthe, S. N. (1985). Evolving Hierarchical Systems: Their Structure and
Representation . New York, NY: Columbia University Press.
Scott, A. (1995). Stairway to the Mind: The Controversial New Science of
Consciousness . New York, NY: Springer-Verlag.
Searle, J. R. (1992). The Rediscovery of the Mind . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Searle, J. R. (2007). Dualism revisited. J. Physiol. Paris 101, 169–178. doi: 10.1016/j.
jphysparis.2007.11.003
Seth, A. (2009). Explanatory correlates of consciousness: theoretical and
computational challenges. Cogn. Comput. 1, 50–63. doi: 10.1007/s12559-009-
9007-x
Shear, J. (ed.) (1999). Explaining Consciousness: The Hard Problem . Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Shigeno, S., Murakami, Y., and Nomura, T. (eds) (2017). Brain Evolution by Design:
From Neural Origin to Cognitive Architecture . New York, NY: Springer.
Siciliano, C. A., Noamany, H., Chang, C. J., Brown, A. R., Chen, X., Leible, D., et al.
(2019). A cortical-brainstem circuit predicts and governs compulsive alcohol
drinking. Science 366, 1008–1012. doi: 10.1126/science.aay1186
Simon, H. (1973). “The organization of complex systems, ” in Hierarchy Theory:
The Challenge of Complex Systems , ed. H. H. Patee (New York, NY: George
Braziller), 1–27.
Skrbina, D. (ed.) (2009). Mind that Abides: Panpsychism in the New Millennium ,
Vol. 75. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing.
Solms, M. (2019). The hard problem of consciousness and the free energy principle.
Front. Psychol. 9:2714. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.02714
Sperry, R. W. (1984). Consciousness, personal identity and the divided
brain. Neuropsychologia 22, 661–673. doi: 10.1016/0028-3932(84)90
093-9
Sperry, R. W. (1990). “Forebrain commissurotomy and conscious awareness, ” in
Brain Circuits and Functions of the Mind , ed. C. Trevarthen (New York, NY:
Cambridge University Press), 371–388.
Stayton, C. T. (2015). What does convergent evolution mean? The interpretation of
convergence and its implications in the search for limits to evolution. Interface
Focus 5:20150039. doi: 10.1098/rsfs.2015.0039
Strausfeld, N. J. (2012). Arthropod Brains: Evolution, Functional Elegance, and
Historical Signiﬁcance . Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University
Press.Szõnyi, A., Zichó, K., Barth, A. M., Gönczi, R. T., Schlingloﬀ, D., Török, B., et al.
(2019). Median raphe controls acquisition of negative experience in the mouse.
Science 366:eaay1094. doi: 10.1126/science.aay8746
Taiz, L., Alkon, D., Draguhn, A., Murphy, A., Blatt, M., Thiel, G., et al. (2020).
Reply to Trewavas et al. and Calvo and Trewavas. Trends Plant Sci. 25, 218–220.
doi: 10.1016/j.tplants.2019.12.020
Teller, P. (2011). “Subjectivity and knowing what it’s like, ” in Emergence or
Reduction? Essays on the Prospects of Nonreductive Physicalism , eds A.
Beckermann, H. Flohr, and J. Kim (New York, NY: Walter de Gruyter),
180–200.
Thompson, E. (2007). Mind in Life: Biology, Phenomenology and the Sciences of
Mind . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Tononi, G., and Koch, C. (2015). Consciousness: here, there and everywhere?
Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 370:20140167. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2014.
0167
Trestman, M. (2013). The Cambrian explosion and the origins of embodied
cognition. Biol. Theory 8, 80–92. doi: 10.1007/s13752-013-0102-6
Tschacher, W., and Haken, H. (2007). Intentionality in non-equilibrium systems?
The functional aspects of self-organized pattern formation. New Ideas Psychol.
25, 1–15. doi: 10.1016/j.newideapsych.2006.09.002
Tsuchiya, N., and Koch, C. (2008). “The relationship between consciousness and
attention, ” in The Neurology of Consciousness: Cognitive Neuroscience and
Neuropathology , eds G. Tononi and S. Laureys (Oxford: Elsevier Academic),
63–78.
Tsuchiya, N., and Van Boxtel, J. J. (2013). Introduction to research topic: attention
and consciousness in diﬀerent senses. Front. Psychol. 4:249. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.
2013.00249
Tye, M. (2002). Consciousness, Color, and Content . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Van Gulick, R. (2001). Reduction, emergence and other recent options on the
mind/body problem. A philosophic overview. J. Conscious. Stud. 8, 1–34.
Van Kranendonk, M. J., Deamer, D. W., and Djokic, T. (2017). Life springs. Sci.
Am. 317, 28–35.
Velmans, M. (1991). Consciousness from a ﬁrst-person perspective. Behav. Brain
Sci.14, 702–719.
Velmans, M. (2008). Reﬂexive monism. J. Conscious. Stud. 15, 5–50.
Watson, T. (2019). The trickster microbes shaking up the tree of life. Nature 569,
323–324. doi: 10.1038/d41586-019-01496-w
Witherington, D. C. (2011). Taking emergence seriously: the centrality of circular
causality for dynamic systems approaches to development. Hum. Dev. 54,
66–92. doi: 10.1159/000326814
Conﬂict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2020 Feinberg and Mallatt. This is an open-access article distributed
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use,
distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original
author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication
in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use,
distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Psychology | www.frontiersin.org 15 June 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 1041