## Tinnitus and decreased sound tolerance.

## OTORHINOLARYNGOLOGY HEAD AND NECK SURGERY 18

## VOLUME 1

## P. ASHLEY WACKYM, MD, FACS, FAAP

Professor and Chair Department of Otolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery Rutgers Robert Wood Johnson Medical School Chancellor's Scholar Rutgers Biomedical and Health Sciences Rutgers University New Brunswick, New Jersey

## JAMES B. SNOW, Jr, MD, FACS

Professor Emeritus

Department of Otorhinolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania Former Director, National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders National Institutes of Health Bethesda, Maryland

2016

PEOPLE'S MEDICAL PUBLISHING HOUSE-USA SHELTON, CONNECTICUT

## People's Medical Publishing House-USA

2 Enterprise Drive, Suite 509 Shelton, CT 06484 Tel: 203-402-0646 Fax: 203-402-0854

E-mail: info@pmph-usa.com

© 2016 P. Ashley Wackym, James B. Snow, Jr.

All rights reserved. Without limiting the rights under copyright reserved above, no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in or introduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means (electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise), without the prior written permission of the publisher.

## 16 17 18 19/PMPH/9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

ISBN-13 (2 volume set) 978-1-60795-177-3

ISBN-10

(2 volume set) 1-60795-177-0

eISBN-13  978-1-60795-943-4

eISBN-10  1-60795-943-7

Printed in the China by People's Medical Publishing House (PMPH)

Editor: Carole Wonsiewicz and Linda Mehta; Copyeditor/Typesetter: diacriTech; Cover designer: Mary McKeon

## Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Names: Wackym, Phillip A., editor. | Snow, James B. (James Byron), 1932- , editor. Title: Ballenger's otorhinolaryngology : head and neck surgery / [edited by] P . Ashley Wackym, James B. Snow Jr. Description: 18. | Shelton, CT : People's Medical Publishing House-USA, [2016] | Includes bibliographical references and index.

Identifiers: LCCN 2016019237 | ISBN 9781607951773 | ISBN 1607951770 | ISBN 9781607959434 (e-ISBN) | ISBN 1607959437 (e-ISBN)

Subjects: | MESH: Otorhinolaryngologic Diseases | Head-surgery | Neck-surgery

Classification: LCC RF46 | NLM WV 140 | DDC 617.5/1-dc23 LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2016019237

## Sales and Distribution

Canada

Login Canada

300 Saulteaux Cr.

Winnipeg, MB R3J 3T2

Phone: 1.800.665.1148

Fax: 1.800.665.0103

www.lb.ca

Foreign Rights

John Scott &amp; Company

International Publisher's Agency

P.O. Box 878

Kimberton, PA 19442, USA

Tel: 610-827-1640

Fax: 610-827-1671

rights@johnscottco.us

United Kingdom, Europe, Middle East, Africa

Eurospan Limited 3, Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, London WC2E 8LU, UK Tel. Within UK: 0800 526830 Outside the UK: +44 (0)20 7845 0868

http://www.eurospanbookstore.com

Singapore, Thailand, Philippines, Indonesia,Vietnam,

Pacific Rim, Korea

McGraw-Hill Education (Asia)

60 Tuas Basin Link

Singapore 638775

Tel: (65) 6863-1580

Fax: (65) 6862-3354

www.mcgraw-hill.com.sg

Australia, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, Fiji, Tonga,

Solomon Islands, Cook Islands

Woodslane Pty Limited

10 Apollo Street

Warriewood NSW 2102

Australia

Tel: 612-8445-2300

Fax: 612-0007-5850

www.elsevier.com.au

Brazil

SuperPedidoTecmedd

Beatriz Alves, Foreign Trade Department

r. SansaoAlves dos Santos, 102

7th floor

Brooklin Novo

San Paolo 04571-090

Brazil

Tel: 55-16-3512-5539

www.superpedidotecmedd.com.br

India, Bangladesh, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Malaysia

Jaypee Brothers Medical Publishers Pvt. Ltd.

4838, 24 Ansari Road, Darya Ganj

New Delhi-110002, India

Phone: +91 11 23272143

Fax: +91 11 23276490

www.jaypeebrothers.com

People's Republic of China

People's Medical Publishing House

International Trade Department

No. 19, Pan Jia Yuan Nan Li

Chaoyang District

Beijing 100021, P .R. China

Tel: 8610-67653342

Fax: 8610-67691034

www.pmph.com/en

Notice: The authors and publisher have made every effort to ensure that the patient care recommended herein, including choice of drugs and drug dosages, is in accord with the accepted standard and practice at the time of publication. However, since research and regulation constantly change clinical standards, the reader is urged to check the product information sheet included in the package of each drug, which includes recommended doses, warnings, and contraindications. This is particularly important with new or infrequently used drugs. Any treatment regimen, particularly one involving medication, involves inherent risk that must be weighed on a case-by-case basis against the benefits anticipated. The reader is cautioned that the purpose of this book is to inform and enlighten; the information contained herein is not intended as, and should not be employed as, a substitute for individual diagnosis and treatment.

## Tinnitus and Decreased Sound Tolerance

## Pawel J. Jastreboff, PhD, ScD, MBA Margaret M. Jastreboff, PhD

Tinnitus is commonly described as a perception of sound that is not related to an external acoustic source or electrical stimulation.  The National 1 Center for Health Statistics categorizes tinnitus as chronic if it lasts at least three months.  Tinnitus is 2 an extremely common condition, but only a fraction of those who experience it are significantly disturbed by it.  Moreover, it has been shown that 3 the perception of tinnitus can be evoked in 94% of  young,  healthy  subjects  by  putting  them  in  a setting  with  a  sufficiently  low  level  of  sound. 4 A  recent  experiment  has  confirmed  this  effect. 5 Although there is a lack of objective measures of tinnitus and no clear agreement on an efficient way to help those who suffer from tinnitus, as well as many unanswered questions, significant   progress has  been  made  over  the  past  quarter  century  in the tinnitus field. Still, most patients are given the unfortunate advice: 'Learn to live with it.'

Tinnitus is not a disease. It is a symptom that, similar  to  pain,  headache,  or  fever,  can  vary  in severity and can affect patients' lives to varying degrees.  Sounds  described  by  patients  can  have different  spectra  and  loudness,  can  change  in loudness and type of sound, and can persist or be transient.  Tinnitus can be annoying to those who 1 experience it and lead to a vicious circle where it becomes the center of attention in patients' lives. Tinnitus affects people of all ages. 2

Tinnitus can exist independently or as part of a complex medical condition. 6  The cause is unclear, and no specific site or molecular or cellular mechanism has been proven to be responsible for the initiation and continuation of tinnitus.

Tinnitus is frequently accompanied by decreased  sound  tolerance  (DST)  and  hearing loss. 2,7,8 Decreased sound tolerance includes hyperacusis  and/or  misophonia. 9,10 There  is  no consensus  regarding  testing  of  DST.  Only  limited  normative  data  are  available  for  Loudness Discomfort  Levels  (LDLs),  which  are  typically used to assess the presence of hyperacusis 11  and one questionnaire has been proposed to evaluate the severity of hyperacusis, 12 the validity of which still needs  to  be  evaluated. 13 The  prevalence and  epidemiology  of  hyperacusis  are  not  welldocumented, and its etiology and mechanisms are poorly understood. Hyperacusis can occur alone or as an adjunct to complex medical conditions. Gradual desensitization can lead to the successful treatment of the problem. 6

It  is  crucial  to  distinguish  between  the  mere presence of tinnitus perception (predicted primarily by hearing loss) and the presence of clinically significant, bothersome tinnitus, from which people  suffer  and  experience  a  number  of  negative reactions  to  it.  Unfortunately,  this  distinction  is frequently not taken into account in research and in proposed mechanisms of tinnitus.

In  recent  years,  tinnitus  has  become  better recognized  in  the  United  States  (US)  due  to  its high  prevalence  in  individuals  who  serve  in  the military and with the growing costs for providing treatment for it. Forty-nine percent of American soldiers involved in explosions develop tinnitus, while only 25% have hearing loss. 14  The Veterans Administration spent 1.1 billion dollars for compensation for tinnitus in 2010 alone, 15,16 and it is expected this amount will rise to 2.26 billion by 2014. 17 The societal cost of tinnitus is significant as well. A recent study estimates the average cost to  society in the Netherlands is over $7,000 per patient per year. 18 Taking the differences in medical systems between the Netherlands and the US into account, and using 5% to denote the prevalence of bothersome tinnitus in the US, the estimated  conservative  cost  to American  society  is over $30 billion per year.

## TINNITUS

## Definitions

Writings  about  tinnitus  can  be  found  in  ancient documentation  of  Babylonian,  Egyptian,  Greek, Indian, and Assyrian medicine. Throughout the  world,  a  variety  of  terms  have  been  used  to describe a ringing, tinkling (Latin, tinnire), buzzing,  and  whistling  in  the  ears  or  the  head,  leaving us with the two most commonly used terms, tinnitus  (in  English)  and  acufenos  (in  Spanish). Historical  reviews  of  tinnitus  may  be  found  in a  number of publications; of particular note are those by Stephens. 19

There  is no  precise, short, and  distinctive definition of tinnitus. Commonly  used  definitions focus on its psychoacoustical characteristics

(eg, definitions based  on  patients'  experiences describe tinnitus as ringing, buzzing, the sound of escaping steam,  hissing,  humming,  crickets,  or  noise in the ears). 1,3 A physiological definition of tinnitus as  'a  phantom auditory perception' points to the lack of a physical acoustic stimulus related to tinnitus. 20 The definition proposed by the Committee on Hearing, Bioacoustics and Biomechanics of the US National Research Council describes tinnitus as 'a conscious experience of sound that originates in the head' of its owner. 1

## Evaluation of Tinnitus

There is no objective method to detect and measure tinnitus. Interview and psychoacoustic characterization  are  the  typical  approaches  used  in clinical practice, sometimes augmented with physiologic  testing.  New  advances  in  research offer the possibility to detect tinnitus objectively by  using  imaging  techniques 21,22 or  magnetoencephalography. 23  These techniques are promising but cannot yet be used in clinical practice as none has been shown to work. Table 31-1 lists the methods used to evaluate tinnitus (adapted from 24-27 ).

## Problems Evoked by Tinnitus

As  tinnitus  can  present  as  a  part  of  a  complex medical  condition,  a  thoughtful  medical  evaluation is necessary to exclude all medically treatable problems that can be linked to tinnitus. Although tinnitus is classified as a symptom and not a disease,  it  does  require  treatment  as  it  can  cause significant  emotional  and  somatic  distress  and can  significantly  influence  a  patient' s  quality  of life. This need for treatment particularly exists if tinnitus is allowed to become a chronic problem. The list of reported associated complaints is long and includes: 1) emotional problems, such as irritation, annoyance, anxiety, stress and depression; 2) hearing problems such as difficulty with speech comprehension; and 3) somatic problems such as headache,  neck  pain,  and  jaw  pain. 1,28 Tinnitus can  be  intrusive  and  may  cause  difficulty  with sleep  and  concentration  and  a  decreased  ability to  participate  in  everyday  activities,  work,  and social  events. Tinnitus  may  also  create  problems in  relationships.  A  detailed  interview  aimed  at

## Table 31-1  Methods Used for Evaluation of Tinnitus

## Interview/questionnaires

## Psychoacoustical

- • Perceptual location
- • Pitch match
- • Loudness match
- • Maskability (minimal masking levels)
- • Postmasking effects (residual inhibition)

## Physiological

- • Otoacoustic emissions
- • Auditory brainstem responses
- • Late cortical potentials
- · Positron  emission  tomography/single  photon  emission tomography
- • Functional magnetic resonance imaging
- • Magnetoencephalography
- · Efferent-mediated suppression of otoacoustic emissions
- • Spontaneous auditory nerve activity

characterizing the specifics and degree of tinnitus impact on the patient' s life, coupled with an otorhinolaryngological evaluation, provide the most thorough  assessment  and  allow  the  practitioner to  address  the  issues  that  need  to  be  considered, including the potential intervention of a psychologist or psychiatrist to accompany treatment.

## Etiology, Prevalence and Epidemiology

Studies conducted around the world have shown a  significant  variability  in  the  estimation  of  tinnitus prevalence in the general population. 2  One explanation  for  the  variability  is  that  every  survey  used  different  questions  when  asking  about tinnitus.  Recent  epidemiological  data  confirmed the main aspects of the previous findings, pointing to an even higher prevalence of bothersome tinnitus in the US (about 8%) compared with the 4% previously reported. 2   From 6 to 17% of the general  population  experience  tinnitus  that  lasts for at least five minutes. From 3 to 7% of the general  population  seek  help  for  their  tinnitus,  and 0.5 to 2.5% report tinnitus has a severe effect on their lives. 1,3 The prevalence of tinnitus in adults with hearing problems is high (59 to 86%), and it  is  estimated that tinnitus is present in 50% of patients with sudden hearing loss, 70% with presbyacusis,  and  in  50  to  90%  with  noise-induced hearing loss. 2

People of all ages experience tinnitus and its prevalence is typically reported as increasing significantly with aging. 2,3,29 Notably, tinnitus prevalence  increases  with  hearing  loss.   However, 2 when  hearing  loss  is  taken  into  account  in  the analysis  and  controlled,  the  prevalence  of  tinnitus actually decreases with age. 2  While it is frequently not reported, children are also affected by tinnitus;  and  the  estimated  prevalence  is  similar to  the  estimated  prevalence  of  tinnitus  reported in  adults.  The  prevalence  of  tinnitus  has  been reported in the range of 15 to 34% in healthy children and approximately 50% in children with otologic problems or hearing loss. 30-32 A significant proportion  of  children  report  having  problems with tinnitus including: sleep disturbance (42%), problems  with  concentration  (47%),  and  sensitivity to sound (33%). A study of 1, 100 children performed in Italy showed that 34% had tinnitus and 6.5% complained about it. 33  A recent study of  118,005  seven-year-old  and  23,339  12-yearold  children  in  Poland  revealed  that  29.3%  and 34.5% of children reported tinnitus in the seven and 12-year-old groups, respectively. 32

Extensive studies have been performed in an attempt to link various factors with tinnitus prevalence. 1,2 Hearing loss, and specifically the extent of  high  frequency  impairment  in  the  worse  ear, is one of the main predicting factors for tinnitus. Conductive hearing  loss  seems  to  be  a  separate factor, 34 and noise exposure has also been correlated with tinnitus.  Tinnitus is also experienced 2 by  those  with  normal  hearing;  18%  of  tinnitus  patients  were  reported  to  have  normal  hearing. 34 Pregnancy has been shown to significantly increase the probability of tinnitus. 35

Other factors do not appear to be correlated with tinnitus. Neither coffee nor alcohol has been shown to increase tinnitus prevalence directly. 6,36 Tinnitus  severity  is  associated  with  severity  of anxiety  and  depression 37 and  seems  to  affect patients'  cognitive  abilities. 38,39 The  main  risk factors  associated  with  the  presence  of  tinnitus are age, male sex, lower level of education, lower annual income, being a military service veteran, poor  general  health  status,  obesity,  significant hearing loss, exposure to loud sound at work for more than 15 hours per week, exposure to impulse noise,  and  smoking  cigarettes  on  a  daily  basis. 2 Interestingly,  being  in  a  managerial,  administrative or technical sales occupational group as well as moderate alcohol consumption were associated with reduced risk  for  tinnitus.   Notably,  all  the 2 above risk factors linked to the increased prevalence of tinnitus are the risk factors for hearing loss  as  well,  which  has  been  shown  to  be  associated with tinnitus. Therefore, these risk factors may not be associated directly with tinnitus, but indirectly  via  hearing  loss.  Unless  hearing  loss factor is not controlled for, these risk factors cannot be accepted as valid, as has been shown in the case of age, which turned out not to be directly related to tinnitus, but only via hearing loss. 2

## Mechanisms and Models

Our knowledge of the mechanisms of tinnitus is still limited and based more on theoretical speculations than on strong research data or stringent clinical studies. Past models focused on peripheral mechanisms in the auditory system, 40-43  whereas recent  models  involve  or  focus  on  information processing within the central auditory pathways  and  central  nervous  system. 20,44 Although the  molecular  and  genetic  basis  for    tinnitus  is unknown, brain-derived neurotrophic factors (BDNF) and the activity-dependent  cytoskeletal protein (Arg3.1/arc) have been found to be potentially related with acoustic trauma induced tinnitus at both the peripheral and central levels. 45

The neurophysiological model of tinnitus postulates  the  involvement  of  many  systems  in  the brain (in addition to the auditory system) in clinically  significant  tinnitus,  both  at  the  peripheral and central levels. Furthermore, the model differentiates between the perception of tinnitus versus tinnitus-induced  negative  reactions,  for  which activation of non-auditory structures in the brain is responsible. 6,8,20,40 Furthermore, the discordant damage/dysfunction theory  of  the  generation  of the tinnitus signal postulates the signal is generated at the level of the dorsal cochlear nucleus due to  imbalanced activation coming from the outer and inner hair cells. 6,20 Specifically, when the outer hair cells are dysfunctional in a certain region of the basilar membrane and the inner hair cells in the same region still  work  properly,  disinhibition  in the dorsal cochlear nucleus occurs and may result in the generation of the tinnitus   signal. 40 This theory  explains  many  tinnitus  conundrums 20,40 and is gathering support from experimental data. 46-48 Table 31-2 summarizes various approaches to the mechanisms of tinnitus. 40,41,49-63

## Tinnitus as a Symptom of Medically Treatable Diseases

Tinnitus may also be part of more complex medical  conditions.  Some  of  these  are  identified  in Table 31-3, (adapted from 40,64,65 ).

## DECREASED SOUND TOLERANCE

Tinnitus is frequently accompanied by DST, that is, oversensitivity to sound, 6,66-69 which is often a combination of hyperacusis and misophonia. 6,9,10

## Definitions

While there is no generally-accepted definition of DST, various terms have been proposed, and the term hyperacusis has been used most frequently. According  to  Stedman's  Medical  Dictionary, 70 hyperacusis  is  defined  as  an  'Abnormal  acuteness  of  hearing  due  to  increased  irritability  of the  sensory  neural  mechanism.  Syn:  auditory hyperesthesia,' while hyperesthesia is defined as an  'Abnormal  acuteness  of  sensitivity  to  touch, pain,  or  other  sensory  stimuli'  or,  according  to the American Heritage Dictionary, as 'An abnormal or pathological increase in sensitivity to sensory stimuli, as of the skin to touch or the ear to sound.' 71 It has been recognized that DST might reflect physical discomfort or be related to a fear of sound. 6

We proposed  an  approach  to  DST  based  on neurophysiology  and  recognized  the  main  systems that can be involved, namely, the peripheral

## Table 31-2  Main Concepts  Related  to Proposed Mechanisms of Tinnitus

## Structures involved

- · Auditory system
- • Periphery (cochlea, auditory nerve)
- • Central auditory pathways
- · Auditory and central nervous system

## Manifestation of tinnitus-related neuronal activity

Increase in spontaneous activity

Modification in temporal patterns of discharges, including bursting activity

Synchronization of the activity between neurons

## Proposed mechanisms responsible for the emergence of tinnitus-related neuronal activity

- · Local decrease of spontaneous activity in the auditory system enhanced by lateral inhibition
- · Discordant damage/dysfunction of outer and inner hair cells
- · Unbalanced activation of Type I and II auditory nerve fibers
- · Neuronal plasticity and cortical reorganization
- · Cortical reorganization of tonotopic maps and hypersynchrony
- · Somatosensory-auditory interaction
- · Abnormal  neurotransmitter  release  from  inner  hair cells
- · Decreased activity of the efferent system
- · Abnormal coupling between neurons
- · Mechanical displacement within the organ of Corti
- · Abnormalities in transduction processes
- · Various aspects of calcium function
- · Physical/biochemical stress on the auditory nerve
- · Auditory fibers deafferentation
- · Enhanced  sensitivity  of  the  auditory  pathways  after decreased auditory input
- · Hypoxia and ischemia in the cochlea

## Level of interest

- · Molecular-ion channels, synapses, cellular membranes
- · Single neuron-processing information within one cell
- · Neuronal assemblies-interaction within group of cells
- · System-interaction  between  various  systems  in  the brain

## Somatosounds

- · Included as 'objective tinnitus'
- · Separated,  with  name  'tinnitus'  reserved  to  auditory phantom perception

and central parts of the auditory system, as well as  the  limbic,  and  the  autonomic  nervous  systems.  Consequently  we  propose  the  following definitions.

Decreased sound tolerance is present when a subject exhibits negative reactions when exposed to sound that would not evoke the same response in  an  average  listener. 9,10 Various  negative  emotional responses such as a discomfort, dislike, distress,  annoyance,  anxiety,  and  fear  are  reported, sometimes together with negative sensations such as pain and fullness in the ears. The level of sound that  evokes these negative reactions can be low, moderate, or high and is not used as a criterion to determine the presence of DST or its components.

Hyperacusis is defined as present when negative  reactions  to  a  sound  depend  only  on its  physical  characteristics  (ie,  its  spectrum  and intensity). The sound' s meaning and the context in  which  it  occurs  are  irrelevant. The  presumed mechanism  of hyperacusis is an abnormally strong activation evoked  by  sound  occurring within the auditory pathways, with other systems such  as  the  limbic  and  autonomic  nervous  systems activated as a consequence of a high-level of auditory-system activation. 6,9,10

Misophonia  is defined as an abnormally strong reaction to a sound with a specific pattern and meaning to  a  given  subject.  The  physical characteristics of a sound are secondary. Indeed, the strength of a patient' s reaction to the sound is only  partially  determined  by  the  physical  characterization of the sound and depends to a large extent on non-auditory factors like the subject's previous  evaluation  of  the  sound  (for  example, the  belief  that  the  sound  is  harmful  or  may  be a  potential  threat),  her/his  psychological profile and  past  history,  and  the  context  in  which  the sound  is  presented.  Postulated  mechanisms  of misophonia  involve  enhanced  functional  connections between the auditory system and other systems  in  the  brain  (mainly  the  limbic  and autonomic  nervous  systems)  to  subject-specific patterns  of  sound,  while  the  auditory  system functions normally. 6,9,10

A specific type of misophonia occurs when fear is the dominant  emotion  and  patients are afraid of sound (phonophobia; phobia - fear). 6,9,10

Most frequently, DST results from a combination of hyperacusis and misophonia. Notably, patients  with  hyperacusis  or  misophonia  report the  same  negative  emotional  and  physiological reactions. This combination leads us to conclude that  all  cases  of  bothersome  DST  involve  the limbic  system  and  other  systems  in  the  brain, in  addition  to  the  auditory  system,  as  well  as connections between  the auditory and other systems. 6,10,72

It is important to assess the presence and the extent  of both conditions  in  a  patient  as  each need  to  be  treated  using  different  approaches. As  the    literature  does  not  differentiate  between these problems, and DST is typically described as hyperacusis, we will use the term hyperacusis in our discussion of the literature.

Neither hyperacusis nor misophonia have any relation  to  the  threshold  of  hearing,  which  can be normal or can reflect hearing loss. Therefore, recruitment  is  not  related  to  DST.  Recruitment refers  to  an  unusually  rapid  growth  of  loudness as  the  volume  of  a  tone  is  increased.  It  occurs in  association  with  hearing  loss  and  is  a  purely cochlear phenomenon. It may coexist with DST, but there is no functional link between these two phenomena.

## Methods of Evaluation of Decreased Sound Tolerance

Whereas there is no one clearly accepted method to  evaluate  DST,  hyperacusis,  and  misophonia, there  is  general  agreement  that  LDLs  provide clinicians with a means to estimate the problem. There are several variants of the protocols of LDL evaluation. For example: continuous sound, pulsed sound  or  beeps  of  sound,  as  well  as  pure  tone versus  narrow-band  noise  have  been  used. 73-75 The approach we use modifies the standard procedure 11 and is aimed at diagnosing the presence and extent of hyperacusis by keeping the effects of the misophonic component of DST to a minimum. To achieve this, an environment is created during testing where patients feel in full control over the maximal sound level to which they will be exposed. As normative data are not uniform, and there is substantial individual variability (even when  using  one  method)  in  measuring  LDLs, 76

## Table 31-3  Medical Conditions That May Be Associated with Tinnitus

## Sensorineural hearing losses

- • Noise-induced hearing loss
- • Menière disease
- • Presbyacusis
- • Vestibular schwannoma
- • Sudden hearing loss
- • Cochlear otosclerosis

## Conductive hearing losses

- • Otitis media
- • Cerumen impaction
- • Ossicular stiffness/discontinuity
- • Otosclerosis

## Hormonal changes

- • Pregnancy or menopause
- • Thyroid dysfunction

## Some medications or withdrawal from them

## Somatosounds

- • Produced by structures adjacent to the ear
- •  Pulsatile Neoplasm
- •  Arterial
- •  Venous
- •  Beginning of intracranial hypertension
- •  Great vessel bruits
- · 'Third windows' of the otic capsule allowing internal sounds to be heard unusually well
- •  Superior canal dehiscence
- ·  Perilymphatic  fistula  (otic  capsule  defects  not visualized by CT)
- • Nonpulsatile
- •  Tensor tympani myoclonus
- •  Tensor veli palatini myoclonus
- •  Patent eustachian tube
- • Produced by structures in the ear
- •  Spontaneous otoacoustic emissions
- • Produced by joint abnormalities
- •  Temporomandibular joint disorders

it  is  advisable  to  pay  attention  to  the  potential presence  of  hyperacusis  when  the  average  LDL values across the tested frequencies are lower than 95 to 100 dB hearing level (HL). When hyperacusis is present, LDLs are typically in the 60 to 85 dB HL range; however, low values alone are not enough to diagnose hyperacusis. The situation is complicated because a wide range of LDL values (eg, an average of 30 dB HL to an average of 120 dB, HL) are found in patients with misophonia. Therefore LDLs alone are insufficient to diagnose hyperacusis as low values may be due to misophonia. Therefore, in addition to a properly administered  LDL test, a detailed interview is crucially important to help the clinician determine the relative contribution of hyperacusis and misophonia to DST. In the interview, it is important to identify sounds which evoke negative reactions as well as sounds which are well-tolerated by the patient to detect  any  discrepancies  between  reactions  and the intensity of the sound. Normal LDLs exclude the possibility of hyperacusis, but DST can still be present. A questionnaire has been proposed to assess the extent of hyperacusis, 12 but its specificity and selectivity need to be evaluated.

## Hyperacusis and Misophonia as a Problem

Decreased sound tolerance can have an extremely strong effect on patients' lives and can be even more debilitating  than  tinnitus.  Whereas  tinnitus  may affect attention, sleep, work, and enjoyment of life, and can make social contact less rewarding, hyperacusis can prevent people from exposing themselves to louder environments and therefore prevent them from working and interacting socially. In extreme severity, patients do not leave their homes, and both their  own lives and the lives of their families are controlled by the avoidance of sound. Misophonia can have the same effect as hyperacusis. Because misophonia is present in all patients with significant hyperacusis, misophonia further enhances the effects of hyperacusis.

## Prevalence and Epidemiology of Decreased Sound Tolerance

Limited  data  are  available  on  the  prevalence  of hyperacusis.  Various  questionnaires  are  used  to provide an assessment of hyperacusis prevalence in  the  general  population.  Data  gathered  from 10,349  randomly  selected  subjects  showed  that 15.3% reported hyperacusis. 77  Patients evaluated for  other  otologic  problems  frequently  undergo audiologic evaluation, which involves an assessment  of  speech  discomfort  level  and  pure  tone LDLs. Several studies indicated that in the normal population, LDLs are in the range of 90 to 110 dB sound pressure level (SPL), with varied results depending  on  the  specific  methods  used  (for example, stimuli: pure tone, warble tone; noise; presentation:  free  field,  insert  earphones,  headphones) and instructions given to patients. 11,73,76 Moreover, these measurements are not part of a routine  audiologic  evaluation.  The  results  tend to cluster within 95 to 110 dB SPL for frequencies from 500 to 8,000 Hz, which correspond to approximately 90 to 100 dB hearing level (HL). 11 A specific study aimed at this issue showed that the average LDL value for subjects without sound tolerance problems was 100 dB HL. 11

Hyperacusis  and  tinnitus  frequently  coexist, and it has been postulated that in some patients, hyperacusis might actually be a pre-tinnitus state. 67 Approximately 60% of patients with tinnitus exhibit DST with about 30% requiring specific treatment  for  hyperacusis. 9,10 Conversely, a  study  of  100  patients  with  hypersensitivity  to sound showed that 86% suffered from tinnitus. 78 Considering the clinical observation that approximately  30%  of  tinnitus  patients  required  treatment  for  hyperacusis  and  86%  of  hyperacusis patients reported tinnitus, and acknowledging that about 4% of the general population have clinically significant tinnitus, it is possible to estimate that significant  hyperacusis  exists  in  approximately 1.75%  of  the  general  population.  Considering data  which  indicate  about  half  of  patients  with DST have hyperacusis, the estimate of the prevalence of DST in the general population is 3.5%.

## Mechanisms of Decreased Sound Tolerance

In the majority of patients, the cause of hyperacusis is unknown. Hyperacusis has been linked to loud sound exposure (particularly short, impulse noise), head injury, stress, medication, and some medical conditions. The lack of strong epidemiological data and of an animal model of hyperacusis prevents us from proving the validity of any potential mechanism responsible for hyperacusis.

At the peripheral level, it is possible to speculate  that  the  abnormal  enhancement  of  vibratory signals within the cochlea by the outer hair cells might result in overstimulation of the inner hair cells and subsequently yield hyperacusis. 6,20 Indeed, in some patients, it is possible to observe high  amplitude  distortion  product  otoacoustic emissions and distortion products evoked by low level  primaries.   The  presence  of  asymmetric 6 hyperacusis  might  indicate  a  peripheral  mechanism since central mechanisms would more likely act similarly on both sides; however, in nearly all patients DST is symmetrical - which suggests the dominant role of the central mechanisms.

Laboratory research has shown that damage to the cochlea or a decrease in the auditory input result in a decrease of the threshold of response in  a  significant  portion  of  neurons  in  the  ventral  cochlear  nucleus  and  inferior  colliculus. 79 Studies with evoked potentials have indicated an abnormal increase of gain in the auditory pathways  after  such  manipulations. 80 This  increase in  gain  has  been  discussed  and  promoted  in a  recently  proposed  approach  concerning  the mechanisms of tinnitus and hyperacusis. 57  Some medical  conditions  listed  in Table  31-4  can  be

Table 31-4  Medical Conditions Linked to Decreased Sound Tolerance

Tinnitus

Williams syndrome

Bell palsy

Lyme disease

Ramsay Hunt syndrome

Post-stapedectomy

Perilymphatic fistula

Head injury

Migraine

Depression

Withdrawal from benzodiazepines

Cerebrospinal fluid high pressure

Addison disease

Translabyrinthine excision of a vestibular schwannoma

linked  to  the  central  processing  of  signals  and modification of the level of neuromodulators as possible factors that induce or enhance hyperacusis.  Moreover, serotonin has been implicated in hyperacusis, 81 and a case report has indicated that serotonin reuptake inhibitors might be helpful for hyperacusis. 82

Mechanisms  of  misophonia  could  involve an  enhancement  of  the  functional  links  between the auditory and limbic systems at both the cognitive and subconscious levels. 6,20 Alternatively,  a  tonic  high  level  of  activation of  the  limbic  and  autonomic nervous systems may  result  in  strong  behavioral  reactions  to moderate sounds. 6

## Decreased Sound Tolerance as a Symptom of Medical Conditions

Hyperacusis has been linked to a number of medical conditions (Table 31-4), adapted from. 6,82-88

## REVIEW OF TREATMENTS FOR TINNITUS

The list of approaches and techniques attempted to help tinnitus patients is long. Table 31-5 lists the most commonlyused treatments, adapted from. 64,89-99

## Anti-reassurance

Notably, some clinicians provide positive suggestions to their patients (eg, you do not have a dangerous condition, you are not going deaf, tinnitus is common, there are things you can do that can help). However, it seems the most common advice given to tinnitus patients has been: 'Nothing can be  done-go  home  and  learn  to  live  with  it. 8,67 This advice is a powerful form of negative counseling, sufficient on many occasions to convert a person who just experiences tinnitus into a patient who suffers from it. 6,20,66,100

## Pharmacotherapy

Many  pharmacologic  agents  have  been  considered  for  tinnitus  treatment 6,89 (Table  31-6,

## Table 31-5  Review of Treatments for Tinnitus

Antireassurance

Pharmacology

Surgery

Electrical stimulation

Sound therapies

Psychological approaches

Tinnitus retraining therapy

Other approaches

Biofeedback

Temporomandibular joint treatment

Acupuncture

Hyperbaric oxygen therapy

Homeopathy

Magnets

## Table 31-6  Drugs Frequently Prescribed for Treatment for Tinnitus

Local anesthetics (lidocaine, procaine, tocainide, flecainide) Sedatives (diazepam, flurazepam, oxazepam, alprazolam) Antidepressants (nortriptyline, trimipramine) Anticonvulsants (carbamazepine, clonazepam, ami- nooxyacetic acid, lamotrigine, baclofen) Vasodilators (niacin) Calcium channel blockers (nimodipine, nifedipine)

Others (misoprostol, zinc, betahistine, cinnarizine, caroverine, melatonin, furosemide, ginkgo biloba)

adapted  from. 6,89 but  no  single,  effective,  specific,  secure,  and  reliable  drug  has  yet  to  be identified. 91,92,94,101,102 In this respect,  strong consideration must be given to the side effects of pharmacologic treatments, such as tolerance, dependence,  and  withdrawal  effects.  Recent reviews of  randomized clinical  trials  of  drugs for tinnitus have shown that all the drugs that were studied have failed to prove their efficacy when compared with a placebo. 89  Future double-blind randomized studies, with proper outcome measurements and adequate sample size, might identify some promising pharmacologic agents.

## Surgery

Surgery  can  offer  help  to  some  patients  with somatosound or conductive hearing loss. 6  In the case  of  Menière  disease,  successful  treatment provides  control  of  vertigo;  however,  tinnitus and  hearing  loss  remain  the  same  or  become worse. 103 The  surgical  removal  of  vestibular schwannoma may provide improvement in tinnitus in some patients, while in others it may evoke tinnitus  or  make  it  worse. 104 No  specific  surgical procedure has been shown to be consistently effective  for  tinnitus  that  does  not  have  a  clear surgically treatable cause. Although promoted in the past, 43 neither transection nor microvascular decompression of the auditory nerve has proven to be effective, 64,105,106

## Sound Therapies

A wide variety of sound therapies is used to treat tinnitus, such as music therapies, auditory discrimination therapy, pink noise therapy, desensitization, the dynamic  tinnitus  mitigation  system,  phase shift tinnitus reduction, auditory integration training,  masking  relief  therapy,  Neuromonics, 107,108 acoustic coordinated reset neuromodulation, 109 SoundCure  (S-Tones) 110   and  the  use  of  hearing aids. 6,111-114 These  approaches  are  based  on  various presumed mechanisms of sound upon tinnitus. Sound modification may involve varying intensity within a short time, applying different intensities for specific stages of treatment, or using phase modification or complex processing of the sound. It is not clear  which  type  of  sound  processing  and  sound protocol are optimal. For most of these approaches, results  have  not  been  published  in  peer-reviewed journals and there are not sufficiently strong data from systematic studies to determine which methods  might  be  effective  in  alleviating  tinnitus.  A counseling component in these therapies is either limited or minimal.

It has  been  postulated  that  improving  frequency discrimination via proper training should be beneficial for tinnitus and some clinical trials have indicated positive effects. 115,116 However, the results  of  randomized  controlled  trials  have  not shown the expected benefits. 117

There are some recent variants of sound therapy. Coordinated  reset  (CR)  neuromodulation presents pure tones below and above the tinnitus pitch match according to a specific algorithm. 109 This method is currently being tested in a randomized controlled trial (RTC, ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT01541969). 118

Another approach, commercially promoted as SoundCure® or S-Tones ®, uses sound centered at the tinnitus pitch with a modulated amplitude. 110 Preliminary results of the study performed on a small  number  of  subjects  looks  promising  but require confirmation on a large scale from independent investigators.

An interesting variant of sound therapy  involves  pairing  sound  with  vagus  nerve stimulation. 119,120

All these methods are promoted with encouraging  preliminary  results,  but  there  is  a  lack  of confirmation from independent groups of investigators and from randomized clinical trails.

Specific version of sound therapy is used as an integral part of tinnitus retraining therapy (TRT) to achieve consistent and prolonged weakening of the tinnitus signal and desensitization of the auditory system. The type and protocol of the sound used are based on the neurophysiological model of  tinnitus.  According to the model, any sound 6 is better than silence, provided it does not annoy, create discomfort, or damage hearing. Counseling in combination  with  a  given  implementation of sound therapy is crucial. TRT is described in detail later in this chapter.

## Electrical Suppression

Electrical suppression of tinnitus was first reported in 1855. 121 Over  the  years,  many  different approaches have been attempted, and methods based on electrical stimulation are still of interest (Table 31-7), adapted from. 121-124 Three new variants  of  electrical  stimulation  for  tinnitus  have been  introduced  in  the  last  several  years.  One variant  involves  deep  brain  stimulation,  which  is sometimes performed for movement disorder and chronic  pain. 125 Recently  it  has  been  shown  that stimulation of locus of caudate neurons (area LC) can trigger, enhance or suppress tinnitus. 126-128 A second approach involves high frequency electrical stimulation  of  the  cochlea  performed  by  placing an electrode on the promontory or via a cochlear implant. 129 A third approach involves direct electrical stimulation of the auditory cortex via electrodes placed on or within the auditory cortex. 130

All these approaches are at an early stage of investigation. Only intra-cochlear or promontory stimulation  has  shown  consistent  and  positive results  in  approximately  50%  of  patients. 131,132 Other approaches were less effective. 121 Although positive direct/pulsed current can provide tinnitus suppression, 121 it has no clinical application as it would damage the cochlea if used for a prolonged time.

## Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation

Transcranial  magnetic  stimulation  (TMS)  uses short pulses of a powerful magnetic field to stimulate the brain cortex. The method, primarily used for  psychiatric  disorders,  has  been  extensively investigated  for  tinnitus. 133 The  magnetic  field easily crosses the skull and induces a strong electrical  field,  perpendicular  to  the  magnetic  field, which in turn activates neurons in the cortex and

## Table 31-7  Conditions Used in Electrical Stimulation for Suppression of Tinnitus

Sites of stimulation

- • Behind the ear lobe/around the ear
- • Mastoid
- • Near cheeks
- • External auditory canal
- • Promontory
- • Tympanic membrane
- • Round window
- • Intracochlear
- • Auditory cortex
- • Deep brain stimulation

Type of stimulus

- • Direct current/positive pulses
- • Alternating current
- • Amplitude-modulated high-frequency carrier

Electrodes

- • Acute/chronic

results in the electrical stimulation of the cortex. The relative position of the axons and dendrites of  neurons  to  the  evoked  electrical  field  is  crucial; depending on this relationship, one group of neurons can be activated while another group in the same area will not be activated. Consequently, changing the angle of the magnetic coil will modify  which neurons will be stimulated within the active area, which is about one inch in diameter. Moreover, as the cortex is highly convoluted, only some  parts  will  be  activated.  All  these  factors, combined with the fact that the auditory cortex is in a deeper part of a sulcus, create a challenge to achieve repetitive, stable results when this method is used to treat tinnitus.

In  addition  to  immediate  effects,  the  longer lasting consequences  are of clinical interest. There  are  two  types  of  TMS  differentiated  by the frequency of stimulation. When a higher frequency is used, TMS has an inhibitory effect on cortical activity reflected in an immediate attenuation of tinnitus perception, which lasts only for a limited time. 134 When low frequency (1 Hz) stimulation is used over several days, plastic changes are presumably evoked in the cortical areas and their  connections  with  subcortical  centers.  The initial effect of TMS might be an absence of tinnitus or the tinnitus might even increase. But over time, the tinnitus can be attenuated and the effects of TMS may last for some time. A recent critical review of TMS reported positive (a success rate from 51 to 64%) and negative treatment outcomes. The report concluded that a number of fundamental questions remain unsolved that prevent a clear conclusion regarding the effectiveness of TMS in the treatment of chronic tinnitus. 97,135,136

A strong positive aspect of TMS is that it does not  require  opening  the  skull  and  can  easily  be performed on conscious subjects, thus encouraging its use and the number of studies of its effect on  tinnitus. 137 The  results  showed  a  statistically significant attenuation of tinnitus and a decrease in the negative impact of tinnitus. Nevertheless, it is still not clear to what extent this improvement has  practical  clinical  value  and  how  long  it  can be  sustained. 138 There  is  also  concern  regarding permanent changes induced in the brain by TMS and, therefore, the safety of the method.

## Masking

The  use  of  an  external  sound  to  cover  tinnitus and bring immediate relief to patients, known as masking, was first used in 1825 by Itard. 19 At the end of the 1970s, Vernon and Schleuning revisited this idea and introduced the first commercial masker. 139 Initial  reports  proclaimed  high  success, 139,140 but the approach did not withstand the test of time. 89,95 One problem involved the criterion  used  to  evaluate  the  effectiveness  of  masking.  For  example,  if  the  masker  was  still  in  use after six months it was counted as a success. 139,140 Presently, this method is rarely used.

Recently, the term 'masking' has been redefined,  as  Henry  and  colleagues  have  proposed to refer to 'masking' to describe the use of any sound  that  brings  immediate  relief  regardless of whether the patient' s perception of tinnitus is covered or not. 113 This approach involves no specific counseling, other than instruction for sound setting. 'Masking', which should more appropriately be labeled as 'relief therapy' uses sound levels close to those used in a variety of sound-based therapies,  including TRT. While  not  as  effective as TRT, masking can be helpful for some patients, particularly  those  with  a  low  level  of  tinnitus severity. 113

## Psychological Management

The psychological  management  of  chronic  tinnitus can be helpful for some patients. 141 As tinnitus affects patients' well-being, the application of cognitive therapy may have a positive impact on the quality  of  life  by  improving  their  ability  to  cope with tinnitus. Cognitive therapies, behavioral modifications,  coping strategies, cognitive distraction, and minimizing distress are examples of psychological approaches. 142-144 Cognitive Behavioral Therapy  (CBT)  is  of particular interest. 145 A recent meta-analysis of all controlled, randomized clinical  trials  listed  in  the  Cochrane  ENT  Group Trials  Register,  the  Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, MEDLINE and EMBASE, identified six trials involving 285 patients that showed while there was no effect of CBT on the subjective loudness of tinnitus or on depression, CBT significantly  improved  quality  of  life. 146 A prospective study  of  434  patients  treated  with  an  integrative behavioral medicine approach showed significant improvement as well. 143 A recently published randomized study claimed the effectiveness of CBT; 147 close examination of the procedures described in this paper revealed that the authors used a modified version of TRT for five months, followed by CBT only for patients who did not experience sufficient improvement in the TRT stage of treatment. 147 This combined  approach  was  considerably  less  effective than TRT alone as shown in a clinical study by Henry et al. 113,148

## Combined Approaches

One  approach  that  combines  counseling  with sound therapy is called Tinnitus Activities Treatment. 149 The approach takes four areas into account:  thoughts  and  emotions,  hearing  and communication,  sleep,  and  concentration.  For sound therapy, the lowest sound level which provides immediate relief is recommended. Patients are given homework  and encouraged to be involved in some activities to facilitate progress. This approach has been claimed to be in use since 1980, but to date there are no published, peer-reviewed clinical studies that show its effectiveness.

A large proportion of veterans experience tinnitus 17 with various level of severity. Considering the economical aspects of providing help, a progressive intervention approach called Progressive Audiologic  Tinnitus  Management  (PATM)  has been  introduced. 150 Five  hierarchical  levels  of intervention  are  implemented  from  Triage  (an interview and basic relevant information) to Individualized Management (which involves multiple treatment modalities).

Counseling  is  a  key  component  of  PATM. It is used to help patients learn how to adjust to the bothersome auditory symptom by employing tools from the therapeutic use of sound and techniques  from  cognitive  behavioral  psychology. 151 Counseling  is  closely  related  to  the  counseling performed in TRT. 152   Sound  therapy  consists  of three types of sound: soothing sound, background sound, and interesting sound. 153 Preliminary positive results of the use of the counseling part of  P ATM have been presented. 152  The results of full  P ATM  -  counseling  combined  with  sound therapy - have not been published.

## NEUROPHYSIOLOGICAL MODEL OF TINNITUS AND TINNITUS RETRAINING THERAPY

The neurophysiological model of tinnitus and the treatment  approach  based  on  the  model,  known as TRT, were introduced in 1990. 8,154-157  Several observations led to the neurophysiological model of  tinnitus  and  DST.  It  is  known  that  tinnitus induces distress in only about 20% of those who perceive it.  There is no correlation between the 2 psychoacoustic  characterization  of  tinnitus,  tinnitus-induced  distress,  and  the  treatment  outcome. 158 The experiment performed by Heller and Bergman showed that the perception of tinnitus cannot  be  pathologic  since  the  vast  majority  of people experience tinnitus when they are put in a sufficiently quiet environment, as shown by the emergence of tinnitus in 94% of people without prior tinnitus when isolated for several minutes in an anechoic chamber. 4  This phenomenon has been recently confirmed. 5 These observations strongly argue that the auditory system plays a secondary role, and other systems in the brain are dominant in clinically relevant tinnitus, that is, tinnitus that creates  discomfort  and  annoyance  and  requires intervention.

An analysis of the problems reported by tinnitus patients, who exhibit strong emotional reactions to its presence, a high level of anxiety, and other psychosomatic problems, indicated that the involvement of the limbic and autonomic nervous systems  is  crucial  in  individuals  with    clinically relevant  tinnitus.  It  was  postulated  that  the  sustained  activation  of  the  limbic  and  autonomic nervous systems is essential  in  creating  distress and, therefore, clinically relevant tinnitus. 20 Other systems in the brain seem to be involved as well (eg, prefrontal cortex, attention networks systems involved in memory  and  cerebellum) 44,159-161 and  the  default  mode  network, 57,162,163 but  the

limbic  and  autonomic  nervous  systems  seem  to have a crucial role in tinnitus-related distress and DST. 6  Since the model has been proposed, a number  of  imaging  studies  have  shown  a  high  activation  of  non-auditory  areas  in  tinnitus  (eg,  the limbic system and various non-auditory cortical areas), 21,163-168 an essential postulate of the neurophysiological model.

It  is  possible  to  distinguish  several  feedback loops, with two major categories: a loop involving the conscious processing of the tinnitus signal including its perception and a loop acting at a subconscious level (Figure 31-1), with the subconscious loop dominant in most patients. 8  It is further suggested that the activation of the limbic and  autonomic  nervous  systems  by  tinnitus-related  neuronal  activity  follows  the  principles  of conditioned reflexes. 100,156,157

The  processing  of  tinnitus-related  neuronal activity  occurs  in  a  dynamic  balance  scenario, with  continuous  modification  of  the  weight  of synaptic connections. Learning and memory have a physiological basis in the modification of the  strength  of  synaptic  connections. 169 A  continuous  presence  of  tinnitus,  combined  with  the attention  given  to  it,  result  in  plastic  modifications of synaptic connections, yielding the modification of receptive fields which correspond to the  tinnitus  signal  and  its  subsequent  enhancement. 40,170 This  postulate  has  been  proven  using magnetoencephalography. 23

Whereas  the  initial  signal  provided  by  the auditory system is needed to start the cascade of events, its strength is irrelevant ,  as the extent of activation  of  the  limbic  and  autonomic  nervous systems depends on the strength of negative associations linked to tinnitus and the susceptibility of the feed-back loops to modification. 171 It appears that  tinnitus-related neuronal activity may result from  compensatory  processes  that  occur  within the cochlea and the auditory pathways to minor dysfunction at the periphery. 20,40

Notably, once plasticity-related modifications of  neuronal  connections  occur,  the  peripheral signal itself may become of little importance, as is  similarly  observed  in  chronic  pain. 172 Indeed, there  are  clear  similarities  between  tinnitus  and chronic pain, including the phenomenon of prolonged  exacerbation  of  tinnitus  as  a  result  of exposure  to  sound,  which  is  observed  in  some patients. 100

The neurophysiologic model includes several systems of the  brain  involved  in  clinically  relevant tinnitus. All levels of the auditory pathways, starting  from  the  cochlea  through  the  subcortical  centers  and  ending  at  the  auditory  cortex, are  essential  in  creating  the  perception  of  tinnitus. 20 When subjects are not bothered or annoyed by  tinnitus,  the  auditory  pathways  are  the  only pathways involved, and tinnitus-related neuronal activity is constrained within the auditory system. Therefore, although these subjects perceive tinnitus, they are not disturbed by it. 156,157,171

In  approximately  20%  of  individuals  with tinnitus,  strong  negative  emotions  are  evoked, which, in turn, activate a variety of physiological defense mechanisms of the brain. In this process the limbic and autonomic nervous systems play a crucial role, and improper activation of these systems by tinnitus-related neuronal activity results at the behavioral level in the problems described by  these  patients.  The  connections  between  the auditory,  limbic,  and  autonomic  systems  with various cortical areas, as proposed in the neurophysiological model of tinnitus, 8,20,40 are outlined in Figure 31-1.

The  model  emphasizes  that  the  sustained activation  of  the  limbic  and  autonomic  nervous systems is responsible for the distress induced by clinically relevant tinnitus. Activation of both systems can be achieved through two routes branching at the level of the thalamus (medial geniculate body). The first includes stimulation of the limbic and autonomic nervous systems from higher level cortical  areas  which  are  involved  in  our  awareness, verbalization, and beliefs. This loop is called high, conscious, or cortical, in the neurophysiologic model of tinnitus.  The signal is passed from 8 the medial geniculate body to the auditory cortices and then down to the amygdala. The second loop,  which  arises  from  the  subconscious  level, is called low, subconscious, or subcortical in the model.  It  provides  stimulation  from  the  lower level auditory centers, directly linking the medial

Figure 31-1 The neurophysiological model of tinnitus.

geniculate body with the amygdala, and involves the  extralemniscal  auditory  pathways. 53   These two paths are labeled the 'high road' and the 'low road' in relation to the general functioning of the emotional system.' 173

In  the  early  stages  of  tinnitus,  the  high  loop is dominant, and the activation of the limbic and autonomic  nervous  systems  is  due  to  cognitive processing of the information and thinking about tinnitus. Later this loop and corticothalamic and corticolimbic interaction might still play a role in the activation of the limbic and autonomic nervous  systems.  This  postulate  is  supported  by  an analysis  of  spontaneous  magnetoencephalography activity in tinnitus and control subjects which revealed enhancement of gamma band activity in tinnitus subjects and allows prediction of the laterality of tinnitus perception. 54 Other studies that provide  support  assess  the  function  of  the  limbic system in patients with tinnitus 174,175 and the results obtained when using an animal model. 176

However,  once negative associations with tinnitus  are  initiated,  the  low  loop  is  automatically  created  and  becomes  dominant.  The  low loop does not involve cognition and is controlled by principles governing conditioned reflexes. Consequently, it is fast, and the limbic and autonomic nervous systems are  activated  before  the higher  loop  may  potentially  modify  reactions. Notably, conditioned reflexes cannot be modified by  conscious  thinking.  Therefore,  although  the patient may be convinced tinnitus is benign, negative reactions to the tinnitus signal can still occur.

The development of tinnitus as a clinical problem can be traced to activation through these two routes, which, with changes of the strength of the synaptic connections enhance the stimulation of the limbic and autonomic nervous systems by the tinnitus-related neuronal activity that comes from the  auditory  system.  The  question  of  how  the neutral  signal  of  tinnitus  may  evoke  persistent, strong  distress  can  be  explained  by  the  principles of conditioned reflexes. 177 To create a conditional reflex, the temporal coincidence of sensory stimuli with negative (or positive) reinforcement is sufficient 171,177,178 (Figure  31-2).  This  initial association can be coincidental, without any real

Figure 31-2 Principles of establishing conditioned reflexes and their passive extinction.

dependence. These types of associations of sensory stimuli are constantly created in normal life.

As long as the sensory stimulus is limited in time and there is no functional link between stimulus  and  reinforcement,  the  conditioned  reflex will gradually disappear (ie, habituate) owing to the passive extinction of the reflex, ie, the sensory stimulus is present but it is not accompanied by reinforcement (see Figure 31-2). Since the 1930s, habituation  has  been  defined  as  'The  extinction of a conditioned reflex by repetition of the conditioned stimulus… the method by which the nervous  system  reduces  or  inhibits  responsiveness during  repeated  stimulation.' 177 Habituation  of perception of this stimulus will follow in the same manner as for all unimportant stimuli. 6

Notably, there are two types of habituation. The first type, called habituation of reaction, is defined as  the  'disappearance  of  a  reaction  to  a  neutral stimulus  due  to  its  repetitive  appearance  without reinforcement.' 179 The second type, known as habituation  of  perception,  occurs  when  awareness  of this  particular  stimulus  disappears   (Figure  31-3). 8 Habituation of reaction and habituation of perception are natural processes. Habituation is a fundamental characteristic of brain function necessitated by  the  brain' s  inability  to  perform  two  tasks  that require complete simultaneous attention.

When the brain is forced to carry out two tasks concurrently that require full consciousness, it uses task switching and is conscious of only one task at a time. The brain areas involved in task switching have been indicated by a functional magnetic resonance imaging study. 180  If forced to monitor all incoming sensory stimuli, our brain would not be able to perform any tasks, except that of switching perception from one sensory stimulus to another, and ultimately paralyzing us in our actions.

reaches  the  level  of  awareness. As  a  result,  the reaction  to  this  stimulus  and  its  perception  are habituated.  In  everyday  life,  habituation  occurs to the majority of sensory stimuli surrounding us.

However, if a specific stimulus has been previously classified as important and, on the basis of comparison with the patterns stored in memory, it was linked to something unpleasant or dangerous, this  stimulus  is  perceived  and  attracts  attention. Furthermore, the sympathetic part of the autonomic nervous system is activated, inducing a reaction to this  stimulus  (frequently  of  the  'fight  or  flight' variety), which further reinforces memory patterns associated with this stimulus. Consequently, if the previous assessment of the importance of a stimulus has been confirmed, the stimulus becomes even more important; its next appearance will result in faster identification, even in the presence of other competing  stimuli,  preventing  the  habituation  of this stimulus. In the case of auditory stimuli, our auditory  system  becomes  tuned  to  recognizing specific patterns of sound that have negative links. In such conditions, the natural habituation of the tinnitus  signal  becomes  impossible.  In  everyday life, this causes people to have problems with their work, concentration, and sleep.

A  simplistic  description  of  the  above  processes  can  be  outlined  to  a  patient.  Increased concern for tinnitus results  in  an  increase  in  its significance which, in turn, increases the amount of time the patient pays attention to it. This reaction is a classic feedback loop or 'vicious circle' scenario, which dramatically increases a patient' s level of distress up to the limit of mental and physical endurance. At this stage, the patient will shift from acute tinnitus, which can be easily relieved by proper counseling, to a chronic stage, which is much more difficult to treat.

To  solve  this  problem,  the  central  nervous system screens and categorizes all stimuli at the subconscious  level.  If  the  stimulus  is  new  and unknown,  it  is  passed  to  a  higher  cortical  level where it is  perceived  and  evaluated.  In  the  case of a stimulus to which we have previously been exposed, the stimulus is compared with patterns stored  in  memory.  If  the  stimulus  is  classified as unimportant and does not require action, it is blocked at the subconscious level of the auditory pathways and neither produces any reactions nor

In  the  case  of  tinnitus,  it  is  impossible  to remove or substantially change the reactions induced by the excitation of the sympathetic part of the autonomic nervous system. To achieve passive  extinction  of  the  conditioned  reflex,  where stimulus (tinnitus) and negative reinforcement are continuously present, is to decrease the magnitude of negative reinforcement and at the same time the strength  of  conditioned  stimulus  (tinnitus)  over time. This situation will result in a partial weakening of the reflex, but must be applied consistently

Figure  31-3 Habituation  of  autonomic  (H AR ) and emotional reactions (H ER ),  and habituation of perception (H ). P

to yield positive effects. Moreover, it is fundamental that patients understand these principles so that enhancement of the reflex due to verbal thinking and incorrect beliefs can be minimalized.

Once the activation of the autonomic nervous system is lowered, this in turn decreases negative reinforcement  to  a  signal  that  is  continuously present and consequently gradually decreases the strength  of  the  conditioned  reflex.  In  turn,  this further  decreases  the  reaction.  Once  tinnitus  is regarded as neutral, its habituation is inevitable in the same way that the brain continuously habituates to other types of stimuli providing that they are of no significance.

Consequently, retraining counseling (the first component of TRT) is oriented  toward  reclassifying  tinnitus  into  a  category  of  neutral  stimuli and removing the patient's negative associations with tinnitus. This reorientation is accomplished by teaching the patient that tinnitus results from a normal compensatory mechanism which occurs in the auditory system in response to typically minor changes in the cochlea. During counseling, it is important to demystify the mechanisms through which tinnitus may affect a patient' s life.

Tinnitus  retraining  therapy  counseling  is  a teaching  session  aimed  at  providing  the  patient with  a  new  frame  of  reference  by  explaining the  potential  mechanisms  of  tinnitus  generation and the neurophysiological mechanisms through which  tinnitus  influences  various  aspects  of  the patient' s  life.  The  patient  is  taught  that  by  activating a naturally occurring mechanism of brain function  (habituation  and  the  plasticity  which underlies it), it is possible to achieve habituation of the tinnitus-induced reaction of the brain and body and habituation of the tinnitus perception.

The second component of TRT is sound therapy aimed at deceasing the strength of the tinnitus   signal in  a  systematic  manner  over  the  course  of  treatment. 6,40,157 Sound therapy is based on an important feature of brain function. Our senses work according to the principle of differences of a given stimuli from the background. Moreover, the perceived strength  of  a  signal  is  not  linked  directly  to  the physical strength of a stimulus. Presently, we cannot easily  suppress  tinnitus-related  neuronal  activity, but by increasing background neuronal activity we can effectively decrease the strength of the tinnitus signal,  which  activates  the  limbic  and  autonomic nervous systems and which is processed in all the centers involved. By decreasing the strength of the tinnitus signal, we can achieve a decrease of reactions induced by tinnitus and, as a result, facilitate the extinction of the conditioned reflex.

The  principles  of  sound  therapy  have  been supported  by  results  published  by  independent groups  of  investigators.  For  example,  the  postulate  that  enriched  sound  environment  yields  a regulation  of  compensatory  processes  operating within  the  central  auditory  pathways,  including  compensation  triggered  by  decreased  auditory input, 20,100,181,182 received support from

basic  science 58,183-186 as  well  as  from  clinical vidence. e 187-189 A trial specifically aimed at evaluating adaptive chronic gain revealed highly statistically  and  clinically  significant  improvement as a result of TRT treatment. 190,191

It is important to analyze the theoretical relationships that exist between the physical intensity of  sound  and  its  effectiveness  on  tinnitus  habituation  (Figure  31-4).  Five  principles  influence this  relationship 6,154 as  follows:  1) The  negative activation  of  the  limbic  and  autonomic  nervous systems  by  sounds  which  could  induce  annoyance or other problems; 2) stochastic resonance (enhancement of the signal by adding low level noise); 3) dependence of the signal' s strength on its contrast with the background; 4) total suppression of the signal, preventing any retraining and habituation;  and  5)  partial  suppression  ('partial masking'), which does not prevent retraining but makes it more difficult as training is performed on a different stimulus than the original.

The first principle is dominant over all other principles  and  relates  to  the  necessity  to  avoid sounds which would activate the limbic system in a negative manner. Sound used as a part of sound therapy  should  never  evoke  annoyance  or  other problems (eg, worsening speech discrimination) as this would hinder or prevent habituation.

The second principle is that when the sound level  is  below,  but  close  to,  the  threshold  of detection,  stochastic  resonance  may  come  into play  where  the  addition  of  low-level  noise  can decrease the threshold of detection of the stimulus and enhance it when the stimulus is weak and close  to  the  threshold  of  detection. 192 The  presence of stochastic resonance has been shown at the level of hair cells, the auditory nerve, and all around  the  brain,  and  preliminary  data  indicate its  effect  on  the  loudness  of  tinnitus. 6,193,194 The effective sound level that induces stochastic resonance covers a range of about 15 dB, beginning

Figure 31-4 Functional dependence of habituation effectiveness on physical intensity of a sound. Notice the need to  avoid  sound  levels  close  to  the  threshold  of  hearing, those inducing partial or total suppression and those evoking annoyance.

at about -9 dB below the threshold of detection of  the  additional  noise. Thus,  owing  to  stochastic resonance, enhancement of the tinnitus signal may be caused by adding low-level external noise (eg, by using sound generators set at the threshold  of  hearing).  In  turn,  this  setting  will  make habituation more difficult. The results of a study in  which  a  comparison  was  performed  among groups  with  counseling  only  (including  advice on using environmental sounds), counseling combined with sound generators set at the threshold of hearing, and counseling combined with sound generators  set  close  to  the  'mixing'  point  fully support the notion of the importance of stochastic resonance. The patients who performed the worst had the sound level set close to the threshold of hearing, whereas the patients who performed best had the sound level set at the 'mixing point,' with the counseling-only group in the middle. 195

The  third  principle  is  that  when  the  sound level  is  further  increased,  the  mechanism  involving  the  decreased  difference  between  the  tinnitus signal and background neuronal activity becomes the  dominant  factor.  As  with  all  perception,  the difference between signal and background plays a central role. Decreasing the difference between the tinnitus-related  neuronal  activity  and  background neuronal activity, yields a decrease of the strength of the tinnitus signal. In turn, the weaker signal is passed to the higher-level cortical areas and, most importantly, to the limbic and autonomic nervous systems. This  passing  of  the  signal  helps  initiate and sustain the process of the passive extinction of conditioned reflexes that link tinnitus to negative reactions. 6,157 As the background activity is the sum of spontaneous and evoked activities, a decrease in the difference between the tinnitus signal and the background neuronal activity can be achieved by exposing patients to additional external sound.

Taken  by  itself,  this  principle  implies  we should use a sound that is as intense as possible. However,  it  is  important  to  consider  two  other principles. The fourth principle has two components:  1)  once  the  tinnitus  signal  is  suppressed, by  definition  habituation  will  not  occur  owing to the lack of a signal to habituate; and 2) when the sound level surpasses the threshold of partial tinnitus  suppression  ('partial  masking'),  it  will modify not only the intensity but also the quality (spectrum) of the tinnitus signal.

The  fifth  principle  is  that  retraining  of  neuronal  networks  will  then  occur  to  the  modified tinnitus signal and not to the original one. Owing to the generalization principle (ie, reaction can be induced to stimuli similar to the original, with the strength depending on the difference between the original and the modified signal), some habituation may still occur. The higher the external sound is, above the threshold of partial masking, the smaller its contribution to habituation will be. Finally, once the level of total suppression is reached, the effectiveness of habituation is decreased to zero as by definition, any retraining (including habituation) is prevented  because  the  brain  cannot  change  reactions to a stimulus it cannot detect.

In  the  past  we  have  recommended  a  different (ie, lower) setting of the sound level emitted by the sound generators when hyperacusis is the dominant or the only problem. However, measurements performed with the use of the Real Ear Measurement system revealed there was no difference in the initial setting of the sound generators in patients with tinnitus only versus patients with tinnitus and hyperacusis.  Thus, the first principle is dominant with regard 6 to setting the sound level for all patients.

The beneficial effects of the use of sound have been recently supported by the results of experiments in which animals were exposed to a damaging sound level, which caused hearing loss and presumably tinnitus. Three groups of animals were studied: control, which were exposed to a standard, low level laboratory sound background, and two groups, which were subsequently exposed for several  weeks  to  continuous  broadband,  low,  or high frequency sound. Control animals and animals exposed to low frequency continuous sound exhibited modification of the spontaneous activity recorded from the auditory cortex linked to tinnitus. 55 However,  the  neuronal  activity  recorded from  animals  exposed  to  continuous  high  frequency sound was similar to the activity recorded from animals which were not exposed to damaging sound and who did not have tinnitus. 51,55 These data support the view that continuous broadband sound may reverse tinnitus-related changes in the neuronal activity of the auditory cortex.

The need to  preserve  stimulation  in  the  low frequency  range  makes  it  advisable  for  people with relatively normal, low frequency hearing to be provided devices or hearing aids with fittings that are as open as possible. It is not sufficiently appreciated that in the normal acoustic environment there is a high proportion of low frequency sounds  below  200  Hz  which  provide  constant stimulation  of  the  auditory  pathways.  Since  the majority of patients have relatively normal hearing in this frequency range, they benefit from this stimulation. Consequently, blocking the ear canal with  closed  ear  molds  decreases  the  auditory input, and many patients experience the enhancement of tinnitus when their ears are blocked.

Note  that  even  the  best  hearing  aids  act  as earplugs in low frequencies whether they are the in-the-canal type or are fitted with a closed mold as they are unable to reproduce frequencies below 200 to 250 Hz owing to restriction based on the physics  of  sound  generation  by  a  loudspeaker. Hearing aids for patients with tinnitus are used primarily as a part of sound therapy to provide extra amplification of background sounds and only secondarily for communication. There are other distinct specifics in selection, programming, and the use  of  hearing  aids  labeled  'tinnitus  fitting.' 114 Other tools may also be used to enrich the auditory background, such as nature sounds, neutral music, or tabletop sound generators.

Both  counseling  and  sound  use  are  dependent  on  patient  categorization,  and  issues  related to sound are summarized in Table 31-8, adapted from. 196 Details of TRT  implementation are presented elsewhere. 6,156,157,160 Categorization provides  general  guidance  for  treatment  with TRT. 154,197 During treatment, patients may move from one category to another. For example, hyperacusis can be totally eliminated and consequently the patient may move from category 3 to category 1, wherein recommendations regarding sound use should  be  modified.  This  change  is  one  reason why follow-up contacts are so important, - first, to continue counseling; second, to check patient status; and third, to modify protocol, if necessary.

## TREATMENTS FOR HYPERACUSIS

Typically, the first effects of TRT can be seen in about one to three months, with clear improvement in about six months. Many patients achieve a high level of control of their tinnitus by about 12 months. 100,113,157 Patients are advised to follow the TRT protocol for at least nine months to prevent a relapse. Improvement in hyperacusis is typically faster  than  it  is  for  tinnitus;  however,  the  time required for improvement in misophonia is similar to that observed for tinnitus and reflects the similarity of mechanisms and centers involved for both phenomena. 6  The results from other centers and our own when using TRT show satisfactory results in over 80% of patients. 69,96,113,148,195,198-211 Currently, an NIH sponsored randomized clinical trial is being conducted to evaluate the effectiveness of  TRT (grants U01DC007411, PI C. Formby, and U01DC007422, PI R. Scherer, ClinicalTrials. gov  identifier:  NCT01177137).  Formby' s  grant has been described in detail. 205

Treatments for hyperacusis move in two contrary  directions. The  most  common  approach is  to  advise  patients  to  avoid  sound  and  use ear  protection.  This  advice  is  based  on  reasoning  including  since  patients  became  sensitive to sound,  they  are  supposedly  more susceptible to sound  exposure  and  consequently need extra protection. Patients easily embrace this philosophy and begin to protect their  ears,  even  to  the  extent  of  using  earplugs  in  quiet  environments.  Unfortunately, this approach makes the auditory system even  more  sensitive  and  further  exacerbates hyperacusis. 68,69,184,212,213

Another  approach  to  treating  hyperacusis involves  desensitization  in  which  patients  are exposed to a variety of sounds. The desensitization  approach  has  been  promoted  for  some time with a number of protocols and types of sounds used, such as using sound with certain frequencies removed, short exposure to moderately loud sound or prolonged exposure to low level sounds. 100,212 According to the principles of the neurophysiological model of tinnitus, the latter approach is recommended and is used as part  of TRT.  Independent  results  dramatically support  the  highly  statistically  and  clinically significant  effect  of TRT  treatment  for  hyperacusis. 69,190 Importantly,  the  misophonic  component  cannot  be  removed  by  desensitization, and  therefore  a  separate  approach  must  be implemented. 9,10,72,214

## Tinnitus Retraining Therapy for Decreased Sound Tolerance

Tinnitus retraining therapy can help patients with both tinnitus and hyperacusis. The presence of  hyperacusis  is  one  of  the  key  factors  in  the categorization  of  patients  (Table  31-8)  and  in determining  the  optimal  protocol  for  treatment. It is recommended that if hyperacusis is present, it  must  be  treated  first.  Although  TRT  offers  a treatment for tinnitus rather than a cure, for some patients  with  DST,  it  can  completely  remove hyperacusis and misophonia, and thus provide a cure for these conditions. 10,154

In some patients, tinnitus and hyperacusis are two manifestations  of  the  same  internal  mechanisms of increased gain within the auditory pathways, and the improvement in hyperacusis results in the improvement in tinnitus as well. Moreover, the  removal  of  hyperacusis  yields  a  decrease  in general anxiety and stress which, in combination with  proper  counseling,  significantly  facilitates tinnitus habituation.

A few parameters of the TRT protocol are of specific  importance  when  treating  patients  with hyperacusis: avoiding silence and  continually being exposed to sound are even more important for these patients than for patients who only have tinnitus.  The  sound  level  should  be  better  controlled  during  treatment,  which  necessitates  the use of wearable sound generators. The sound used should never induce discomfort or annoyance.

Patients with DST and particularly misophonia  tend  to  set  the  sound  level  of  their  devices close to or at the threshold of hearing, which might

Table 31-8  Categories of Patients with Tinnitus and Hyperacusis

|   Category | Impact on life   | Tinnitus          | Significant hearing loss   | Hyperacusis   | Prolonged sound induced exacerbation   | Counseling                                                                                                                                                                                | Instrumentation                                                                          |
|------------|------------------|-------------------|----------------------------|---------------|----------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|          0 | Low              | Present           | -                          | -             | -                                      | Abbreviated, with special care to avoid presentation that tinnitus can be worse that in specific case                                                                                     | No wearable devices necessary, but still can be used                                     |
|          1 | High             | Present           | -                          | -             | -                                      | Extensive, focused at mechanisms involved in tinnitus generation and in inducing reactions.                                                                                               | SG set, if possible, at a mixing point                                                   |
|          2 | High             | Present           | Present                    | -             | -                                      | Extensive, focused at mechanisms linking tinnitus and hearing loss.                                                                                                                       | Combi or HA with stress on enrichment of the auditory background                         |
|          3 | High             | Present or absent | Present or absent          | Present       | -                                      | Extensive, focused at mechanisms of decreased sound tolerance. When hearing loss is present as well, the mechanisms linking it with decreased sound tolerance and tinnitus are discussed. | SG only in cases of normal hearing. Combi (or HA) when significant hearing loss present. |
|          4 | High             | Present or absent | Present or absent          | Present       | Present                                | Extensive, highly individualized with discussion of potential medical problems. Crucial to exclude existence of misophonia.                                                               | SG set at low level; slow increase of sound level                                        |

Abbreviations: Impact on life - the extent tinnitus and/or hyperacusis influence patient' s life; Prolonged sound-induced exacerbation of tinnitus/hyperacusis - when the effects persists to the following day or longer; Significant hearing loss - having a significant impact on patient' s life; SG - sound generators; Combi - combination instruments. HA - hearing aids. Common treatment for each category involves counseling and the use of enriched auditory background. Sound used in sound therapy is always set below annoyance level. Note that the presence of misophonia, which is treated concurrently, is not affecting categorization. The dominant features for each category are shown in bold.

induce stochastic resonance and enhance tinnitus for some patients. Furthermore, a low sound level is less efficient for tinnitus and hyperacusis. The use of real-ear measurements, as a guide in setting and checking the sound level for all patients with instrumentation  during  the  initial  and  follow-up visits, is helpful for patients with DST.

Desensitization works on the auditory system; consequently, this approach will not affect misophonia,  which  should  be  addressed  via the  active  extinction  of  conditioned  reflexes between the auditory and limbic systems. In  addition  to  counseling,  desensitization  is achieved by instructing patients to engage systematically in activities that the patient enjoys in  which  sound  plays  an  indispensable  role and  is  pleasant,  such  as  actively  listening  to one's  favorite  music  or  audiobooks  following a  specific  protocol.   Other  activities  could  be 9 shopping in a mall, going to parties, dining in restaurants,  attending  movies,  etc.  The  main concept  is  to  create  an  association  of  sound with  a  pleasant  situation  (implementing  the active extinction of conditioned reflexes). There are  four  classes  of  protocols  for  misophonia. Each protocol is geared toward creating a positive  association  with  a  sound,  but  they  differ with  respect  to  the  extent  of  control  a  patient has over the sound environment and (in the case of protocol 4) the use of sounds with positive association  together  with  bothersome  sounds which evoke negative reactions.

Protocol level 1 provides the patient with full control over the selection of sound, its level, and duration. As such, it can be used even for patients with coexisting significant hyperacusis and can be implemented from the start of treatment.

Protocol  level  2  affords  the  patient  full  control over the type of sound, but only partial, indirect control over the sound level, by yielding this control  to  someone  close  to  the  patient,  who  is instructed to set the sound volume to a level he or she thinks the patient will accept. After a listening session, the patient should provide feedback as to whether the sound level was too high, too low or just fine.

Protocol  level  3  enables  the  patient  to  select the type of sound, but the sound level is out of the patient' s  control.  This  protocol  can  be  used  only when significant hyperacusis is absent or has already been eliminated by treatment. Therefore, the introduction of this protocol is frequently delayed.

Protocol level 4 uses the concept of complex conditioned stimuli and combines exposure to sounds  which  evoke  negative  reactions  with the simultaneous exposure to sound the patient regards  as  highly  positive  and  enjoyable.  The ratio  of  sound  levels  of  positive-to-negative sound is gradually decreased. Furthermore, in this protocol, the environment where it is implemented is taken into account, as many patients react  differently  depending  on where they  are exposed to bothersome sound (ie, home, school, a  public  place,  a  restaurant,  a  friend' s  home). The multisensory aspect of stimuli is also taken into  account  as  some  patients  react  even  to seeing  someone  producing  an  offensive  sound (eg, eating). The specific protocol employed is tailored  to  the  individual  patient.  Frequently more  than  one  protocol  for misophonia  is implemented.

## CONCLUSIONS

Tinnitus  and  hyperacusis  remain  challenging topics  to  study,  and  patients  with  these  symptoms  are  challenging  to  treat.  Many  questions are unanswered. The mechanisms of tinnitus and hyperacusis are speculative and not yet proven. At this time, we do not have objective methods to detect and evaluate tinnitus. We believe the neurophysiological model of tinnitus and TRT provide a promising approach that may ultimately result  in  a  better  understanding  of  tinnitus  and provide greater help to patients with tinnitus and hyperacusis.

## REFERENCES

- 1. McFadden  D. Tinnitus:  Facts,  Theories,  and  Treatments. Washington, DC: National Academy Press; 1982.
- 2. Hoffman HJ, Reed GW. Epidemiology of tinnitus. In: Snow JB, ed. Tinnitus: Theory and Management. Hamilton, London: BC Decker; 2004:16-41.
- 3. Davis A, El Refaie A. Epidemiology of tinnitus. In: Tyler R, ed. Tinnitus Handbook. San Diego, CA: Singular, Thomson Learning; 2000:1-23.
- 4. Heller MF, Bergman M. Tinnitus in normally hearing   persons. Ann Otol. 1953;62:73-93.
- 5. Tucker  DA,  Phillips  SL,  Ruth  RA,  Clayton  WA,  Royster E,  Todd  AD.  The  effect  of  silence  on  tinnitus  perception. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2005;132:20-24.
- 6. Jastreboff  PJ, Hazell  JWP . Tinnitus  Retraining  Therapy: Implementing  the  Neurophysiological  Model. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; 2004.
- 7. Davis A, El Refaie A. Epidemiology of tinnitus. In: Tyler RS, ed. Tinnitus Handbook. San Diego, CA: Singular, Thomson Learning; 2000:1-23.
- 8. Jastreboff PJ. Tinnitus habituation therapy (THT) and tinnitus retraining therapy (TRT). In: Tyler R, ed. Tinnitus Handbook. San Diego, CA: Singular, Thomson Learning; 2000:357-376.
- 9. Jastreboff MM, Jastreboff PJ. Decreased sound tolerance and tinnitus retraining therapy (TRT). Austr New Zeal J Audiol. 2002;21:74-81.
- 10. Jastreboff  PJ,  Jastreboff  MM.  Using  TRT  to  treat  hyperacusis,  misophonia  and  phonophobia. ENT  Audiol  News. 2013;21(6):88-90.
- 11. Sherlock  LP ,  Formby  C.  Estimates  of  loudness,  loudness discomfort, and the auditory dynamic range: normative estimates, comparison of procedures, and test-retest reliability. J Am Acad Audiol. 2005;16:85-100.
- 12. Khalfa S,  Dubal  S,  Veuillet  E,  Perez-Diaz  F ,  Jouvent  R,  Collet  L. Psychometric normalization of a hyperacusis questionnaire. ORL J Otorhinolaryngol Relat Spec. 2002;64:436-442.
- 13. Wallen MB, Hasson D, Theorell T, Canlon B. The correlation between  the  hyperacusis  questionnaire  and  uncomfortable loudness levels is dependent on emotional exhaustion. Int J Audiol. 2012;51:722-729.
- 14. Cave  KM,  Cornish  EM,  Chandler  DW .  Blast  injury  of  the ear: clinical update from the global war on terror. Mil Med. 2007;172:726-730.
- 15. Department of Veterans Affairs VBA. Annual Benefits Report, Fiscal Year 2010. 2010:1-152.
- 16. International State-of-the-Science Meeting on Blast-Induced Tinnitus. Nov 11-15, 2011. https://blastinjuryresearch.amedd. army.mil/docs/sos_tinnitus/SoS_Tinnitus_Presentations.pdf. Accessed April 4, 2015.
- 17. Facts About the Military, Veterans and Tinnitus. http://www. ata.org/sites/ata.org/files/pdf/ATA%20Facts%20About%20
- Military%20Veterans%20and%20Tinnitus.pdf. Accessed April 4, 2015.
- 18. Maes  IH,  Cima  RF,  Vlaeyen  JW ,  Anteunis  LJ,  Joore  MA. Tinnitus: a cost study. Ear Hear. 2013;34:508-514.
- 19. Stephens D. A history of tinnitus. In: Tyler RS, ed. Tinnitus Handbook. San  Diego,  CA:  Singular,  Thomson  Learning; 2000:437-448.
- 20. Jastreboff PJ. Phantom auditory perception (tinnitus): mechanisms  of  generation  and  perception. Neurosci  Res. 1990;8:221-254.
- 21. Lockwood AH, Salvi RJ, Coad ML, Towsley ML, Wack DS, Murphy  BW.  The  functional  neuroanatomy  of  tinnitus: vidence e for limbic system  links and  neural plasticity. Neurology. 1998;50:114-120.
- 22. Andersson G, Lyttkens L, Hirvela C, Furmark T, Tillfors M, Fredrikson M. Regional cerebral blood flow during tinnitus: a PET case study with lidocaine and auditory stimulation. Acta Otolaryngol. 2000;120:967-972.
- 23. Muhlnickel  W,  Elbert  T,  Taub  E,  Flor  H.  Reorganization of  auditory  cortex  in  tinnitus. Proc  Natl  Acad  Sci  U  S  A. 1998;95:10340-10343.
- 24. Penner MJ. Linking spontaneous otoacoustic emissions and tinnitus. Br J Audiol. 1992;26:115-123.
- 25. McKee GJ, Stephens SD. An investigation of normally hearing subjects with tinnitus. Audiol. 1992;31:313-317.
- 26. Jacobson GP , Ahmad BK, Morgan J, Newman CW, Tepley N, Wharton J. Auditory evoked cortical magnetic field (M100M200) measurements in tinnitus  and  normal  groups. Hear Res. 1991;56:44-52.
- 27. Henry  JA,  Zaugg  TL,  Schechter  MA.  Clinical  guide  for audiologic tinnitus management I: assessment. Am J Audiol. 2005;14:21-48.
- 28. Hebert  S,  Lupien  SJ. The  sound  of  stress:  blunted  cortisol reactivity to psychosocial stress in tinnitus sufferers. Neurosci Lett. 2007;411:138-142.
- 29. Holgers KM, Juul J. The suffering of tinnitus in childhood and adolescence. Int J Audiol. 2006;45:267-272.
- 30. Mills RP , Albert DM, Brain CE. Tinnitus in childhood. Clin Otolaryngol. 1986;11:431-434.
- 31. Aksoy S, Akdogan O, Gedikli Y, Belgin E. The extent and levels of tinnitus in children of central Ankara. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2007;71:263-268.
- 32. Raj-Koziak D, Skarzynski H, Kochanek K, Fabijanska A. [The prevalence of tinnitus in children in Poland]. Otolaryngol Pol. 2013;67:149-153.
- 33. Savastano M. Characteristics of tinnitus in childhood. Eur J Pediatr. 2007;166(8):797-801.
- 34. Stouffer JL, Tyler RS. Characterization of tinnitus by tinnitus patients. J Speech Hear Disord. 1990;55:439-453.
- 35. Gurr P ,  Owen G, Reid A, Canter R. Tinnitus in pregnancy. J Clin Otolaryngol. 1993;18:294-297.
- 36. Ronis  ML.  Alcohol  and  dietary  influences  on  tinnitus. J Laryngol Otol. 1984;98:242-246.
- 37. Zoger  S,  Svedlund  J,  Holgers  KM.  Relationship  between tinnitus  severity  and  psychiatric  disorders. Psychosomatics. 2006;47:282-288.
- 38. Rossiter S, Stevens C, Walker G. Tinnitus and its effect on working  memory  and  attention. J  Speech  Lang  Hear  Res. 2006;49:150-160.
- 39. Hallam RS, McKenna L, Shurlock L. Tinnitus impairs cognitive efficiency. Int J Audiol. 2004;43:218-226.
- 40. Jastreboff  PJ.  Tinnitus  as  a  phantom  perception:  theories and  clinical  implications.  In:  Vernon  J,  Moller  AR,  eds. Mechanisms of  Tinnitus. Boston,  London: Allyn  &amp;  Bacon; 1995:73-94.
- 41. Tonndorf J. Stereociliary dysfunction, a case of sensory hearing loss, recruitment, poor speech discrimination and tinnitus. Acta Otolaryngol. 1981;91:469-479.
- 42. Moller  AR.  Pathophysiology  of  tinnitus. Ann  Otol  Rhinol Laryngol. 1984;93:39-44.
- 43. Moller  MB,  Moller  AR,  Jannetta  PJ,  Jho  HD.  Vascular decompression surgery for severe tinnitus: selection criteria and results. Laryngoscope. 1993;103:421-427.
- 44. Langguth  B,  Kreuzer  PM,  Kleinjung  T,  De  Ridder  D. Tinnitus:  causes  and  clinical  management. Lancet  Neurol. 2013;12:920-930.
- 45. Tan J, Ruttiger L, Panford-Walsh R, et al. Tinnitus behavior and hearing function correlate with the reciprocal expression patterns of BDNF and Arg3.1/arc in auditory neurons following acoustic trauma. Neuroscience. 2007;145:715-726.
- 46. Kaltenbach JA, Rachel JD, Mathog TA, Zhang J, Falzarano PR, Lewandowski M. Cisplatin-induced yperactivity in the dorsal cochlear nucleus and its relation h to outer hair cell loss: relevance to tinnitus. J Neurophysiol. 2002;88:699-714.

- 47. Job A,  Raynal  M,  Kossowski  M.  Susceptibility  to  tinnitus revealed at 2 kHz range by bilateral lower DPOAEs in normal hearing subjects with noise exposure. Audiol Neurootol. 2007;12:137-144.
- 48. Ozimek  E,  Wicher  A,  Szyfter  W ,  Szymiec  E.  Distortion product otoacoustic emission (DPOAE) in tinnitus patients. J Acoust Soc Am. 2006;119:527-538.
- 49. Tonndorf J. The analogy between tinnitus and pain: a suggestion for a physiological basis of chronic tinnitus. Hear Res. 1987;28:271-275.
- 50. Zenner HP, Ernst A. Cochlear-motor, transduction and signal-transfer tinnitus: models for three types of cochlear tinnitus. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 1993;249:447-454.
- 51. Eggermont  JJ.  Cortical  tonotopic  map  reorganization  and its  implications  for  treatment  of  tinnitus. Acta  Otolaryngol Suppl. 2006;9-12.
- 52. Mazurek B, Haupt H, Georgiewa P , Klapp BF, Reisshauer A. A model of peripherally developing hearing loss and tinnitus based on the role of hypoxia and ischemia. Med Hypotheses. 2006;67:892-899.
- 53. Moller  AR.  Neural  plasticity  in  tinnitus. Prog  Brain  Res. 2006;157:365-372.
- 54. Weisz  N,  Muller  S,  Schlee  W ,  Dohrmann  K,  Hartmann T, Elbert T. The neural code of auditory phantom perception. J Neurosci. 2007;27:1479-1484.
- 55. Norena  AJ, Eggermont JJ. Enriched acoustic environment  after  noise  trauma  abolishes  neural  signs  of  tinnitus. NeuroReport. 2006;17:559-563.
- 56. Sanchez  TG,  da  Silva  LA,  Brandao  AL,  Lorenzi  MC, Bento RF. Somatic modulation of tinnitus: test reliability and results after repetitive muscle contraction training. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol. 2007;116:30-35.
- 57. Norena AJ, Farley BJ. Tinnitus-related neural activity: theories of generation, propagation, and centralization. Hear Res. 2013;295:161-171.
- 58. Norena AJ. An integrative model of tinnitus based on a central  gain  controlling  neural  sensitivity. Neurosci  Biobehav Rev. 2011;35:1089-1109.
- 59. Epp B, Hots J, Verhey JL, Schaette R. Increased intensity discrimination thresholds in tinnitus subjects with a normal audiogram. J Acoust Soc Am. 2012;132:EL196-EL201.
- 60. Schaette R, Kempter R. Computational models of neurophysiological correlates of tinnitus. Front Syst Neurosci. 2012;6:34.
- 61. De Ridder D, Vanneste S, Weisz N, et al. An integrative model of auditory phantom perception: tinnitus as a unified percept of interacting separable subnetworks. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2014;44:16-32.
- 62. Roberts LE, Eggermont JJ, Caspary DM, Shore SE, Melcher JR, Kaltenbach JA. Ringing ears: the neuroscience of tinnitus. J Neurosci. 2010;30:14972-14979.
- 63. Kujawa SG, Liberman MC. Adding insult to injury: cochlear nerve degeneration after 'temporary' noise-induced hearing loss. J Neurosci. 2009;29:14077-14085.
- 64. Perry BP, Gantz  BJ. Medical  and  surgical evaluation and  management  of  tinnitus.  In:  Tyler  R,  editor. Tinnitus Handbook. San  Diego,  CA:  Singular, Thomson  Learning; 2000:221-241.
- 65. Baguley  DM,  Humphriss  RL,  Axon  PR,  Moffat  DA.  The clinical characteristics of tinnitus in patients with vestibular schwannoma. Skull Base. 2006;16:49-58.
- 66. Jastreboff PJ, Gray WC,  Gold  SL. Neurophysiological approach to tinnitus patients. Am J Otol. 1996;17:236-240.
- 67. Jastreboff PJ, Hazell JWP . A neurophysiological approach to tinnitus: clinical implications. Brit J Audiol. 1993;27:1-11.
- 68. Hawley ML, Keaser ML, Formby C. Predicting hyperacusis in tinnitus patients. Semin Hear. 2007;28(4):261-275.
- 69. Formby C, Gold SL, Keaser  ML,  Block  KL,  Hawley  ML. Secondary  benefits  form  tinnitus  retraining  therrapy:  clinically  signficant  increase  in  loudness  discomfort  level  and expansion  of  the  auditory  dynamic  range. Semin  Hear. 2007;28:227-260.
- 70. Stedman's Concise Medical Dictionary . 26th ed. Baltimore, MD: William &amp; Wilkins; 1997.
- 71. The American Heritage Dictionary. 3rd ed. Cambridge, MA: SoftKey International; 1994.
- 72. Jastreboff PJ, Jastreboff MM. Decreased sound tolerance. In: Snow JB, ed. Tinnitus: Theory and Management. Hamilton, London: BC Decker; 2004:8-15.
- 73. Cox RM, Alexander GC, Taylor IM, Gray GA. The Countour test of loudness perception. Ear Hear. 1997;18:388-400.
- 74. Ricketts TA, Bentler RA. The effect of test signal type and bandwidth on the categorical scaling of loudness. J  Acoust Soc Am. 1996;99:2281-2287.
- 75. Hawkins  DB,  Walden  BE,  Montgomery  A,  Prosek  RA. Description and validation of an LDL procedure designed to select SSPL90. Ear Hear. 1987;8:162-169.
- 76. Byrne  D,  Dirks  D.  Effects  of  acclimatization  and  deprivation on non-speech auditory abilities. Ear Hear. 1996;17:29S-37S.
- 77. Fabijanska  A, Rogowski  M,  Bartnik  G,  Skarzynski  H. Epidemiology  of  tinnitus  and  hyperacusis  in  Poland.  In: Hazell  JWP ,  ed. Proceedings  of  the  Sixth  International Tinnitus Seminar, 1999, Cambridge, UK. London, UK: THC; 1999:569-571.
- 78. Anari M,  Axelsson  A, Elies W , Magnusson L. Hypersensitivity to sound-questionnaire data, audiometry and classification. Scand Audiol. 1999;28:219-230.
- 79. Boettcher  FA,  Salvi  RJ.  Functional  changes  in  the  ventral cochlear  nucleus  following  acute  acoustic  overstimulation. J Acoust Soc Am. 1993;94:2123-2134.
- 80. Gerken  GM.  Alteration  of  central  auditory  processing  of brief stimuli: a review and a neural model. J Acoust Soc Am. 1993;93:2038-2049.
- 81. Marriage J, Barnes NM. Is central hyperacusis a symptom of 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) dysfunction? J Laryngol Otol. 1995;109:915-921.
- 82. Gopal  KV ,  Daly  DM,  Daniloff  RG,  Pennartz  L.  Effects  of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors on auditory processing: case study. J Am Acad Audiol. 2000;11:454-463.
- 83. Adour  KK,  Wingerd  J.  Idiopathic  facial  paralysis  (Bell' s palsy): factors affecting severity and outcome in 446 patients. Neurology. 1974;24:1112-1116.
- 84. Wayman DM, Pham HN, Byl FM, Adour KK. Audiological manifestations of Ramsay Hunt syndrome. J Laryngol Otol , 1990;104:104-108.
- 85. Nields JA, Fallon BA, Jastreboff PJ. Carbamazepine in the treatment of Lyme disease-induced hyperacusi. J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci. 1999;11:97-99.
- 86. Klein AJ, Armstrong BL, Greer MK, Brown FR. Hyperacusis and  otitis  media  in  individuals  with  Williams  syndrome. J Speech Hear Disord. 1990;55:339-344.
- 87. Lader M. Anxiolytic drugs: dependence, addiction and abuse. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol. 1994;4:85-91.
- 88. Blomberg  S,  Rosander  M,  Andersson  G.  Fears,  hyperacusis  and musicality in Williams syndrome. Res Dev Disabil. 2006;27:668-680.
- 89. Dobie RA. Clinical trials and drug therapy for tinnitus. In: Snow JB, ed. Tinnitus: Theory and Management. Hamilton, London: BC Decker; 2004,:266-577.
- 90. Bennett  MH,  Kertesz  T,  Y eung  P .  Hyperbaric  oxygen  for idiopathic  sudden  sensorineural  hearing  loss  and  tinnitus. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2007;CD004739.
- 91. Baldo  P ,  Doree  C,  Lazzarini  R,  Molin  P ,  McFerran  DJ. Antidepressants for patients with tinnitus. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2006;CD003853.
- 92. Hilton  M,  Stuart  E.  Ginkgo  biloba  for  tinnitus. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2004;CD003852.
- 93. Martinez DP , Waddell A, Perera R, Theodoulou M. Cognitive behavioural  therapy  for  tinnitus. Cochrane  Database  Syst Rev. 2007;CD005233.
- 94. Hoekstra  CE,  Rynja  SP ,  van  Zanten  GA,  Rovers  MM. Anticonvulsants  for  tinnitus. Cochrane  Database  Syst  Rev 2011;CD007960.
- 95. Hobson J, Chisholm E, El Refaie A. Sound therapy (masking) in the management of tinnitus in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2010;CD006371.
- 96. Phillips  JS,  McFerran  D.  Tinnitus  Retraining  Therapy (TRT) for tinnitus. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2010;CD007330.
- 97. Meng Z, Liu S, Zheng Y, Phillips JS. Repetitive transcranial magnetic  stimulation  for  tinnitus. Cochrane  Database  Syst Rev. 2011;CD007946.
- 98. Choi SJ, Lee JB, Lim HJ, et al. Intratympanic dexamethasone injection  for  refractory  tinnitus:  prospective  placebo-controlled study. Laryngoscope. 2013;123(11):2817-2822.
- 99. Ngao CF, Tan TS, Narayanan P , Raman R. The effectiveness of transmeatal low-power laser stimulation in treating tinnitus. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2014;271(5):975-80.
- 100. Jastreboff  PJ,  Jastreboff  MM.  Tinnitus  Retraining  Therapy (TRT) as a method for treatment of tinnitus and hyperacusis patients. J Amer Acad Audiol. 2000;11:156-161.
- 101. Robinson SK, Viirre ES, Stein MB. Antidepressant therapy in tinnitus. Hear Res. 2007;226(1-2):221-31.
- 102. Smith PF, Zheng Y, Darlington CL. Ginkgo biloba extracts for tinnitus: more  hype  than  hope? J Ethnopharmacol. 2005;100:95-99.
- 103. van  Deelen  GW ,  Huizing  EH.  Use  of  a  diuretic  (Dyazide) in the treatment of Meniere' s disease. A double-blind crossover placebo-controlled study. ORL J Otorhinolaryngol Relat Spec. 1986;48:287-292.
- 104. Wiegand  DA,  Ojemann  RG,  Fickel  V .  Surgical  treatment of acoustic neuroma (vestibular schwannoma) in the United States: report from the Acoustic Neuroma Registry. Laryngoscope. 1996;106:58-66.
- 105. Berliner  KI,  Shelton  C,  Hitselberger  WE,  Luxford  WM. Acoustic tumors: effect of surgical removal on tinnitus. Am J Otol. 1992;13:13-17.
- 106. Baguley DM, Humphriss RL, Axon PR, Moffat DA. Change in tinnitus handicap after translabyrinthine vestibular schwannoma excision. Otol Neurotol. 2005;26:1061-1063.
- 107. Davis PB, Wilde RA, Steed LG, Hanley PJ. Treatment of tinnitus with a customized acoustic neural stimulus: a controlled clinical study. Ear Nose Throat J. 2008;87:330-339.
- 108. Newman CW, Sandridge SA. A comparison of benefit and economic value between two sound therapy tinnitus management options. J Am Acad Audiol. 2012;23:126-138.
- 109. Tass  PA,  Adamchic  I,  Freund  HJ,  von  ST,  Hauptmann  C. Counteracting tinnitus by acoustic coordinated reset neuromodulation. Restor Neurol Neurosci. 2012;30:137-159.
- 110. Reavis KM, Rothholtz VS, Tang Q, Carroll JA, Djalilian H, Zeng FG. Temporary suppression of tinnitus by modulated sounds. J Assoc Res Otolaryngol. 2012;13:561-571.
- 111. Nickel  AK,  Hillecke  T,  Argstatter  H,  Bolay  HV .  Outcome research in music therapy: a step on the long road to an evidence-based treatment. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2005;1060:283-293.
- 112. Herraiz C, Diges I, Cobo P , Plaza G, Aparicio JM. Auditory discrimination therapy (ADT) for tinnitus managment: preliminary results. Acta Otolaryngol Suppl. 2006;556:80-83.
- 113. Henry JA, Schechter MA, Zaugg TL, et al. Outcomes of clinical trial: tinnitus masking versus tinnitus retraining therapy. J Am Acad Audiol. 2006;17:104-132.
- 114. Jastreboff PJ, Jastreboff MM. The role of hearing aids in tinnitus management. In: Derebery J, Luxford W , eds. Hearing Aid Book. Plural Publishing; San Diego, CA 2009:119-131.
- 115. Flor  H,  Hoffmann  D,  Struve  M,  Diesch  E.  Auditory  discrimination  training for the treatment  of  tinnitus. Appl Psychophysiol Biofeedback. 2004;29:113-120.
- 116. Herraiz  C,  Diges  I,  Cobo  P ,  Aparicio  JM,  Toledano  A. Auditory  discrimination  training  for  tinnitus  treatment:  the effect  of  different  paradigms. Eur  Arch  Otorhinolaryngol. 2010;267:1067-1074.
- 117. Hoare  DJ,  Kowalkowski  VL,  Hall  DA.  Effects  of  frequency  discrimination  training  on  tinnitus:  results  from two randomised controlled trials. J  Assoc Res Otolaryngol. 2012;13:543-559.
- 118. Hoare  DJ,  Pierzycki  RH,  Thomas  H,  McAlpine  D,  Hall DA.  Evaluation  of  the  acoustic  coordinated  reset  (CR(R)) neuromodulation  therapy  for  tinnitus:  study  protocol  for  a double-blind randomized  placebo-controlled  trial. Trials. 2013;14:207.
- 119. Engineer  ND,  Riley  JR,  Seale  JD,  et  al.  Reversing  pathological neural activity using targeted plasticity. Nature. 2011;470:101-104.
- 120. Engineer  ND,  Moller  AR,  Kilgard  MP .  Directing neural  plasticity  to  understand  and  treat  tinnitus. Hear  Res. 2013;295:58-66.
- 121. Dauman R. Electrical stimulation for tinnitus supression. In: Tyler  R,  ed. Tinnitus  Handbook. San  Diego,  CA:  Singular, Thomson Learning; 2000:377-398.
- 122. Hazell JWP, Jastreboff PJ, Meerton LE, Conway  MJ. Electrical  tinnitus  suppression:  frequency  dependence  of effects. Audiol. 1993;32:68-77.
- 123. De Ridder D, Vanneste S, Kovacs S, et al. Transcranial magnetic stimulation and extradural electrodes implanted on secondary auditory cortex for tinnitus suppression. J Neurosurg. 2011;114:903-911.
- 124. Cheung  SW,  Larson  PS.  Tinnitus modulation by deep brain  stimulation  in  locus  of  caudate  neurons  (area  LC). Neuroscience. 2010;169:1768-1778.
- 125. Olanow  CW,  Brin  MF,  Obeso  JA.  The  role  of  deep  brain stimulation  as  a  surgical  treatment  for  Parkinson' s  disease. Neurology. 2000;55:60-66.
- 126. Larson PS, Cheung SW. A stroke of silence: tinnitus suppression following placement of a deep brain stimulation electrode with infarction in area LC. J Neurosurg. 2013;118:192-194.
- 127. Larson  PS,  Cheung  SW .  Deep  brain  stimulation  in  area LC controllably triggers auditory phantom percepts. Neurosurgery. 2012;70:398-405.

- 128. Cheung SW, Larson PS. Striatal neuromodulation effects on tinnitus. 7th International TRI Tinnitus Conference Abstracts. Tinnitus: A Treatable Disease. 2013;7:44.
- 129. Rubinstein  JT,  Tyler  RS,  Johnson A,  Brown  CJ.  Electrical suppression  of  tinnitus  with  high-rate  pulse  trains. Otol Neurotol. 2003;24:478-485.
- 130. De Ridder D, De MG, Verstraeten E et al. Primary and secondary  auditory  cortex  stimulation  for  intractable  tinnitus. ORL J Otorhinolaryngol Relat Spec. 2006;68:48-54.
- 131. Valles-Varela H, Royo-Lopez J, Carmen-Samperiz L, Sebastian-Cortes JM, Alfonso-Collado I. The cochlear implant as a tinnitus  treatment. Acta Otorrinolaringol Esp. 2013;64:253-257.
- 132. Arts  RA,  George  EL,  Stokroos  RJ,  Vermeire  K.  Review: cochlear implants as a treatment of tinnitus in single-sided deafness. Curr Opin Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2012;20:398-403.
- 133. Pridmore  S,  Kleinjung  T, Langguth  B,  Eichhammer  P . Transcranial  magnetic  stimulation:  potential  treatment  for tinnitus? Psychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2006;60:133-138.
- 134. Fregni  F,  Marcondes  R,  Boggio  PS,  et  al.  Transient  tinnitus  suppression induced by repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation and transcranial direct current stimulation. Eur J Neurol. 2006;13:996-1001.
- 135. Theodoroff  SM,  Folmer  RL.  Repetitive  transcranial  magnetic stimulation as a treatment for chronic tinnitus: a critical review. Otol Neurotol. 2013;34:199-208.
- 136. Piccirillo JF , Kallogjeri D, Nicklaus J, et al. Low-frequency repetitive  transcranial  magnetic  stimulation  to  the  temporoparietal  junction  for  tinnitus:  four-week  stimulation  trial. JAMA Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2013;139:388-395.
- 137. Langguth B, De Ridder D, Dornhoffer JL, et al. Controversy: does repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation/ transcranial direct  current  stimulation  show  efficacy  in  treating  tinnitus patients? Brain Stimul. 2008;1:192-205.
- 138. Rossi S, De Capua A, Ulivelli M, et al. Effects of repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation on chronic tinnitus. A randomised, cross over, double blind, placebo-controlled study. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2007;78(8):857-863.
- 139. Schleuning AJ, Johnson RM, Vernon JA. Evaluation of a tinnitus  masking  program:  a  follow-up  study  of  598  patients. Ear Hear. 1980;1:71-74.
- 140. Johnson  RM. The  masking  of  tinnitus.  In: Vernon  JA,  ed. Tinnitus Treatment and Relief. 1st ed. Boston, MA: Allyn and Bacon; 1998:164-186.
- 141. Wilson PH, Henry JL. Psychological management of tinnitus. In: Tyler R, ed. Tinnitus Handbook. San Diego, CA: Singular, Thomson Learning; 2000:263-279.
- 142. Caffier  PP ,  Haupt  H,  Scherer  H,  Mazurek  B.  Outcomes  of long-term  outpatient  tinnitus-coping  therapy:  psychometric changes and value of tinnitus-control instruments. Ear Hear. 2006;27:619-627.
- 143. Goebel G, Kahl M, Arnold W, Fichter M. 15-year prospective follow-up study of behavioral therapy in a large sample of inpatients with chronic tinnitus. Acta Otolaryngol Suppl. 2006;70-79.
- 144. Andersson G, Juris L, Classon E, Fredrikson M, Furmark T. Consequences of suppressing thoughts about tinnitus and the effects  of  cognitive  distraction  on  brain  activity  in  tinnitus patients. Audiol Neurootol. 2006;11:301-309.
- 145. Wilson  PH.  Classical  conditioning  as  the  basis  for  the effective treatment of tinnitus-related distress. ORL J Otorhinolaryngol Relat Spec. 2006;68:6-11.
- 146. Martinez-Devesa P, Perera R, Theodoulou  M,  Waddell A.  Cognitive  behavioural  therapy  for  tinnitus. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2010;CD005233.
- 147. Cima  RF,  Maes  IH,  Joore  MA,  et  al.  Specialised  treatment  based  on  cognitive  behaviour  therapy  versus  usual care  for  tinnitus:  a  randomised  controlled  trial. Lancet. 2012;379:1951-1959.
- 148. Henry JA, Schechter MA, Zaugg TL, et al. Clinical trial to compare  tinnitus  masking  and  tinnitus  retraining  therapy. Acta Otolaryngol Suppl. 2006;64-69.
- 149. Tyler RS, Gogel SA, Gehringer AK. Tinnitus activities treatment. Prog Brain Res. 2007;166:425-434.
- 150. Henry JA, Schechter MA, Loovis C, Zaugg TL, Kaelin C, Montero M. Clinical management  of tinnitus using a 'progressive  intervention'  approach. J  Rehabil  Res  Dev. 2005;42(4 Suppl 2):95-116.
- 151. Henry  JA,  Zaugg  TL,  Myers  PJ,  Kendall  CJ,  Turbin  MB. Principles and application of educational counseling used in progressive  audiologic  tinnitus  management. Noise  Health. 2009;11:33-48.
- 152. Henry JA, Loovis C, Montero M, et al. Randomized clinical trial:  group counseling based on tinnitus retraining therapy. J Rehabil Res Dev. 2007;44:21-32.
- 153. Henry JA, Zaugg TL, Myers PJ, Schechter MA. Using therapeutic sound with progressive audiologic tinnitus management. Trends Amplif. 2008;12:188-209.
- 154. Jastreboff PJ, Jastreboff MM. Tinnitus retraining therapy. In: Baguley D, ed. Perspectives in Tinnitus Management. New York, Stuttgart: Thieme; 2001;51-63.
- 155. Jastreboff  PJ,  Jastreboff  MM. Tinnitus  retraining  therapy:  a different  view  on  tinnitus. ORL  J  Otorhinolaryngol  Relat Spec. 2006;68:23-29.
- 156. Jastreboff  PJ.  Tinnitus  retraining  therapy. Prog  Brain  Res. 2007;166:415-423.
- 157. Jastreboff  PJ.  Tinnitus  Retraining  Therapy.  In:  Moller  A, Kleinjung  T,  Langguth  B,  De  Ridder  D,  eds. Textbook  of Tinnitus. New York, NY: Springer; 2010;575-596.
- 158. Jastreboff  PJ,  Hazell  JW ,  Graham  RL.  Neurophysiological model of tinnitus: dependence of the minimal masking level on treatment outcome. Hear Res 1994;80:216-232.
- 159. Jastreboff PJ. The neurophysiological model of tinnitus. In: Snow JB, ed. Tinnitus: Theory and Management. Hamilton, London: BC Decker; 2004,:96-106.
- 160. Jastreboff  PJ. Tinnitus  retraining  therapy.  In:  Snow  JB,  ed. Tinnitus: Theory and Management. Hamilton, London: BC Decker; 2004:295-309.
- 161. Bauer CA, Kurt W, Sybert LT, Brozoski TJ. The cerebellum as a novel tinnitus generator. Hear Res. 2013;295:130-139.
- 162. Ueyama T, Donishi T, Ukai S, et al. Brain regions responsible for tinnitus distress and loudness: a resting-state FMRI study. PLoS One. 2013;8:e67778.
- 163. Schecklmann M, Landgrebe M, Poeppl TB, et al. Neural correlates of tinnitus duration and distress: a positron emission tomography study. Hum Brain Mapp. 2013;34:233-240.
- 164. Lockwood AH, Salvi RJ, Burkard RF. Tinnitus. N Engl J Med. 2002;347:904-910.
- 165. Mirz F, Gjedde A, Ishizu K, Pedersen CB. Cortical networks subserving  the  perception  of  tinnitus-a  PET  study. Acta Otolaryngol Suppl. 2000;543:241-243.
- 166. Cacace AT. The limbic system and tinnitus. In: Snow JB, ed. Tinnitus:  Theory  and  Management. Hamilton,  ON:  Decker BC; 2004:162-170.
- 167. Leaver AM,  Renier  L,  Chevillet  MA,  Morgan  S,  Kim  HJ, Rauschecker  JP .  Dysregulation  of  limbic  and  auditory  networks in tinnitus. Neuron. 2011;69:33-43.
- 168. Vanneste  S,  De  Ridder  D.  The  auditory  and  non-auditory brain areas involved  in tinnitus.  An emergent  property of  multiple  parallel  overlapping  subnetworks. Front  Syst Neurosci. 2012;6:31.
- 169. Albus  JS.  A  theory  of  cerebellar  function. Math  Biosci. 1971;10:25-61.
- 170. Bartels H, Staal MJ, Albers FW . Tinnitus and neural plasticity of the brain. Otol Neurotol. 2007;28:178-184.
- 171. Jastreboff PJ, Jastreboff MM. The neurophysiological model of  tinnitus  and  its  practical  implementation:  current  status. In:  Myers  EN,  Bluestone  CD,  Brackman  DE,  Krause  CJ, Tutchko  MJ,  eds. Advances  in  Otolaryngology-Head  and Neck Surgery. Vol 15. St. Louis, MO: Mosby; 2001:135-147.
- 172. Moller AR. Tinnitus and pain. Prog Brain Res. 2007;166:47-53.
- 173. LeDoux JE. Emotion circuits in the brain. Annu Rev Neurosci. 2000;23:155-184.
- 174. De Ridder D, Fransen H, Francois O, Sunaert S, Kovacs S, Van  de  HP . Amygdalohippocampal  involvement  in  tinnitus and auditory memory. Acta Otolaryngol Suppl. 2006;50-53.
- 175. Muhlau M, Rauschecker JP , Oestreicher E, et al. Structural brain changes in tinnitus. Cereb Cortex. 2006;16:1283-1288.
- 176. Mahlke  C,  Wallhausser-Franke  E.  Evidence  for  tinnitus -related plasticity in the auditory and limbic system, demonstrated by arg3.1 and c-fos immunocytochemistry. Hear Res. 2004;195:17-34.
- 177. Konorski J. Conditioned Reflexes and Neuronal Organization. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; 1948.
- 178. Konorski J. Integrative activity of the brain. Chicago: University of Chicago Press; 1967.
- 179. Thompson  RF,  Donegan  NH.  Learning  and  memory.  In: Adelman G, ed. Encyclopedia of Neuroscience. Boston, MA: Birkhauser; 1987:571-574.
- 180. Koechlin E, Basso G, Pietrini P , Panzer S, Grafman J. The role  of  the  anterior  prefrontal  cortex  in  human  cognition. Nature. 1999;399:148-151.
- 181. Hazell  JWP ,  Sheldrake  JB.  Hyperacusis  and  tinnitus.  In: Aran  J-M,  Dauman  R,  eds. Tinnitus  91.  Proceedings  IV
- International  Tinnitus  Seminar,  Bordeaux,  France,  1991. Amsterdam: Kugler Publications; 1992:245-248.
- 182. Hazell  JWP . Tinnitus  masking  therapy.  In:  Hazell  JWP ,  ed. Tinnitus. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone; 1987:96-117.
- 183. Formby C, Sherlock LP , Gold SL. Adaptive plasticity of loudness induced by chronic attenuation and enhancement of the acoustic background. J Acoust Soc Am. 2003;114:55-58.
- 184. Formby C, Sherlock LP , Gold SL. Adaptive plasticity of loudness induced by chronic attenuation and enhancement of the acoustic background. J Acoust Soc Am. 2003;114:55-58.
- 185. Munro KJ, Blount J. Adaptive plasticity in brainstem of adult listeners following earplug-induced deprivation. J Acoust Soc Am. 2009;126:568-571.
- 186. Hebert S, Fournier P , Norena A. The auditory sensitivity is increased in tinnitus ears. J Neurosci. 2013;33:2356-2364.
- 187. Gold SL, Formby C, Frederick EA, Suter C. Shifts in loudness discomfort level in tinnitus patients with and without hyperacusis. In: Patuzzi R, ed. Proceedings of the VIIth International Tinnitus Seminar, 2002, Fremantle, Western Australia. Fremantle. Western Australia:  Physiology  Department, The University of Western Australia; 2002:170-172.
- 188. McKinney CJ, Hazell JWP , Graham RL. Changes in loudness discomfort level and sensitivity to environmental sound with habituation based therapy. In: Hazell JWP , ed. Proceedings of the Sixth International Tinnitus Seminar, 1999, Cambridge, UK. London, UK: THC; 1999:499-501.
- 189. Norena AJ, Chery-Croze S. Enriched acoustic environment rescales auditory sensitivity. NeuroReport. 2007;18:1251-1255.
- 190. Formby  C.  Hyperacusis  and  related  sound  tolerance  complains: differential diagnosis, treatment effects, and models. Semin Hear. 2007;28:227-259.
- 191. Formby  C,  Gold  SL.  Modification  of  loudness  discomfort level:  evidence  for  adaptive  chronic  auditory  gain  and  its clinical relevance. Semin Hear. 2002;23:21-34.
- 192. Ehrenberger K, Felix D, Svozil K. Stochastic resonance  in  cochlear  signal  transduction. Acta  Otolaryngol. 1999;119:166-170.
- 193. Jaramillo  F,  Wiesenfeld  K.  Mechanoeletrical  transduction assisted by Brownian motion: a role for noise in the auditory system. Nat Neurosci. 1998;1:384-388.
- 194. Morse RP , Evans EF. Enhancement of vowel coding for cochlear implants by addition of noise. Nat Med. 1996;2:928-932.
- 195. McKinney  CJ,  Hazell  JWP ,  Graham  RL. An  evaluation  of the  TRT  method.  In:  Hazell  JWP ,  ed. Proceedings  of  the Sixth International Tinnitus Seminar, 1999, Cambridge, UK. London, UK: THC; 1999:99-105.
- 196. Jastreboff PJ, Jastreboff MM. Tinnitus and Decreased Sound Tolerance: Theory and Treatment. In: Huges G, Pensak M, eds. Clinical Otology. 3rd ed. New  Y ork, NY: Thieme Medical Publishers, Inc.; 2007.
- 197. Jastreboff  PJ.  Categories  of  the  patients  and  the  treatment outcome.  In:  Hazell  JWP ,  ed. Proceedings  of  the  Sixth International Tinnitus Seminar, 1999, Cambridge, UK. London, UK: THC; 1999:394-398.
- 198. Herraiz  C,  Hernandez  FJ,  Plaza  G,  De  los  SG.  Long-term clinical trial of tinnitus retraining therapy. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2005;133:774-779.
- 199. Seydel  C,  Haupt  H,  Szczepek  AJ,  Klapp  BF,  Mazurek  B. Long-term  improvement  in  tinnitus  after  modified  tinnitus retraining  therapy  enhanced  by  a  variety  of  psychological approaches. Audiol Neurootol. 2010;15:69-80.
- 200. Heitzmann T, Rubio L, Cardenas MR, Zofio E. The importance  of  continuity  in  TRT  patients:  results  at  18  months. In:  Hazell  JWP ,  ed. Proceedings  of  the  Sixth  International Tinnitus Seminar, 1999, Cambridge, UK. London, UK: THC; 1999:509-511.
- 201. Sheldrake JB, Hazell JWP , Graham RL. Results of tinnitus retraining  therapy.  In:  Hazell  JWP ,  ed. Proceedings  of  the Sixth International Tinnitus Seminar, 1999, Cambridge, UK. London, UK: THC; 1999:292-296.
- 202. Bauer CA, Brozoski TJ. Effect of tinnitus retraining therapy on the loudness and annoyance of tinnitus: a controlled trial. Ear Hear. 2011;32:145-155.
- 203. Beriat  GK,  Ezerarslan  H, Akmansu  SH,  et  al.  Comparison of efficacy of different treatment  methods  in  the  treatment of idiopathic tinnitus. Kulak Burun Bogaz Ihtis Derg. 2011;21:145-153.
- 204. Oishi N, Shinden S, Kanzaki S, Saito H, Inoue Y, Ogawa K. Effects of tinnitus retraining therapy involving monaural noise generators. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2013;270:443-448.
- 205. Formby  C,  Scherer  R.  Rationale  for  the  tinnitus  retraining therapy trial. Noise Health. 2013;15:134-142.

- 206. Bartnik G, Stepien A, Raj-Koziak D, Fabijanska A, Niedzialek I, Skarzynski H. Troublesome tinnitus in children: epidemiology, audiological profile, and preliminary results of treatment. Int J Pediatr. 2012;2012:945356.
- 207. Parazzini M, Del BL, Jastreboff M, Tognola G, Ravazzani P. Open ear hearing aids in tinnitus therapy: an fficacy    comparison  with  sound  generators. e Int  J  Audiol. 2011;50:548-553.
- 208. Molini E, Faralli M, Calenti C, Ricci G, Longari F, Frenguelli A. Personal experience with tinnitus retraining therapy. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2009;267:51-56.
- 209. Forti  S,  Costanzo  S,  Crocetti  A,  Pignataro  L,  Del  BL, Ambrosetti U. Are results of tinnitus retraining therapy maintained  over  time?  18-month  follow-up  after  completion  of therapy. Audiol Neurootol. 2009;14:286-289.
- 210. Baracca  GN,  Forti  S,  Crocetti  A,  et  al.  Results  of  TRT after eighteen months: our experience. Int J Audiol. 2007;46:217-22.
- 211. Lux-Wellenhof  G,  Hellweg  FC.  Longterm  follow  up  study of TRT in Frankfurt. In: Patuzzi R, ed. Proceedings of the Seventh International Tinnitus Seminar. Perth, Australia: The University of Western Australia; 2002:277-279.
- 212. Vernon J, Press L. Treatment for hyperacusis. In: Vernon JA, ed. Tinnitus Treatment and Relief. 1st ed. Boston, MA: Allyn and Bacon; 1998:223-227.
- 213. Formby C, Hawley M, Sherlock LP , et  al.  Intervention  for restricted dynamic  range  and  reduced  sound  tolerance: Clinical trial using a Tinnitus Retraining Therapy protocol for hyperacusis. J Acoust Soc Am. 2013;133(5):3382-3383.
- 214. Jastreboff  MM.  Sound  therapies  for  tinnitus  management. In: Langguth B, Hajak G, Kleinjung T, Cacace A, Moller A, eds. Tinnitus:  Pathophysiology  and  Treatment. Amsterdam: Elsevier; 2007:449-454.