Treatments for Decreased Sound Tolerance
(Hyperacusis and Misophonia)
Pawel J. Jastreboff, Ph.D., Sc.D.1and Margaret M. Jastreboff, Ph.D.2
ABSTRACT
Decreased sound tolerance (DST) is an underappreciated
condition that affects the lives of a signiﬁcant portion of the general
population. There is lack of agreement regarding deﬁnitions, speciﬁccomponents, prevalence, methods of evaluation, and methods of
treatment. Limited data are available on the results of treatments.
Research is scant and constrained by the lack of an animal model. Thisarticle proposes a deﬁnition of DST and its division into hyperacusis and
misophonia. The potential mechanisms of these phenomena are out-
lined, and the results of treatment performed at Emory University arepresented. Out of 201 patients with DST, 165 (82%) showed signiﬁcant
improvement. Of 56 patients with hyperacusis (with or without
misophonia), 45 (80%) showed signiﬁcant improvement. This propor-tion was higher for the group with hyperacusis and concurrent
misophonia (33 of 39, or 85%) and lower for patients with hyperacusis
only (13 of 17, or 76%). Effectiveness of treatment for misophonia withor without hyperacusis was identical (152 of 184, 83% and 139 of 167,
83%, respectively, for misophonia accompanied by hyperacusis and for
misophonia only). Even with current limited knowledge of DST, it ispossible to propose speciﬁc mechanisms of hyperacusis and misophonia
and, based on these mechanisms, to offer treatments in accordance with
the neurophysiological model of tinnitus. These treatments are part ofTinnitus Retraining Therapy (TRT), which is aimed at concurrently
treating tinnitus and DST and alleviating the effects of hearing loss.
High effectiveness of the proposed treatments support the postulatedmechanisms.
KEYWORDS: Decreased sound tolerance, hyperacusis,
misophonia, deﬁnitions, treatment
1Department of Otolaryngology, Emory University School
of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia;2JHDF, Inc., Columbia,
Maryland.
Address for correspondence: Pawel J. Jastreboff, Ph.D.,
Sc.D., Department of Otolaryngology, Emory University
School of Medicine, 550 Peachtree St. NE, Medical OfﬁceTower 11th Floor, Suite 1130, Atlanta, GA 30308
(e-mail: pjastre@emory.edu).Tinnitus, Hyperacusis, and Misophonia; Guest Editors,
Diane F. Duddy, Au.D. and Laura A. Flowers, Au.D.
Semin Hear 2014;35:105–120. Copyright #2014 by
Thieme Medical Publishers, Inc., 333 Seventh Avenue,
New York, NY 10001, USA. Tel: +1(212) 584-4662.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1055/s-0034-1372527.ISSN 0734-0451.
105This document was downloaded for personal use only. Unauthorized distribution is strictly prohibited.

Learning Outcomes: As a result of this activity, the participant will be able to (1) classify subsets of
decreased sound tolerance; (2) list potential mechanisms for hyperacusis and misophonia.
Most people have preferences regarding
speciﬁc sounds or the level of sound, but these
preferences do not affect their everyday livesand interaction with others. Nevertheless, a
signiﬁcant number of people have negative
reactions such as irritation, tension, anxiety,or fear of ordinary sounds that, in turn, nega-
tively affect their lives. Individuals with de-
creased sound tolerance (DST) are unable totolerate everyday sounds that do not bother
other people. Interestingly, the sounds that
evoke negative responses in these individuals(see Table 1) are not necessarily loud (e.g.,
power tools or low-ﬂying planes) or moderate
(e.g., electric shaver or average ofﬁce sounds).Indeed, some individuals may be affected by
soft sounds, such as breathing or chewing. For
many years, DST was underestimated andtherefore not fully investigated. Perhaps this
was because affected individuals sought help
from clinicians with a variety of specialtiesincluding otology, neurology, psychiatry, psy-
chology, audiology, and occupational therapy.
As a result, DST had no research home ortreatment.
DST can be present with different levels of
severity and may not necessarily require inter-vention and treatment. This text focuses on
clinically signiﬁcant DST (i.e., DST that both-
ers the individual to the extent that he or shewants to alleviate it).
Individuals affected by DST can be divided
into two distinct groups: (1) Patients whorespond consistently to sounds above a certain
intensity; their reactions can be correlated with
the physical parameters of the sound. Thesepatients are diagnosed with hyperacusis . (2)
Patients who react to speciﬁc patterns of sound
and/or react to sound that occurs in speciﬁcsituations or settings whereas tolerating other
sounds that are frequently much louder. These
patients are diagnosed with misophonia .A l -
though the same sounds may be reported to
induce identical reactions in both groups of
patients, the treatment of hyperacusic andmisophonic patients is quite distinct and there-
fore they require careful diagnosis.
DEFINITIONS
Over the years, various terms have been used to
describe oversensitivity to ordinary sounds that
induce negative reactions. These terms includehyperacusis ,recruitment ,hyperacousia ,auditory
hyperesthesia ,dysacousis ,auditory dysesthesia ,ody-
nacusis ,auditory allodynia ,phonophobia ,in-
creased noise sensitivity ,collapsed tolerance level ,
and decreased sound tolerance , with the term
hyperacusis used most frequently.
1–3These
terms have not been precisely deﬁned. Based
on the literature and our accumulated knowl-
edge from clinical practice, we proposed todeﬁne DST as present when a subject exhibits
negative reactions following exposure to sound
that would not evoke the same response in an
average listener.
2,4,5We also postulated that
DST consists of two components: hyperacusisand misophonia, which frequently coexist.
Hyperacusis, the ﬁrst component of DST,
is present when negative reactions to a sounddepend only on its physical characteristics (i.e.,
its spectrum and intensity). The sound’s mean-
ing and the context in which it occurs areirrelevant. In turn, this implies that the mech-
anisms responsible for the emergence of hyper-
acusis are within the subconscious part of theauditory pathways.
2,4,5For example, a patient
will react identically to the sound of a knife
hitting china in anysituation or setting. This
individual also will react negatively to all other
high-intensity sounds.
The second component of DST, misopho-
nia, is present when an abnormally strong
reaction occurs to a sound with a speciﬁc pattern
and/or meaning to an individual.4,5The reac-
tion may depend on the environment where the
offensive sound is presented. The physical
characteristics of the sound are secondary. In-deed, the strength of the misophonic patient’s
reaction is only partially determined by the106 SEMINARS IN HEARING/VOLUME 35, NUMBER 2 2014
This document was downloaded for personal use only. Unauthorized distribution is strictly prohibited.

sound’s physical characteristics. Frequently, a
person with misophonia will respond stronglyto a soft sound of a speciﬁc pattern (e.g., a voice,
the sounds of eating), but not react to other,
much louder sounds (e.g., loud music). Fur-thermore, the individual may react to a given
sound in one setting (such as in his or her home)
but not react to the same sound in another
setting (such as in the home of a friend). The
patient’s negative reaction to the sound depends
on nonauditory factors such as his or herprevious evaluation of the sound, on the belief
that the sound is a potential threat, or that
exposure to it will be harmful. The sound maybe associated with a previous negative experi-
ence.
2–5The patient’s psychological proﬁle and
the context in which the sound occurs areimportant as well.
2,4,5
A speciﬁc category of misophonia called
phonophobia occurs when the patient’s fear ofTable 1 Sounds that Evoke Negative
Reactions as Reported by Patients/C3
Loud rings (phone, doorbell)
School bell
Announcements in a metro, train station, airport, orsupermarket
Announcement on airplane or train
Train on a track, particularly under bridgeLow-ﬂying airplanes
Street sounds
Sound of car brakes or bicycle brakesSounds of driving on street or highway
Dogs barking
Warning sounds (e.g., sirens, car horns, beepers)Slamming doors
Sudden sounds (e.g., object dropped on a hard
surface)Sounds of surgical instruments in an operating room
Sounds of a dental procedure
DrillingPower tools
Mechanical/motor sounds
Leaf blower, lawnmowersSwimming pool pump
Shoveling cement
Movie theaters, concertsSocial gatherings, parties
Restaurants, pubs, bars, nightclubs
School breaks, cafeteriasSporting events
Church services
TV, radio with volume set by family member withnormal hearing
Other people singing
A musical instrument
Vacuum cleaner
Boiling waterSound of a refrigerator
Utensils hitting china
Cutlery and platesLoading dishes in dishwasher
Garbage disposal
Popping popcornSupermarket freezer
Grocery stores
Shopping mallsCrinkly bags
Crumpling or wrinkling paper
Hum of electricityHum of a computerOfﬁce sounds (typing on a keyboard, printers, copymachine, fax)
Other people’s headphones
One’s own voiceSpeciﬁc type of laughter
Children’s voices
Screaming, crying babiesHigh-pitched voices
Snifﬁng
Other person breathing in bed, snoringOther people breathing
Lip smacking
Sounds of eatingSwallowing
Chewing
Crunching soundClipping and ﬁling ﬁngernails
Toothbrush
Electric shaverHair dryer
Flushing toilet
Keys rattlingMoving hand on a surface
Chalk on a blackboard
Sound of drawing with a felt-tipped penCat walking on a hardwood ﬂoor
/C3From various texts.3,5,21Note that sounds such as bird
song, running water, wind, and rain are rarely reported
as negative.21DECREASED SOUND TOLERANCE/ JASTREBOFF AND JASTREBOFF 107
This document was downloaded for personal use only. Unauthorized distribution is strictly prohibited.

sound is the dominant emotion.2,4,5Phono-
phobia is recognized in clinical psychology,
where it is treated the same way as other typesof sensory phobias, and in neurology, where it is
one of the symptoms associated with migraines
and treated as part of a chronic neurologicaldisorder characterized by recurrent headaches.
The concept of misophonia was created in
2001, after 10 years of clinical work withpatients with tinnitus and what we believed
at the time was hyperacusis, when we recog-
nized the presence of the two subgroups ofpatients with DST. Patients who reacted neg-
atively to speciﬁc patterns of sound did not
improve as well as hyperacusic patients toclassical sound desensitization treatment. In
introducing a new categorization of patients
with DST, including a new concept and aspeciﬁc term to describe patients who reacted
in a negative manner to speciﬁc patterns of
sound, we combined the word miso (meaning
hate in Greek) to represent patients’ strong
negative attitudes with the term phonia (mean-
ing voice, sound )t of o r mt h et e r m misopho-
nia.
4,6Obviously, it is incorrect to translate
misophonia literally as hatred or dislike of
sound, just as it would be incorrect to translatephotography to mean light drawing. Unfortu-
nately, such an incorrect interpretation has
been made in the literature. There are patientswho exhibit a general dislike of sound, typically
combined with phonophobia, but they are rare.
Although the term misophonia was intro-
duced in the literature in 2002
4and described
in the following years,2,3,7,8in January 2013,
Schro¨der et al redeﬁned misophonia based on
their work in a psychiatric center and proposed
to classify the condition as a new psychiatric
disorder.9In our opinion, Schro ¨der studied a
population of psychiatric patients who hap-
pened to have misophonia as well. In our
clinical work, we have seen several hundredmisophonic patients (compared with 42 cases
reported by Schro ¨der), all evaluated by physi-
cians, and in only a few cases did patientsexhibit psychiatric problems. Moreover, our
misophonic patients showed signiﬁcant im-
provement when treated with a combinationof counseling and a speciﬁc version of sound
therapy (described later) without any need for
psychiatric intervention.PREVALENCE OF DST
Information on the prevalence of DST is vague.
There is a lack of agreement on terminology anddeﬁnitions, and even on how such an evaluation
should be performed. No validated question-
naire exists to detect the presence of DST. Somereports indicate high prevalence; for example,
data obtained from 10,349 randomly selected
subjects showed that 15.3% reported DST.
10
Other authors reported lower prevalence.11–13
There is general agreement that with regard to
hyperacusis, pure tone loudness discomfort levels(LDLs) must have decreased values. That being
said, there is no consensus on how LDLs should be
evaluated and, indeed, a variety of methods havebeen proposed.
14–18Furthermore, LDLs are not
typically part of a routine audiological evaluation.
Importantly, low LDLs by themselves do notprove the presence of hyperacusis as low values
may be due to misophonia. A careful inspection of
publications reveals that, in some cases, misopho-nia rather than hyperacusis was present, such as in
reports on Williams syndrome.
19,20
On the basis of the tinnitus literature, for
which more detailed data are available, it is
possible to estimate the prevalence of DST in
the general population. Results from the EmoryTinnitus and Hyperacusis Center indicate /C2460%
of patients with tinnitus examined have signiﬁ-
cant DST.
4Results from other clinicians and
researchers show that /C2425 to 30% of patients with
tinnitus have hyperacusis that requires treat-
ment.3,4,21–24In addition, it has been reported
that 86% of patients with hyperacusis suffer from
tinnitus.25By accepting an average prevalence of
clinically signiﬁcant tinnitus reported in the liter-ature as 4%,
26it is possible to calculate that
clinically signiﬁcant hyperacusis is present in
/C241.75% of the general population. As our data
indicate, hyperacusis is present in about half of
patients with DST, and the prevalence of DST in
the general population can be estimated to be3.5%. Because our data indicate 92% of patients
w i t hD S Th a v em i s o p h o n i a ,t h ep r e v a l e n c eo f
misophonia in the general population can beestimated at 3.2%.
PRESUMED MECHANISMS
The mechanisms associated with the emergence
of DST, and how negative reactions to sound108 SEMINARS IN HEARING/VOLUME 35, NUMBER 2 2014
This document was downloaded for personal use only. Unauthorized distribution is strictly prohibited.

develop, are hypothetical and none of the
proposed mechanisms have been proven. The
lack of an established animal model of hyper-acusis makes it difﬁcult to assess the validity of
the proposed mechanisms. Both peripheral and
central mechanisms have been postulated.
3,27,28
The impact of stress on the peripheral and
central auditory system involving dynorphins
has been proposed,29as has the involvement of
serotonin.30,31Dynorphins are a class of opioid
peptides that have been shown to be involved in
modulating pain response, addiction to cocaine,stress and depression, appetite and circadian
rhythms, and temperature regulation. Minimal
experimental and clinical support exists to sup-port either proposition.
Another proposed mechanism involves
dysfunction of the efferent olivocochlear sys-tems,
32,33which have an inhibitory action on
the outer hair cell (OHC) and inner hair cell
(IHC) systems. The available data argue againstthis hypothesis in the following ways. Record-
ings of otoacoustic emissions in hyperacusis
patients have not revealed enhanced emissions,thereby arguing against overampliﬁcation pro-
vided by the cochlear ampliﬁer. Importantly,
the possibility of involvement of the efferentolivocochlear bundles can be excluded due to
the observation that severance of the vestibular
nerve in humans, within which all efferentolivocochlear ﬁbers are contained, has no im-
pact on DST
34nor on auditory performance.35
In analyzing the potential mechanisms of
hyperacusis and misophonia, it is essential to
consider the following. First, the negative re-
actions induced by hyperacusis and misophoniaare identical and it is impossible to distinguish
between the two conditions on that basis. We
can imply, however, that common brain systemsare responsible for the negative reactions
evoked by hyperacusis and misophonia and
that these reactions (see Table 2) argue forthe dominant role played by the limbic and
autonomic nervous systems. Other systems in
the brain are involved, but are secondary.
Second, the differentiating factor between
the two conditions is that for hyperacusis the
physical characterization of the offendingsound is sufﬁcient to assess the other sounds
that would create a problem, whereas for mi-
sophonia the speciﬁc pattern of sound, itsmeaning, and the situation in which it occurs
play a predominant role. Therefore, the reac-
tions depend on the misophonic’s past history
and on the association of the sound withsomething negative. Taken together, these facts
suggest that although the negative reactions to
sound are identical, the mechanisms yieldingthese reactions are different for hyperacusis and
misophonia.
In cases of clinically signiﬁcant DST, a
sound evokes the overactivation of the limbic
and autonomic nervous systems. Taking into
account the factors listed previously, it is possi-ble to consider two different scenarios leading
to such a state. In one scenario, when the sound
reaches the cochlea it is overampliﬁed exclu-sively within the auditory system, (1) during the
transduction process performed by the IHCs
and OHCs or (2) at a higher level of thesubconscious part of the auditory path-
ways.
2,3,36In the second scenario, the auditory
system works normally, but functional connec-tions between the auditory system and the
limbic and autonomic nervous systems are
enhanced.Table 2 Negative Reactions Frequently
Reported by Patients with DST
Irritation
Annoyance
AngerTension
Frustration
Urge to escape (run)Urge to cry
Feeling of physical pain
Feeling of being restrained in doing thingsFeeling uncomfortable (discomfort)
Inability to concentrate
Inability to enjoy things, particularly involving louderor speciﬁc sounds
Increased awareness of sounds (forced to monitor
sounds)Fear of sounds
Emotional distress
UneasinessWorry
Stress
DST, decreased sound tolerance.DECREASED SOUND TOLERANCE/ JASTREBOFF AND JASTREBOFF 109
This document was downloaded for personal use only. Unauthorized distribution is strictly prohibited.

At the peripheral level of the auditory
pathways, it is possible to envision enhanced
activity of the OHCs that would result in theoverstimulation of IHCs or the enhanced re-
lease of neurotransmitters from the IHCs.
2,3,36
Available data, however, argue against a domi-
nant peripheral mechanism for DST. For ex-
ample, clinical observations show the nearly
universal dominance of bilateral, symmetricalhyperacusis,
24which suggests the central mech-
anism as dominant. In other words, as in the
case of cochlear dysfunction, there should becases of clear unilateral hyperacusis. Further-
more, if overampliﬁcation of the OHCs was
present, then a high level of distortion productotoacoustic emissions should be observed,
which is not the case.
Research and available clinical data men-
tioned later support the involvement of the
central part of the auditory pathways in DST.
As is the case for all other sensory systems, theauditory system works according to the dynam-
ic balance principle, where the gain on the
system is modiﬁed depending on the inputlevel. Thus, when the sound level is low, the
sensitivity and gain of the auditory system
increases. Animal research has shown thatdamage to the cochlea or a decrease in auditory
input yields a corresponding decrease of the
response threshold in a signiﬁcant proportionof neurons in the ventral cochlear nucleus and
inferior colliculus.
37These ﬁndings have been
corroborated by a study of evoked potentials,which indicated an abnormal increase of gain in
the auditory pathways after such manipula-
tions.
38The hypothesis of increased gain with-
in the central part of the auditory pathways has
been discussed and promoted in recent ap-
proaches to the mechanisms of tinnitus andhyperacusis.
39
In the previously mentioned scenario, the
auditory system alone would be involved withno corresponding evaluation of the sound’s
meaning and without regard to memory, previ-
ous exposure (which would involve other brainsystems), or emotional status. The patient’s
reactions would be determined solely by the
physical characterization of the sound (i.e., itsspectrum and intensity). When this behavior is
observed in patients with DST, we diagnose
them as having hyperacusis.In misophonia, patients react to speciﬁc
patterns of sound (soft or loud sounds), but do
not have problems with other, even loudersounds. This observation demonstrates that
the mechanism for misophonia is not within
the auditory pathways, but in functional con-nections of the auditory pathways with other
systems in the brain. The neurophysiological
model of tinnitus can be used to explain themechanisms of misophonia as well as to delin-
eate the differences between the mechanisms of
hyperacusis and misophonia.
THE NEUROPHYSIOLOGICAL
MODEL OF TINNITUS AS A BASIS
FOR PROPOSED MECHANISMS OF
HYPERACUSIS AND MISOPHONIAAND THEIR TREATMENT
The fundamental principle of the neurophysio-
logical model of tinnitus is that in cases ofclinically signiﬁcant tinnitus or DST, several
brain systems are dominant other than the
auditory system. Furthermore, the activationof these other systems is responsible for the
negative emotional and autonomic reactions
evoked by these conditions. Analysis of thesereactions points to the essential involvement of
the limbic and autonomic nervous systems.
In cases of hyperacusis, it is proposed that
the problem results from abnormally high am-
pliﬁcation occurring within the auditory path-
ways, which, in turn, results in the stimulationof the limbic and autonomic nervous systems
(Fig. 1A). Consequently, the neuronal activity
evoked by exposure to (for example) a 70-dBhearing level (HL) sound in a patient with
hyperacusis is similar to activity evoked in an
individual without hyperacusis, following ex-posure to a 120-dB HL sound. In the same way
that such a level of activity would evoke an
aversive negative reaction in a normal subject,negative reactions would be evoked in a hyper-
acusis patient who is stimulated by a 70-dB HL
sound. Note, for hyperacusis, the functionalproperties of the connections between the au-
ditory system and the limbic and autonomic
nervous systems are normal and the strongreaction of these systems reﬂects a high level
of input to the limbic and autonomic nervous
systems coming from the auditory system.110 SEMINARS IN HEARING/VOLUME 35, NUMBER 2 2014
This document was downloaded for personal use only. Unauthorized distribution is strictly prohibited.

The situation is dramatically different in
cases of misophonia (Fig. 1B). In these cases,
the auditory system works normally. However,the functional connections between the audito-
ry and the limbic and autonomic nervous sys-
tems are enhanced for speciﬁc patterns of
sound.
2–5These connections involve the con-
scious, cognitive part and the subconscious
path, with the subconscious path governed bythe principle of conditioned reﬂexes. Our re-
sults indicate that the subconscious connections
play a dominant role in overactivating thelimbic and autonomic nervous systems.
40As a
result, even if a subject fully understands a given
sound is not dangerous or threatening, strongnegative reactions are still evoked.
The proposed mechanisms of misophonia
were recently supported by the results of physi-ological investigations by Edelstein et al.
41The
authors found experimental evidence that mi-
sophonia produces distinct autonomic effects,and suggested that the mechanisms of miso-
phonia concern aberrant functional connections
between the auditory and limbic systems. Fur-thermore, the overactivation of the autonomic
nervous system may, in turn, activate the tensor
tympani muscle,
5,7resulting in tensor tympani
syndrome (e.g., fullness, pulsation, pain in the
ear).42The presence of tensor tympani syn-
drome can be documented by measuring im-mittance over a 30- to 60-second period.
Tensor tympani syndrome is frequently ob-
served in patients with severe misophonia andtreatment of misophonia results in its
elimination.
4,5
The concept of a complex conditioned
stimulus43plays an important role in misopho-
nia. Behavioral neuroscience has documented
that reaction to a stimulus occurs as a whole,and not to its individual components. A classic
example has been described in the case of a
tinnitus patient.
36The patient perceived tinni-
tus as a hissing sound that was highly intrusive
during the day and markedly affected his con-
centration and life. Paradoxically, although thepatient had difﬁculty sleeping at night prior to
developing tinnitus, his sleep improved after he
had tinnitus. A detailed interview revealed hehad a happy, carefree childhood and that the
sound of his tinnitus was similar to the loud
hissing sound produced by a water cistern in hisattic bedroom that he heard as he drifted off to
sleep. At bedtime, the similarity of the patient’s
tinnitus to the water cistern, in combinationwith the darkness and other factors he associat-
ed with going to sleep, created a complex
stimulus that the patient perceived as positiveand relaxing. On the other hand, the patient’s
tinnitus was highly intrusive during the day.
Thus, the patient’s tinnitus evoked oppositereactions depending on the copresence of other
stimuli, which created the complex stimulus.
Similarly, for misophonia the environment
may play a signiﬁcant role and the patient may
react to the same sound differently depending
on the context and setting in which the sound is
Figure 1 Block diagram of potential mechanisms responsible for decreased sound tolerance (DST). (A) Block
diagram of potential mechanisms responsible for hyperacusis. Hyperacusis results from abnormal ampliﬁca-tion of sound-evoked activity occurring within the auditory pathways (marked by black lines). (B) Block diagram
of potential mechanisms responsible for misophonia. Misophonia results from enhanced functional
connections between the auditory and the limbic and autonomic nervous systems for a speciﬁc pattern ofsound-evoked activity (marked by black lines). Note overampliﬁcation of the limbic and autonomic system
occurring in both conditions and marked by cross pattern. (Modiﬁed from Jastreboff and Jastreboff
3).DECREASED SOUND TOLERANCE/ JASTREBOFF AND JASTREBOFF 111
This document was downloaded for personal use only. Unauthorized distribution is strictly prohibited.

heard. The purposeful creation of a complex
conditioned stimulus, with the offensive sound
as its component, is used in one of the protocolsto treat misophonia, as discussed later.
For hyperacusis and misophonia, the ex-
tent of a patient’s reaction to sound will dependon his or her emotional status and the coexis-
tence of factors that induce a negative emotion-
al state (e.g., pain, a vestibular problem, etc.).These factors directly affect the limbic and
autonomic nervous systems, the centers respon-
sible for inducing a negative reaction, andincrease their sensitivity and reactivity
(Fig. 1A and 1B).
EVALUATION OF HYPERACUSIS
AND MISOPHONIAThere is lack of agreement as well as signiﬁcant
confusion regarding how to evaluate DST (see
the previous discussion of LDL measurement),assess its severity, and discriminate between the
presence and relative contribution of hyper-
acusis and misophonia. Only two question-naires have been published that assess the
extent of hyperacusis: the Hyperacusis Ques-
tionnaire
44and the Multiple-Activity Scale for
Hyperacusis (MASH).45
There are some concerns regarding the
speciﬁcity and selectivity of these question-naires. The Hyperacusis Questionnaire was
created by testing the general population of
subjects who did notcomplain of hyperacusis.
The questionnaire primarily focuses on the
psychological and social aspects of hearing
rather than on hyperacusis per se. Indeed,only 4 of 14 questions are related to hyperacusis
whereas the remaining questions are related to
other aspects of hearing, including hearing loss(for example, “5. Do you have difﬁculty listen-
ing to conversations in noisy places?”).
44The
MASH questionnaire consists of a list of 14activities, and respondents are asked to indicate
their level of annoyance related to a given
activity on a scale from 0 to 10.
45Although
both questionnaires have been reported to be
effective in evaluating hyperacusis, interesting-
ly, there was no correlation of their scores withaudiological measurements of discomfort levels
such as the LDL test and a speech discomfort
level assessment.
45Therefore, these question-naires need to be further evaluated. Notably,
neither questionnaire differentiates between
hyperacusis and misophonia. There is no pub-lished, validated questionnaire for misophonia.
The approach we are using to evaluate
DST and its components, as well as to theadministration and evaluation of LDLs, is
based on published forms for structured initial
and follow-up interviews.
46Detailed instruc-
tions on how to apply these interviews have
been published.47The expanded interview is
crucial to assess DST. During this interview,stress is placed on identifying sounds that evoke
negative reactions in the patient as well as
sounds that are well tolerated. It is importantto check for the presence of any discrepancies
between the patient’s reactions and the intensity
of the sound. The existence of these discrep-ancies indicates the presence of misophonia.
There is a need to create a structured interview
and a questionnaire oriented to detect thepresence and assess the severity of misophonia.
LDLs are useful for evaluating the poten-
tial presence of hyperacusis. Normal LDLvalues ( /C24100-dB HL
18) exclude the presence
of hyperacusis. As low LDL values could be due
to misophonia, the presence of low values alonedoes not provide sufﬁcient proof that the pa-
tient has hyperacusis. Notably, hyperacusis and
misophonia frequently occur together. Indeed,misophonia is inevitable in cases of severe
hyperacusis, as the negative reaction evoked
by hyperacusis will provide negative reinforce-ment and create a conditioned reﬂex linking
speciﬁc sounds with something negative. Mi-
sophonia, however, does not inducehyperacusis.
LDL values reﬂect the contribution of
hyperacusis and misophonia. The goal is toobtain LDLs that reﬂect hyperacusis and mini-
mize the contribution of misophonia. Typically,
the misophonic component is enhanced bypatients’ concern that they will be exposed to
a loud sound that would make their tinnitus
and/or DST worse; unfortunately, this mayreﬂect the past experience of some patients.
To decrease the impact of misophonia on
LDLs, we promote a modiﬁcation of the stan-dard procedure for administering LDLs.
48Pa-
tients are given the full power to stop the LDL
test at any time. In addition, patients are112 SEMINARS IN HEARING/VOLUME 35, NUMBER 2 2014
This document was downloaded for personal use only. Unauthorized distribution is strictly prohibited.

presented with short beeps of sound separated
by a second or more of silence, so they have time
to think and decide if they will allow for afurther increase of the sound level.
3,49LDL
measurements are administered twice and the
second set of results is used to assess thepotential presence of hyperacusis. Note that
misophonic patients tend to have higher
LDL values during the second test. For exam-ple, the ﬁrst set of values may be 85-, 90-, 85-,
and 80-dB HL for 1, 3, 4, and 6 kHz, respec-
tively, and the second set may be 90-, 95-, 90-,and 90-dB HL, respectively.
In cases of pure hyperacusis, LDLs are in
the 60- to 85-dB HL range.
4In cases of pure
misophonia, LDL values as low as 30-dB HL to
as high as 120-dB HL can be observed. There-
fore, LDLs alone are insufﬁcient to diagnosehyperacusis or misophonia and a speciﬁc, de-
tailed interview is crucial to diagnose and assess
the relative contribution of hyperacusis andmisophonia to DST.
TREATMENT OF HYPERACUSIS
AND MISOPHONIA
There are very limited data in the literature onthe results of hyperacusis treatment. According
to anecdotal reports, treatment has taken two
opposite directions. The most common ap-proach is to advise patients to avoid sound
and use ear protection. This approach is based
on the reasoning that because patients becamesensitive to sound, they are supposedly more
susceptible to sound exposure and consequently
require extra protection. Patients readily em-brace this advice and begin to protect their ears,
even to the extent of using earplugs in quiet
environments. Unfortunately, this well-in-tended approach makes the auditory system
even more sensitive to sound and further ex-
acerbates hyperacusis.
13,50–53
The opposite approach to treating hyper-
acusis involves desensitization wherein patients
are exposed to a variety of sounds. The desen-sitization approach has been promoted for some
time with several protocols and types of sounds
used.
13For example, sounds with certain fre-
quencies removed, short exposure to moderate-
ly loud sound, or prolonged exposure to
relatively low-level sounds have beenused.13,54Pink noise therapy as proposed by
Vernon and Press has gained some recogni-
tion.13For this protocol, patients are advised to
stop overprotecting their ears and to listen to
pink noise through headphones set at the high-
est comfortable level for 2 hours a day. A groupof patients were provided with pink noise
cassette tapes, and questionnaires were mailed
to 30 participants. Of 20 patients who re-sponded, 13 reported using these tapes in a
systematic manner and 7 (54%) reported im-
provement in their hyperacusis.
13A version of
pink noise therapy also has been proposed
recently for tinnitus and hyperacusis by John-
son.55The protocol combines the use of pink
noise with a 16-week cognitive exercise pro-
gram, divided into sections and devoted to
different topics, such as recognition and relief.To date, no results have been published in the
peer-reviewed literature regarding the effec-
tiveness of this approach.
Medications have been recommended for
DST aimed at decreasing anxiety, depression,
and other negative reactions. Cognitive behavior-al therapy (CBT) has been proposed as well.
56
There are no reports in the literature showing thepositive effects of medication on DST (except formigraine) and there is limited information on the
efﬁcacy of CBT to treat DST.
57
In rare cases of hyperacusis, exposure to
normal, everyday sound can evoke vestibular
disturbances (e.g., sound-induced loss of bal-
ance, a feeling of motion sickness, nausea,vertigo, or dizziness). This is called the Tullio
phenomenon (sometimes vestibular hyperacusis ),
and it is one of the common symptoms ofsuperior canal dehiscence syndrome and may
be successfully treated by surgery.
As discussed previously, hyperacusis results
from enhanced gain within the auditory system,
particularly the central part of the auditory
pathways. The sensory systems work accordingto the principle of automatic gain control;
depending on the strength of the signal, the
sensitivity and gain changes continuously. Con-sequently, the lack of sensory input results in an
increase of gain within the auditory system,
yielding a corresponding enhancement of neu-ronal activity representing a sound, whereas
exposure to louder sound yields a decrease in
gain. Therefore, according to the principles ofDECREASED SOUND TOLERANCE/ JASTREBOFF AND JASTREBOFF 113
This document was downloaded for personal use only. Unauthorized distribution is strictly prohibited.

the neurophysiological model of tinnitus, as
well as the proposed mechanisms of hyper-
acusis, the systematic enhancement of the pa-tient’s auditory background should result in
decrease of the gain within the auditory path-
ways. Consequently, this approach is recom-mended and used as part of Tinnitus Retraining
Therapy (TRT).
IMPLEMENTATION
When TRT is used to treat hyperacusis, speciﬁccounseling is provided with the focus on the
proposed mechanisms of hyperacusis, auditory
toughening (i.e., preexposure to a nondamaginglevel of noise provides protection against loud
noise
58–60), and sound therapy.2,3Sound en-
richment can be achieved by various means,with tabletop sound machines and ear-level
sound devices (i.e., sound generators or combi-
nation devices that feature ampliﬁcation and asound generator) being most common. The
sound used in sound therapy for hyperacusis
cannot evoke annoyance or other problems forany reason, as the negative activation of the
limbic and autonomic nervous systems would
then occur, which, in turn, enhances condi-tioned reﬂexes and, as a consequence, enhances
negative reactions to sound.
The sound emitted by the wearable sound
generators should be set at or above a level
below which stochastic resonance (i.e., en-
hancement of the signal by adding low-levelbroadband noise) could be evoked (i.e., 6-dB
sensational level (SL) or higher).
61At the same
time, the sound should not be too high as tomake it difﬁcult to understand speech (above
20-dB SL). Stochastic resonance might en-
hance a loudness match of coexisting tinnitusby/C2410%,
61and anecdotal reports indicate the
possibility of inducing tinnitus in patients
treated with sound generators set close tothreshold of a patient hearing.
Our results show that, on average, hyper-
acusis patients use sound at /C249-dB SL (range
from 0 to 20 dB SL) as evaluated by real ear
measurement.
62There is no need to initially set
the sound to a lower level, nor are patients askedto change the sound level of the devices in a
systematic manner during treatment.
62In prac-
tical terms, it is recommended that patients usesound that is not annoying to them, even when
listening to the sound for many hours. At the
same time, patients should be able to easilynotice the sound when focusing their attention
on it. Patients may temporarily increase the
sound level when going to louder places.
Independent studies support the use of TRT
for the treatment of hyperacusis and have shown
that the desensitization approach used in TRThas a statistically and clinically signiﬁcant impact
on hyperacusis.
53,63It is possible to observe
signiﬁcant improvement in hyperacusis and im-provements in LDLs within a few months. In
some cases, it is possible to achieve a cure for and
elimination of hyperacusis.
As discussed previously, the mechanisms of
misophonia and hyperacusis are very different.
In the case of misophonia, because the auditorysystem works within the norm, the misophonic
component of DST cannot be removed by
classical desensitization therapy. A differentapproach must be used for misophonia that
includes speciﬁc counseling and therapy involv-
ing several speciﬁc protocols of sound use.
3–5,64
As misophonia results from enhanced function-
al connections between the auditory and the
limbic and autonomic nervous systems, whichare governed by principles of conditioned re-
ﬂexes, treatment for misophonia is aimed at
weakening and then removing these connec-tions using protocols appropriate for the extinc-
tion of conditioned reﬂexes. Speciﬁcally, the
active extinction of conditioned reﬂexes is per-formed by linking currently offensive sounds
with something positive. Note the similarity
between the mechanisms of misophonia andtinnitus. The difference is in the initial signal
(internally generated neuronal activity in the
case of tinnitus and neuronal activity evoked byan external sound for misophonia), but the
remaining proposed mechanisms are the
same. Consequently, treatment for misophoniausually takes a similar amount of time as the
treatment for tinnitus.
When hyperacusis and misophonia coexist,
offensive sound evokes the overactivation of
neuronal activity within the auditory pathways;
in turn, this signal is further enhanced whileconveyed to the limbic and autonomic nervous
systems via connections that are tuned to the
speciﬁc pattern of the sound. Clinical114 SEMINARS IN HEARING/VOLUME 35, NUMBER 2 2014
This document was downloaded for personal use only. Unauthorized distribution is strictly prohibited.

observations indicate that even when coexisting
hyperacusis is treated successfully, as shown by
changes in LDLs to normal values, the behav-ioral reactions of patients remain the same in
that patients do not perceive improvement.
Presumably, misophonia becomes even stron-ger, which keeps the strength of the negative
reactions the same.
For misophonic patients, the sound therapy
component includes the same recommendations
as for hyperacusis. However, speciﬁc additional
protocols for sound use are recommended.There are four classes of sound protocols for
misophonia and all of them contain a compo-
nent whereby positive associations are formedwith sound. The protocols differ in terms of the
extent of control the patient has over the
environment, the sounds used, and the lengthof exposure. Additionally, for protocol category
4, complex conditioned stimuli are created by
combining offensive sounds with sounds thathave highly positive connotations, and then
gradually modifying the relative levels of those
two types of sound. Notably, the protocol mustbe tailored to the individual. Frequently more
than one protocol is used concurrently.
Protocol category 1 provides the patient with
full control over the selection of sound used, its
level, and its duration.
4This protocol can be used
even in cases of coexisting signiﬁcant hyperacusisfrom the beginning of DST treatment.
When implementing this protocol, pa-
tients are asked to select a sound they likevery much and listen attentively to it once or
twice a day for 15 to 30 minutes each time.
Patients typically select music, but any favoritesound can be used such as an audiobook on CD
or a favorite TV show (particularly in the case of
children). In the following example, music willbe used. The speciﬁc music selected for a given
day can vary depending on what the patient
feels like listening to at a given moment. It isimportant that the patient listen attentively to
the music and is not involved in any other
activity that requires his or her attention (e.g.,the patient should not read a book at the same
time or drive a car). During the ﬁrst week, every
session begins with the patient selecting musicand then adjusting the sound level to achieve
maximum pleasure. During the second week,
the patient selects music he or she wants to hearand adjusts the sound level to a volume that is
optimal for listening pleasure. Before beginning
the listening session, the patient is then asked toincrease the volume by a just noticeable differ-
ence. In practice, the increase in volume will be
/C242 dB or a little more. During the third week,
the patient is asked to increase the initial
optimal level by 2 steps, which would yield a
volume increase of /C244t o5d B .
This protocol has two goals: (1) to create a
positive association wit h a favorite type of sound
and (2) to gradually increase the level of soundconsidered to be optimal. Due to the principle of
stimulus generalization, t he positive associations
that are formed will spread to include other,similar types of sound. This protocol is completely
safe, as the patient fully controls the type, level,
and duration of sound he or she is listening to.Protocol category 1 is not aimed at exposing the
patient to a variety of sounds or to offensive
sounds, but at creating a positive associationwith sound in general. In cases of coexisting
hyperacusis, this is the only protocol used.
Protocol category 2 also provides the pa-
tient with full control over the type of sound
used (e.g., music, movie, TV program), but only
partial, indirect control over the sound level. Inthis case, control is given to someone close to
the patient who is instructed to set the sound
volume to a level he or she thinks the patientwill accept. After a listening session, the patient
should provide feedback as to whether the
sound level was too high, too low, or justﬁne, so that the individual can adjust the level
for the next session.
The following example shows a movie
being used to implement this protocol. Patients
are asked to select one of their favorite movies
and watch it in its entirety on DVD (ordownload it from the Internet) one to two
times a week. Patients should select a movie
they feel like watching at a given time. Thesound level is set by somebody living with the
patient, but modiﬁed from session to session on
the basis of feedback from the patient. Patientswho use sound generators or combination de-
vices are advised to increase the sound level of
the generators before starting the movie.
3
This protocol also creates a positive associ-
ation with sound, but decreases the patient’s
direct control over the sound level. As theDECREASED SOUND TOLERANCE/ JASTREBOFF AND JASTREBOFF 115
This document was downloaded for personal use only. Unauthorized distribution is strictly prohibited.

average movie contains a variety of sounds,
patients will attain a more positive association
with several sounds because they are presentedwhile the patient is enjoying the movie.
Protocol category 3 enables the patient to
select the type of sound, but the sound level isoutside his or her control. This protocol is
aimed at exposing the patient to a variety of
sounds encountered in everyday life and there-fore going to a movie theater is recommended.
For some patients, it is recommended that they
go to shopping malls and gradually visit louderstores. This protocol is used only when signiﬁ-
cant hyperacusis is absent or has been eliminat-
ed by treatment. (Patients can always choose toleave a noisy environment when annoyed by
sound or for any other reason.)
When implementing this protocol, pa-
tients are asked to go to a movie theater once
or twice a week and select only their most
favorite movies. Patients who use sound gen-erators or combination devices are advised to
increase the sound level of the generators before
entering the movie theater. If the situationcauses strong discomfort, the patient should
leave the theater and return 10 to 15 minutes
later.
This protocol works similarly to protocol
category 2 but removes patients’ control over
the sound level to which they are exposed. Itcreates a positive association with a broad
variety of sounds even when some sounds are
presented at a typically high level.
Protocol category 4 is more complex and
addresses speciﬁcally offensive sounds. It imple-
ments the concept of complex conditionedstimuli, which are created by combining offen-
sive sounds with sounds that have highly posi-
tive connotations, and then gradually modifyingthe relative levels of the two types of sound.
Once the new complex stimulus is established,
the ratio of positive to negative sound is gradu-ally decreased. The environment where this
protocol is used must be taken into account,
as many patients react differently depending onwhere they are exposed to a bothersome sound
(i.e., home, school, a restaurant, a friend’s
home). Patients are advised to start with lessoffensive sounds and gradually work with more
challenging sounds and situations. For example,
if the sounds in a school cafeteria are lessbothersome to a patient than the sounds of
eating at home, the protocol should ﬁrst be
implemented at school. The multisensory aspectof stimuli also is taken into account as some
patients react even to seeing someone produce
offensive sounds (e.g., eating). Consequently,patients are advised to observe offensive situa-
tions while listening to highly positive sounds.
An example of implementation: Let’s as-
sume that a patient strongly reacts to the sounds
of eating when at home. In this case, the patient
is asked to select a highly favorable sound, suchas music he or she likes a lot. In the ﬁrst stage of
this protocol, before the meal, the patient is
asked to start playing the music at a level thatstill allows the offensive sounds to be heard. An
open-ﬁeld sound presentation is preferred, as
headphones or earbuds will isolate patientsfrom other people, but if the type of music or
its level is unacceptable to others, then head-
phones or earbuds are recommended, providedthe patient can still hear the offensive sounds.
Typically, it is recommended that the positive
sound should not mask the offensive sounds;however, full masking is permitted for a limited
time for those patients who exhibit an extremely
strong reaction to the offensive sounds.
After the patient follows this protocol for
1 week, and provided the newly created com-
plex stimulus has a positive or neutral connota-tion for the patient and is well tolerated, the
level of positive sound is gradually decreased
over a period of weeks to months.
Protocol category 4 is applied to all offen-
sive sounds; if it is difﬁcult to create a situation
with certain offensive sounds, the sounds can berecorded and played back to create the complex
stimulus described previously. Furthermore, to
facilitate treatment, stimuli from other sensorymodalities in addition to sound (i.e., vision,
taste, smell), which are associated with positive
emotions and have some connection with theoffensive sound, are introduced. For example, if
the crunching sound of a cookie as it is being
eaten is aversive to a patient but the patient likesto eat cookies, the smell of freshly baked cookies
is presented at the same time the crunching
sound is made.
Some “desensitization protocols” resemble
a simpliﬁed version of protocol category 4.
However, protocol category 4 appears to be116 SEMINARS IN HEARING/VOLUME 35, NUMBER 2 2014
This document was downloaded for personal use only. Unauthorized distribution is strictly prohibited.

more powerful and consistent in offering help
to patients even in challenging cases, such as for
autistic children, perhaps because it is based onspeciﬁc postulated neurophysiological mecha-
nisms and on well-established methods from
behavioral psychology.
43
RESULTS OF TREATMENT OFHYPERACUSIS AND MISOPHONIA
AT EMORY TINNITUS AND
HYPERACUSIS CENTERDetailed information was available for 201
consecutive patients diagnosed with DST. Of
these 201 patients, 184 (92%) exhibited miso-phonia; 17 patients (8%) had hyperacusis alone,
and 56 patients (28%) had hyperacusis and
misophonia concurrently. The proportion ofpatients with signiﬁcant hyperacusis (with or
without misophonia) who required speciﬁc
treatment is similar to the 25 to 30% reportedin the literature
3,21–24and to the 26% we have
reported previously.4
All patients were treated with an appropri-
ate version of TRT. The initial and follow-up
structured interviews were used to monitor the
treatment, with several questions aimed atassessing DST. Patients were asked to judge
the severity of their DST, the annoyance in-
duced by it, the effect of DST on their lives, andto rate DST as a problem on a scale from 0 to 10
(where 0 corresponded to an absence of DST
and 10 indicated DST was as big of a problem asthey could imagine). Patients were asked to
consider an average over the last month in their
responses.
Improvement in hyperacusis was judged on
the basis of changes in LDLs combined with
responses obtained during the structured inter-views, whereas improvement in misophonia was
solely based on the interviews. This decision
was based on the observation that in cases ofmisophonia, any LDL values could be seen and
that the values were not correlated with pa-
tients’ judgment of the problems due to DST.
Of 201 patients with DST, 165 patients
(82%) showed signiﬁcant improvement. For 56
patients with hyperacusis (with or withoutmisophonia), 45 patients (80%) showed signif-
icant improvement. This proportion was higher
for the group with hyperacusis and concurrentmisophonia (33 of 39, or 85%) and lower for
patients with hyperacusis alone (13 of 17, or
76%). The effectiveness of treatment for miso-phonia with or without hyperacusis was identi-
cal (152 of 184 patients with misophonia
accompanied by hyperacusis, or 83%, and 139of 167 patients with misophonia alone, or 83%).
In some cases, it is possible to achieve a cure
for misophonia, as is also the case for hyper-acusis.
5,65Furthermore, our clinical observa-
tions demonstrated that treatment of
misophonia is crucial to achieving a successfuloutcome for tinnitus treatment.
66
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
DST remains a complex and elusive phenome-
non that has only recently attracted largerattention. There is limited information on
epidemiology, potential mechanisms, and re-
sults of a variety of treatments that are used.The situation is particularly complex and difﬁ-
cult with misophonia (reaction to speciﬁc pat-
terns of sound). Consequently, many patientswith DST are left without help. The proposed
mechanisms of hyperacusis and misophonia,
which are based on the neurophysiologicalmodel of tinnitus, indicated a potential ap-
proach to their treatment. These treatments
have been used for over a decade as part of TRTwith a high level of success for both hyperacusis
and misophonia. This observation supports the
proposed mechanisms of DST. There is stillneed for improvement in the diagnosis and
treatment of DST, as well as for research that
could lead to a better understanding of theproblem.
REFERENCES
1. Baguley D, McFerran D. Hyperacusis and disor-
ders of loudness perception. In: Moller A, Klein-jung T, Langguth B, De Ridder D, eds. Textbookof Tinnitus. New York, NY: Springer; 2010:13–23
2. Jastreboff PJ, Hazell JWP. Tinnitus Retraining
Therapy: Implementing the Neurophysiological
Model. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge UniversityPress; 2004
3. Jastreboff PJ, Jastreboff MM. Decreased sound
tolerance. In: Snow JB, ed. Tinnitus: Theory and
Management. London, UK: BC Decker; 2004:8–15DECREASED SOUND TOLERANCE/ JASTREBOFF AND JASTREBOFF 117
This document was downloaded for personal use only. Unauthorized distribution is strictly prohibited.

4. Jastreboff MM, Jastreboff PJ. Decreased sound
tolerance and Tinnitus Retraining Therapy(TRT). Aust N Z J Audiol 2002;21(2):74–81
5. Jastreboff PJ, Jastreboff MM. Using TRT to treat
hyperacusis, misophonia and phonophobia. ENT
Audiology News 2013;21(6):88–90
6. Jastreboff MM, Jastreboff PJ. Hyperacusis. Audi-
ology On-line 6–18–2001. Available at: http://www.tinnitus.org/DST_NL2_PJMJ.pdf. Accessed
on March 19, 2014
7. Jastreboff PJ. Tinnitus Retraining Therapy. In:
Moller A, Kleinjung T, Langguth B, De Ridder D,eds. Textbook of Tinnitus. New York, NY: Spring-er; 2010:575–596
8. Jastreboff PJ, Jastreboff MM. Tinnitus and de-
creased sound tolerance. In: Ballenger JJ, Snow JB,Ashley WP, eds. Ballenger’s OtorhinolaryngologyHead and Neck Surgery. 17 ed. San Diego, CA:Singular Publishing; 2009:351–362
9. Schro ¨der A, Vulink N, Denys D. Misophonia:
diagnostic criteria for a new psychiatric disorder.PLoS ONE 2013;8(1):e54706
10. Fabijanska A, Rogowski M, Bartnik G, Skarzynski
H. Epidemiology of tinnitus and hyperacusis in
Poland. In: Hazell JWP, ed. Proceedings of the
Sixth International Tinnitus Seminar. Cambridge,UK: THC; 1999:569–571
11. Baguley DM. Hyperacusis. J R Soc Med 2003;
96(12):582–585
12. Andersson G, Lindvall N, Hursti T, Carlbring P.
Hypersensitivity to sound (hyperacusis): a preva-lence study conducted via the Internet and post. IntJ Audiol 2002;41(8):545–554
13. Vernon J, Press L. Treatment for hyperacusis. In:
Vernon JA, ed. Tinnitus Treatment and Relief. 1sted. Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon; 1998:223–227
14. Byrne D, Dirks D. Effects of acclimatization and
deprivation on non-speech auditory abilities. Ear
Hear 1996;17(3):29S–37S
15. Cox RM, Alexander GC, Taylor IM, Gray GA.
The contour test of loudness perception. Ear Hear1997;18(5):388–400
16. Hawkins DB, Walden BE, Montgomery A, Prosek
RA. Description and validation of an LDL proce-
dure designed to select SSPL90. Ear Hear 1987;8(3):162–169
17. Ricketts TA, Bentler RA. The effect of test signal
type and bandwidth on the categorical scaling of
loudness. J Acoust Soc Am 1996;99(4 Pt 1):2281–2287
18. Sherlock LP, Formby C. Estimates of loudness,
loudness discomfort, and the auditory dynamic
range: normative estimates, comparison of proce-
dures, and test-retest reliability. J Am Acad Audiol2005;16(2):85–100
19. Blomberg S, Rosander M, Andersson G. Fears,
hyperacusis and musicality in Williams syndrome.
Res Dev Disabil 2006;27(6):668–68020. Klein AJ, Armstrong BL, Greer MK, Brown FR
III. Hyperacusis and otitis media in individualswith Williams syndrome. J Speech Hear Disord1990;55(2):339–344
21. Hazell JWP, Sheldrake JB, Graham RL. Decreased
sound tolerance: predisposing / triggering factorsand treatment outcome following tinnitus retrain-ing therapy (TRT). Paper presented at: 7thInternational Tinnitus Seminar; March 5–9 2002;
Fremantle, Western Australia; Perth, Australia:
University of Western Australia.255–261
22. Herra ´iz C, Plaza G, Aparicio JM. [Mechanisms
and management of hyperacusis (decreased soundtolerance)]. Acta Otorrinolaringol Esp 2006;57(8):
373–377
23. Herra ´iz C, Herna ´ndez Calvı ´n J, Plaza G, Toledano
A, de los Santos G. [Study of hyperacusis at atinnitus unit]. Acta Otorrinolaringol Esp 2003;54(9):617–622
24. Jastreboff PJ, Jastreboff MM, Sheldrake JB. Audio-
metrical characterization of hyperacusis patientsbefore and during TRT. In: Hazell JWP, ed.Proceedings of the Sixth International TinnitusSeminar. Cambridge, UK THC1999:495–498
25. Anari M, Axelsson A, Eliasson A, Magnusson L.
Hypersensitivity to sound—questionnaire data,audiometry and classiﬁcation. Scand Audiol1999;28(4):219–230
26. Hoffman HJ, Reed GW. Epidemiology of tinnitus.
In: Snow JB, ed. Tinnitus: Theory and Manage-ment. London, UK: BC Decker; 2004:16–41
27. Baguley D, Andersson G. Hyperacusis Mecha-
nisms, Diagnosis, and Therapies. San Diego,
CA: Plural Pub; 2007;144;
28. Niu Y, Kumaraguru A, Wang R, Sun W. Hyper-
excitability of inferior colliculus neurons caused byacute noise exposure. J Neurosci Res 2013;91(2):292–299
29. Sahley TL, Nodar RH. A biochemical model of
peripheral tinnitus. Hear Res 2001;152(1–2):43–54
30. Marriage J, Barnes NM. Is central hyperacusis a
symptom of 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) dys-function? J Laryngol Otol 1995;109(10):915–921
31. Gopal KV, Daly DM, Daniloff RG, Pennartz L.
Effects of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors onauditory processing: case study. J Am Acad Audiol2000;11(8):454–463
32. Jastreboff PJ, Hazell JWP. A neurophysiological
approach to tinnitus: clinical implications. Br JAudiol 1993;27(1):7–17
33. Attias J, Zwecker-Lazar I, Nageris B, Keren O,
Groswasser Z. Dysfunction of the auditory efferent
system in patients with traumatic brain injuries
with tinnitus and hyperacusis. J Basic Clin PhysiolPharmacol 2005;16(2–3):117–126
34. Baguley DM, Axon P, Winter IM, Moffat DA.
The effect of vestibular nerve section upon tinnitus.
Clin Otolaryngol Allied Sci 2002;27(4):219–226118 SEMINARS IN HEARING/VOLUME 35, NUMBER 2 2014
This document was downloaded for personal use only. Unauthorized distribution is strictly prohibited.

35. Scharf B, Magnan J, Chays A. On the role of the
olivocochlear bundle in hearing: 16 case studies.Hear Res 1997;103(1–2):101–122
36. Jastreboff PJ. Phantom auditory perception (tinni-
tus): mechanisms of generation and perception.
Neurosci Res 1990;8(4):221–254
37. Boettcher FA, Salvi RJ. Functional changes in the
ventral cochlear nucleus following acute acousticoverstimulation. J Acoust Soc Am 1993;94(4):
2123–2134
38. Gerken GM. Alteration of central auditory proc-
essing of brief stimuli: a review and a neural model.J Acoust Soc Am 1993;93(4 Pt 1):2038–2049
39. Noren ˜a AJ, Farley BJ. Tinnitus-related neural
activity: theories of generation, propagation, and
centralization. Hear Res 2013;295:161–171
40. Jastreboff PJ. The role of subconscious pathways in
tinnitus and decreased sound tolerance. Paperpresented at: 9th International Tinnitus Seminar;
June 15–18 2008; Goteborg, Sweden
41. Edelstein M, Brang D, Rouw R, Ramachandran
VS. Misophonia: physiological investigations andcase descriptions. Front Hum Neurosci 2013;7:296
42. Klochoff I. Impedance ﬂuctuation and a “Tensor
Tympani Syndrome”. Penha R, Pizarro P, eds.
Paper presented at: Proc 4th International Sympo-sium on Acoustic Impedance Measurements;September 25–28 1979. Lisbon, Portugal: Univer-
sidad Nova de Lisboa; 69–76
43. Konorski J. Conditioned Reﬂexes and Neuronal
Organization. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Uni-versity Press; 1948
44. Khalfa S, Dubal S, Veuillet E, Perez-Diaz F,
Jouvent R, Collet L. Psychometric normalization
of a hyperacusis questionnaire. ORL J Otorhino-laryngol Relat Spec 2002;64(6):436–442
45. Dauman R, Bouscau-Faure F. Assessment and
amelioration of hyperacusis in tinnitus patients.
Acta Otolaryngol 2005;125(5):503–509
46. Jastreboff MM, Jastreboff PJ. Questionnaires for
assessment of the patients and treatment outcome.In: Hazell JWP, ed. Proceedings of the SixthInternational Tinnitus Seminar. Cambridge, UK:
THC. 1999:487–490
47. Henry JA, Jastreboff MM, Jastreboff PJ, Schechter
MA, Fausti SA. Guide to conducting tinnitusretraining therapy initial and follow-up interviews.
J Rehabil Res Dev 2003;40(2):157–177
48. Hood JD, Poole JP. Tolerable limit of loudness: its
clinical and physiological signiﬁcance. J Acoust SocAm 1966;40(1):47–53
49. Jastreboff PJ, Gray WC, Gold SL. Neurophysio-
logical approach to tinnitus patients. Am J Otol
1996;17(2):236–240
50. Formby C, Sherlock LP, Gold SL. Adaptive
plasticity of loudness induced by chronic attenua-tion and enhancement of the acoustic background. J
Acoust Soc Am 2003;114(1):55–5851. Formby C, Hawley M, Sherlock LP, et al. Inter-
vention for restricted dynamic range and reducedsound tolerance: clinical trial using a TinnitusRetraining Therapy protocol for hyperacusis. J
Acoust Soc Am 2013;133(5):3382–3383
52. Hawley ML, Keaser ML, Formby C. Predicting
hyperacusis in tinnitus patients. Semin Hear 2007;28(4):261–275
53. Formby C, Gold SL, Keaser ML, Block KL, Hawley
ML. Secondary beneﬁts from Tinnitus Retraining
Therapy: Clinically signiﬁ cant increase in loudness
discomfort level and expansion of the auditory dy-namic range. Semin Hear 2007;28:227–260
54. Jastreboff PJ, Jastreboff MM. Tinnitus Retraining
Therapy (TRT) as a method for treatment of
tinnitus and hyperacusis patients. J Am AcadAudiol 2000;11(3):162–177
55. Johnson M. Pink sound protocol for tinnitus &
hyperacusis. Available at: http://www.pinksound.
info/. Accessed: January 7, 2014
56. Andersson G, Ju ¨ris L, Kaldo V, Baguley DM,
Larsen HC, Ekselius L. [Hyperacusis—an unex-plored ﬁeld. Cognitive behavior therapy can relieveproblems in auditory intolerance, a condition with
many questions]. Lakartidningen 2005;102(44):
3210–3212
57. Hiller W, Haerko ¨tter C. Does sound stimulation
have additive effects on cognitive-behavioral treat-
ment of chronic tinnitus? Behav Res Ther 2005;
43(5):595–612
58. Henselman LW, Henderson D, Subramaniam M,
Sallustio V. The effect of “conditioning” exposureson hearing loss from impulse noise. Hear Res 1994;
78(1):1–10
59. Niu X, Tahera Y, Canlon B. Protection against
acoustic trauma by forward and backward soundconditioning. Audiol Neurootol 2004;9(5):265–273
60. Niu X, Tahera Y, Canlon B. Environmental en-
richment to sound activates dopaminergic path-ways in the auditory system. Physiol Behav 2007;92(1–2):34–39
61. Jastreboff PJ, Jastreboff MM. Potential impact of
stochastic resonance on tinnitus and its treatment.
Association for Research in Otolaryngology Feb-ruary 23, 2000. Meeting materials, pg. 5542
62. Jastreboff PJ, Jastreboff MM, Payne L. Real ear
measurements in tinnitus retraining therapy. Paper
presented at: 7th International Tinnitus Seminar;March 5–9 2002; Freemantle, Australia
63. Formby C. Hyperacusis and related sound toler-
ance complains: differential diagnosis, treatment
effects, and models. Semin Hear 2007;28:227–259
64. Jastreboff MM. Sound therapies for tinnitus man-
agement. In: Langguth B, Hajak G, Kleinjung T,Cacace A, Moller A, eds. Tinnitus: Pathophysiol-ogy and Treatment. Amsterdam, the Netherlands:
Elsevier; 2007:449–454DECREASED SOUND TOLERANCE/ JASTREBOFF AND JASTREBOFF 119
This document was downloaded for personal use only. Unauthorized distribution is strictly prohibited.

65. Jastreboff PJ, Jastreboff MM. Tinnitus Retraining
Therapy. In: Baguley D, ed. Perspectives in Tinni-tus Management. New York, NY: Thieme; 2001:51–6366. Jastreboff PJ, Jastreboff MM. Decreased Sound
Tolerance (Hyperacusis and Misophonia): Theoryand Clinical Practice. Boston, MA: AmericanAcademy of Audiology; 2012120 SEMINARS IN HEARING/VOLUME 35, NUMBER 2 2014
This document was downloaded for personal use only. Unauthorized distribution is strictly prohibited.

Copyright
of
Seminars
in
Hearing
is
the
property
of
Thieme
Medical
Publishing
Inc.
and
its
content
may
not
be
copied
or
emailed
to
multiple
sites
or
posted
to
a
listserv
without
the
copyright
holder's
express
written
permission.
However,
users
may
print,
download,
or
email
articles
for
individual
use.