## Reality  Monitoring

Marcia  K. Johnson State University of New  York  at  Stony  Brook

Carol  L. Raye Barnard  College

People remember information  from  two basic sources: that derived from  external sources  (obtained  through  perceptual  processes) and  that  generated  by internal processes such  as reasoning, imagination, and  thought. Of  particular  interest  to us are  the  processes people use in deciding whether  information  initially had  an external  or  an  internal  source,  which  we call  "reality  monitoring."  We  propose a  working  model  of  reality  monitoring  to  account  for  both  discrimination  and confusion  between  memories  for  thoughts  and  memories  for  perceptions.  Examples of questions the model addresses are,  What types of information are more likely  to  be  represented  in  memories  of  external  events  than  in  memories  of internal events? What cues allow people to decide the origin of a memory? What is  the  nature  of  the  decision  processes  involved?  Which  processes,  and  under what conditions, are  likely to break down and  lead to unreliable memory? What assumptions  do  individuals  have  about  their  memory  for  their  thoughts compared  to  their  memory  for their  perceptions?  How accurate  are  these  assumptions? We summarize some research that is encouraging as far as the tractability of some of these problems is concerned  and  that  demonstrates the  usefulness of the  particular  working  model  proposed  here.

Both  perception  of  external  stimuli  and thought produce  memories. We  have  referred  to  the  processes by  which  a  person attributes  a  memory  to  an  external  or  an internal source as reality  monitoring (Johnson, 1977;  Johnson  &amp;  Raye,  Note  1).  Of course,  in one  sense,  the  memories  created by  thoughts  are  no  less  "real"  than those created  by  perceptual  experiences,  and  the former can be shown to have important  consequences; for example, thinking about

This research was supported by Grant BNS-7813054 from  the  National Science  Foundation. We  would like to thank Mark Aronoff, Ed Casey, Don Fry, Julie Hochberg,  Emil  Menzel, and  Tom  Taylor for their participation  in discussions  that  clarified  some of the  ideas in this article and for their helpful  comments  on an earlier draft  of  the manuscript.

something  may  make  it  seem  as  though  it was  perceived more  often  than  it  actually was (e.g., Johnson, Taylor,  &amp; Raye,  1977). However, real commonly  refers  to  things existing outside of oneself, and it is this sense that  is  implied  by  reality  monitoring.  The term  is intended to suggest  similarities with the  concepts of reality  testing  and  memory monitoring.  Reality  testing  generally refers to  the process  of  distinguishing a  present perception  from  a present act of imagination or act of remembering (Cameron, 1963; Freud, 1895/1966, p.  325,  1925/1961,  p. 237; Horowitz,  1978).

The  general issue addressed  here was  raised at  the annual  meeting  of  the  American Psychological Association,  Chicago, 1975. The  proposed model and  some of the present  data were initially presented at the  annual meeting  of  the Psychonomic  Society,  San  Antonio, Texas,  1978, and  at  the  annual  meeting of  the Rocky Mountain  Psychological Association, Las  Vegas,  Nevada, 1979.

Carol  Raye  is  now at  Bell  Telephone Laboratories, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854.

Requests  for  reprints  should  be  sent  to  Marcia  K. Johnson,  Department of  Psychology, State  University of  New  York, Stony Brook, New  York  11794.

Reality  testing  has  received  some experimental  attention from investigators  interested  in  perception  (Perky,  1910;  Segal  &amp; Fusella,  1970)  and  from  those  interested  in clinical  problems,  especially  because  of  the central  role  confusion  between  the  real  and the  imagined  plays  in  diagnoses  of  schizophrenia (McGuigan, 1966;  Mellor, 1970; Mintz  &amp; Alpert,  1972). In contrast,  reality monitoring  refers  to  the  process  of  distinguishing  a past perception  from  a past act of  imagination,  both  of  which  resulted  in memories. Reality monitoring  thus also shares  with Hart's (1967) memory monitoring  concept  the  idea  of  making judgments

about information in memory. Reality monitoring is particularly interesting in that fairly extreme  errors  about  the origin  of memories  are  probably more  common  than reality testing failures  such  as  hallucinations.  Reality  monitoring  failures may  also generally  be  more  difficult  to  correct  than misperceptions.  You  cannot,  for  example, move your  head  to  look  for  changes  in  occlusion or  reach  out  and  try  to touch  an  erroneous memory.

One way to regard  the events we call failures  in  reality  monitoring  is as the  extreme consequences  of  elaborative  processes that have  consistently  interested cognitive  psychologists.  Cognitive  approaches  to memory emphasize  memories  as  a  joint  product  of external  and  internal  events  (e.g., Bartlett, 1932; Bruner, 1957; James, 1890/1950; Krech,  1949;  Kohler,  1947/1959; Lashley, 1967;  Postman,  1951;  Tolman,  1948;  and, more recently,  Bower,  1972a;  Bransford  &amp; Johnson,  1973; Cofer,  1973; Craik  &amp;  Lockhart, 1972; Dooling &amp;  Lachman, 1971; Hochberg, 1979;  Kintsch,  1976;  Mandler, 1967; Neisser,  1967;  Paivio,  1969;  Tulving, 1968).  With  rare  exceptions  (e.g.,  Gibson, 1966,  1979),  few modern  investigators propose  that there  is  a  straightforward  relationship  between  physical  stimuli  and  the mind's impression of those stimuli, much less our memory for them. Rather, the more general  view is that  most, if not  all,  stimuli  are subject to alternative interpretations and elaboration  and that what is remembered  is based on the way that events are  interpreted, organized,  and  thought  about.  Given  this theoretical  framework,  is  there  any  reason to  make  a  distinction  between  memories of perceptions  and  memories  of thoughts?

The  idea  that  there  can  be  no  memories of pure sensory experience  without some degree of cognitive  elaboration is certainly compelling.  Yet  equally  compelling  is  the idea that  memories  do vary in the  extent  to which  they  are  tied  to  external  events  (i.e., publicly  available  stimulus  conditions). In ordinary usage,  memory is by definition  distinguished from  imagination  by virtue of its veridicality. Furthermore, the importance of the  distinction  between  externally  and  internally generated  information is not simply definitional. For example, memories of child- hood  experiences  such  as sexual  encounters may  suggest different psychological constructs depending on whether they represent early  imaginative  processes  or  actual perceptual experiences.  Freud's decision to treat such memories as largely the product of fantasy  greatly  influenced  the  development of psychoanalytic theory, especially of the  idea of infantile sexuality (Heidbreder,  1933, pp. 385-386). In short, the fact that the criteria of  veridicality  may  not  be  entirely  clear  to memory theorists  does not argue against  the central  role veridicality plays in the  concept of  memory.

Our  position  is not  really  in  conflict  with a general  cognitive  view  emphasizing  the contribution  of  thought  to  comprehension and  memory  (e.g.,  Bransford &amp;  Johnson, 1972, 1973). However,  in  attempting to demonstrate that people do think while perceiving  and  remembering,  there  has  been  a tendency to overemphasize the  hopeless entanglement  of  memories  derived  from  perception and thought. Many  investigators have  assumed  not  only that  a  memory is a joint  product  of  the  external  and  internal events but also that this joint memory exists in place of what might be called the external and  the  internal  components.  For  example, "We  have  strong  evidence  that  the  list-aspresented  is not  the  list-as-encoded,  just  as a  CVC  presented  may not lead  to  a  CVC stored,  but  to  an  NLM [natural  language mediator] instead" (Klatzky,  1980,  p. 222, emphasis  added).  The  notions  that externally generated information  is discarded once  it  is  used  to  generate a  construction (Sachs,  1967) or that  externally  and  internally  generated  traces  are  equivalent in every  respect  have  led  to  a  number  of  expectations-for  example,  that  ideas  and  their paraphrases should be indistinguishable (Bransford  &amp; Franks,  1971; Jenkins,  1974), that both perceived and inferred components of a mental map should be equally available (e.g.,  Levine &amp; Jankovic, Note  2), and  that if inferences  do  not  intrude  in  recall,  they must  not  have  been  made  previously (e.g., Corbett  &amp;  Dosher,  1978).

Thus,  cognitive theorizing has  sometimes assumed that  the inability to disentangle internally  and  externally  generated  information  is the  defining  characteristic  of a  "cog-

nitive"  system.  However,  it  is not  logically necessary to prove that specific memory (i.e., memory  faithful  to  perceptual  events) does not  exist  in  order  to  show  that  organized mental  representations  do  exist.  Yet  it  is precisely the tendency to equate evidence for constructive  or  imaginative  processes  with evidence against accurate memory (and vice versa) that limits the questions cognitive  psychologists  have  posed.  In  addition,  in  emphasizing the many transformations a stimulus  might  undergo,  we  run  the  danger  of forgetting  the  dire  functional  implications of  a  memory system that  is  assumed  to  be so loosely tied  to  external  events  (although the  problem  is  beginning to  be  recognized; Neisser,  1976).

If thought is assumed to produce memory representations  but  not  necessarily  to  supplant those yielded by perception, a  different set  of  questions  for  research  is  suggested. What  are  the  characteristics of both  memories  derived primarily from  perceptual  experience  and  memories  more  remotely  related to perceptual experience?  How are the representations of  externally and internally generated  events  distinguished,  and  when and  why are  they confused? Understanding the differences  and similarities in the  nature of internally and externally generated memories is important for  any theory of the  way information  is represented  in  memory,  and an  adequate  model must be able to account for both  confusion and  discrimination  between  past  imaginations  and  past  perceptions  (Johnson,  Note  3).  J.  S.  Mill  (1869/ 1967)  suggested that "the only difficulty about  Memory,  when  once the  laws of Association  are  understood,  is  the difference between  it  and  imagination"  (p.  339).  To paraphrase  this  notion  to  fit  the present problem,  once  we  have  acknowledged  the role of imagination in memory, we still have the problem  of  accounting  for  the  conditions  under  which  we  know  the  difference between  memories  of  external  events  and memories  of  imaginations.  What  are  our "cues to  reality?"

For  the  most  part,  philosophers and  psychologists have not been concerned with  the problem of reality monitoring,  although James  Mill (1829/1967)  did assert  that because sensations and ideas "are  distinguish- able in the  having, it is likely  that the  copy of  the sensation  should  be  distinguishable from  the  revival of  the  idea"  (p.  334).  Although little attention has been given to the issue  of  discriminating memories  produced by perceptions from those produced by thought,  a number of philosophers have addressed the issue of how sensations and ideas are  distinguishable  initially  ("in the  having").  Two  general  lines  of  thought  have been  that  perception  and  imagination  primarily  differ  in  that  percepts  are  stronger or more vivid (e.g., Hume, 1739/1978; James,  1890/1950)  and  the  opposing  idea that  "sensation  .  .  . and  imagination, even where they  have the  same object,  are  operations  of  a  quite  different  nature,  and  perfectly distinguishable  by those who are sound  and  sober"  (Reid,  1764/1975,  chap. 2,  section  5,  p. 18).  The  model  presented below incorporates aspects  of both  of  these hypotheses  and  further  suggests  that  some of the same cues that allow  judgments about the  nature  (present perception  or  present imagination)  of  conscious experience are preserved  and  become  the  bases  for  judgments about the  nature of past  experience.

## The Present  Approach

## Some Preliminary  Assumptions

Although we assume that perceptual events produce persistent  memory traces  (perhaps in a kind of continuous record of experience; Landauer,  1975),  we  also  assume  that  internally generated  events produce persistent memory  traces.  Not  all,  but  many  of  the errors  we  see  in  memory  may  be  the  consequence of a failure to discriminate the origin of a memory trace. The ideas that memory  traces  for  perceptual experiences are accurate, in that  they  reflect the characteristics  of  stimulus-determined  processes  and that  they  exist  side  by  side  or  intertwined with memories produced by imaginative processes have particular  implications  for  theories of representation that are based  on error  data  such  as  false  recognitions.  Insofar as false  recognitions  reflect  a  failure to  discriminate  the  origin of a trace, their  appropriateness  as  an  indication  of the  nature of the memory representation of external events

is somewhat  questionable. That  is,  errors may  reflect coexistence  of information  from multiple  sources  as well  as integration,  and this  distinction is  beginning  to  be  investigated  (e.g.,  Cole &amp;  Loftus,  1979; Hasher &amp;  Griffin, 1978).  Although  this  argument may  at  first  seem  to  be  quibbling  over  terminology, these two metaphors certainly imply  different  directions  for  research. They might  also lead to different expectations about  the  potential  success  of  introspective effort  (and  more extreme  measures  such  as hypnosis)  in  separating the  real from the imagined.

## Types  of  Self-Generated Information

There  are  many  types  of  thoughts  and imaginal  events  that  would be  relevant  for reality  monitoring.  These  types  can  tentatively  be  separated into  three  major  categories: (a)  re-representation,  (b)  cotemporal thoughts, and (c) fantasy. The first category refers  to the  re-representation  of  perceptual experience  or  remembering  something  previously experienced.  In re-representation,  information that has dropped  out of consciousness or working memory is reactivated  at  a later  time  in the  absence  of the  original external stimulus (in contrast  to, for example, rehearsing recently perceived information several times in succession). Cotemporal thought refers to the sort  of elaborative  and associative  processes  that  augment,  bridge, or  embellish  ongoing perceptual  experience but  that  are  not  neccessarily  part  of the veridical  representation of  perceptual experience.  Most  work  on  imaginal  processes  in memory  has  been  directed  at  this  category (e.g.,  Bartlett,  1932; Bower, 1972b;  Neisser, 1967).  Fantasy  involves novel  combinations of information that produce imaginary events that take place only  in  our imagination. Making  up  a  story  or  dreaming  would  fall primarily in this category. While recognizing that  there  are some problems with this  classification  scheme  (where  does  "re-representation" end and "fantasy"  begin?), we have found  it  useful  as  a  starting  point. To  date, our  research  has  primarily consisted  of laboratory  investigations  of  the  first  two  categories.

As stated  above, we use the  term reality monitoring as  a  way of referring to  the  activity  of  discriminating  between  memories primarily  derived  from  external  events and those primarily derived from  internal events. However,  this  term  is  not  meant  to  imply that the processes  involved in discriminating the origin  (internal  or  external)  of  information  in  memory  are  always  the same. Rather,  the  details  of  the  processing  (activating information, applying decision  strategies)  might reasonably be expected  to vary depending on the  nature of the  remembered information,  the conditions under which the monitoring occurs, the cost of mistakes, and so forth.  Finally, reality  monitoring can  be thought  of  as  one  of  the  general  class  of metamemory  processes (e.g., see Brown, 1975;  Kreutzer,  Leonard,  &amp;  Flavell,  1975) by  which  people  reflect  varying degrees  of understanding about the nature of their own memories.

## A  Working  Model

As a vehicle for interpreting available data and  as  a  stimulus  for  further  research,  we have developed the following working model of  reality  monitoring. Basically, we propose that  reality  monitoring  is  affected  by  two major factors: the nature of the traces  being evaluated and the types of decision  processes applied.  Either  of these should influence  the amount of confusion  a person displays about the  origin  of information. Our  first  assumption is that  any memory potentially consists of  many  types  of  information or  attributes (e.g., Bower, 1967; Craik  &amp; Lockhart, 1972; Posner  &amp; Warren,  1972; Underwood,  1969; Wickens, 1970). Thus,  for  example,  if  a word  is presented  or  imagined, information may  be  stored  with  respect  to  its  physical properties (e.g., pitch) and its semantic properties. Types  of  potential attributes that should  be  particularly important  for reality monitoring  include  information  about the sensory  characteristics  of  the  stimulus presentation  (e.g.,  auditory  information),  the type  of  cognitive  processing  engaged  (e.g., imagery),  semantic  content,  and  contextual information  (e.g.,  spatial  and  temporal  information).  Various  subcategories  could  be defined  within  each  of  these  four.  For  example,  semantic content  for a  spoken word,

as used here, would include physical  aspects of  its  referent  such  as  size  and  color, functional  characteristics  of  the  referent,  emotional  connotation,  and so on. An issue  that could plague us, as well as most recent  theories of memory based on "attributes," "levels," or  "codes"  (e.g.,  Craik  &amp;  Lockhart, 1972;  Paivio,  1971;  Underwood,  1969),  is, How is it  possible to  separate  sensory  from semantic dimensions  of  memory  representations? The fact that something is seen and not  heard  (or  said  by a  low frequency voice rather  than a  voice higher in frequency) might have  significance  in the semantic sense,  as  might the  spatial  or  temporal  position  of an  event. These categories  are  not necessarily  proposed  as  hard  and  fast  divisions (any more than one can  make  a  clear distinction  between  internal  and external) but represent  sensible  and  useful analytic categories for characterizing and understanding  the  nature  of  information  represented  in memory.

We  propose  that,  as  a  class,  internally generated  memories  may  differ from the class of externally generated memories along specific  dimensions. First, externally generated  memories  in  general  may  have  more spatial  and  temporal  contextual attributes coded in the representation  of the event than internally  generated  memories  do.  Second, they  should  also  have  more  sensory  attributes, although imaginal  processes  presumably also generate some sensory information (e.g., see Atwood, 1971; Brooks, 1968; Finke, 1979; Kosslyn, 1976). Third, we  propose that externally generated representations are more semantically detailed-that is, contain more  information or more  specific information-than internally generated  representations. Thought tends to be more schematic. Finally,  we  propose that internally generated memories  may  typically  have  more  operational attributes associated  with them  (coded in  the  trace).  This  latter  notion is based partly  on the  assumption that  perception  is usually somewhat more "automatic" (Brown, 1975; Hasher  &amp; Zacks,  1979; Posner  &amp; Snyder,  1975) than imaginal processes  and  that attention  (e.g.,  voluntarily engaging  in  creating images) increases the  chances that coded  information about  operations  will be available later (see Posner  &amp; Warren, 1972).

Although  for some cases  these  characteristics  might  not  hold,  if  the  two  classes  of representations generally differ in these ways, then  these dimensions  could be  used  to decide  the  origin  of  a  trace  regardless  of  the particular  content  of  the  memory involved. Assuming  that  the  populations  of  external and internal memories form distributions on each  of these  four  dimensions, a  reasonable model  of  the  process  involved  in  decisions about  the  origin  (internal  or  external)  of  a memory might be similar to some models of old-new  recognition  decisions  (e.g.,  Atkinson  &amp;  Juola,  1973;  Mandler,  1972;  Raye, 1976).  That  is, criteria  may  be  set  on  each dimension,  one  for  identifying  probable  internal  events  and  one for  probable external events,  and  any  event  registering  between the  two cutoffs would be of uncertain origin and  require further  processing.  Figure  1 illustrates  such  a  decision  structure  for  one of  the  proposed dimensions.

Information  about  these  four dimensions could  of  course  be  combined  in different ways. Decisions could be based on a  strategy that  always or  usually weighted the  four  in a  constant  fashion, for example, sensory attributes might always  be  weighted  more heavily  than  amount  of detail,  and  amount of  detail  more  heavily  than  contextual attributes,  and  so on. On  the  other  hand, different dimensions  might be given  more weight in  varying  instances  depending on what  other  information  the  individual has about the situation. In general, then, it should be possible to produce confusion

STRENGTH OR AMOUNT OF CONTEXTUAL INFORMATION

Figure  I. Representation  of a  set  of  decision rules for judging  the  origin  of  a  memory  on  the  basis  of  the amount  of  contextual  (time  and  place)  information  it includes.  (In  this  sample, externally  derived memories are represented  by triangles and internally  derived ones by  circles.)

about  the  origin  of  an  event  by  manipulations that  cause  it  to  have abnormally high or  low  values  on  one  or  more  dimensions, compared  to  typical  memories  of  its  class; an  interesting  question  is whether  some  dimensions are more important in this  regard than  others.

In  addition  to  atypical  class characteristics,  a major  vehicle for confusion should be specific  similarity  (with  respect  to  any  attribute)  between  particular  memories  from the two classes. We have discussed  "a  memory"  as if it could be isolated,  but  this is just for  convenience. Clearly,  when a memory is activated,  so  are  other  memories,  and  the characteristics of these other memories may influence  or  dominate  the  decision  process. Thus  in considering the  origin of a memory that  was actually  generated  internally, one might  be  influenced by  extensive  sensory characteristics  of semantically similar traces that  are  also  activated while  the  target  is being evaluated.  The extreme case would be one in which a retrieval cue activates  a similar trace from  the opposite class but not the target,  causing  an  apparent  error  in  identification  of  origin  when,  in  fact,  the  target trace  is not being  considered  at  all.

As mentioned earlier, decisions  about  the origin  of  a  memory  based  on  the  proposed typical class differences may be inconclusive, and  the  person  may  access  further  information. The person then may use this further information to reason toward a decision about the origin of the memory. This further information  may consist  of qualitative characteristics of  the  trace  being  evaluated  in combination  with the  person's  prior knowledge. For example, a person  may remember an extremely vivid dream about a money tree but  reason that  it could  not be an externally generated  memory because  money does not grow  on  trees.  Or  this  further  information may consist of characteristics of related traces.  For  example,  suppose  an  architect was  not  sure  whether  a  design  she  had  in mind  was  initially  hers  or  her  associate's. She  then  remembers  not  only  the  idea  but also her associate's starting to draw a rough sketch  and  breaking  his  pencil.  Therefore, she reasons,  the  idea  must  have been  his.

Finally,  this  type  of  reasoning also  probably  uses  strategies  based  on  certain  meta- memory assumptions  or beliefs held  by  the individual. For example, subjects might have certain "biases"  about memories derived from  their  own thoughts  (e.g.,  "I'd remember  if  it  had  been  my  idea").  These  latter processes  need  not  always wait  for  the  outcome of the  more general  decision  based on class characteristics discussed above but may  be  initiated  simultaneously.  However, since they are assumed often  to involve more specific  information, which may require  additional retrieval from memory,  they  are presumed  normally  to  take  longer  and  for this  reason  might  be  considered  a  second stage. Which  processes play  the  predominant role in a particular decision should depend on such factors  as the  amount of  time a  person  has,  availability  of  additional  information  in  memory,  and  the  cost  of  mistakes.  Thus,  if the  consequence of  asserting that  something was  perceived  when  in  fact it  might  only have been  inferred  is  serious, a  person  should be particularly  likely to  attempt to retrieve additional information that would tend to support or confirm  one or  the other  decision.

In  general,  both  perception  and  thought result  in  memories  that  persist.  Confusion of  the  two  does  not  necessarily  happen  via degradation  of traces  but  rather  can  happen via other  mechanisms.

## Empirical  Evidence

The model developed above (see  Table  1) represents  a  set  of  interrelated hypotheses, and  we  have tried  in  a  number  of  ways  to translate  some  of these  hypotheses  into  experiments.

Evidence  That  the  Classes  of Externally and  Internally Generated  Memories Differ

A  fundamental assumption  of  the  model is that the classes of externally and internally derived  memories  differ.  Two  lines  of  evidence  suggest  this  is  a  reasonable  starting point.

Superiority effects. Slamecka  and  Graf (1978) reported  the results of several  experiments  specifically directed at  determining whether  there  is  a  memory  advantage  for self-generated information.  Their general

Types of attributes potentially comprising memories

Contextual

Sensory

Semantic

Cognitive operations

Dimensions on which  the  classes  of externally generated  and  internally generated  memories  typically  differ

External have more contextual  attributes

External have more sensory attributes

External  have more semantic detail

Internal  include more information  about  cognitive operations

Processing  characteristics  of reality monitoring

Decisions  about  the  origin of a specific trace  may  be based  on a  weighted combination of the  results of comparing the  target  trace attributes indicated  above to criteria  defining  the general  classes of external  and

internal representations

Decisions may be based on a  reasoning process  involving

Qualitative characteristics  of the  target  trace

Characteristics  of related  traces

Metamemory assumptions

Which processes  take place should depend  on such  factors as  time, availability of different  types of information,  cost  of  mistakes, and  so  forth

Sources  of errors  in  reality monitoring

Target  trace  not  typical of its class

Characteristics  of similar incorrect  traces

Failure  in a  reasoning process  (e.g.,  failure  to  retrieve  additional information,  incorrect  metamemory assumptions)

procedure  was  to  present  subjects with  a stimulus  and  either  to  present  a  response (E  items)  or  to  require  the  subject  to  generate  a  response  (S  items)  according  to  a rule and a specified first letter. The rule and first  letter constrained the generated responses  (e.g., synonym-rapid-f almost  always produced  the  response fast ),  allowing Slamecka  and  Graf  to  counterbalance  the assignment of items to conditions such  that E and S items were the same across subjects. Across  a  number  of  types  of  items  and  instructional conditions,  recognition and recall were better  for the  subject-generated items (the "generation  effect").

Raye, Foley,  &amp;  Foley, in press, Experiment 1).  This  outcome supports the  idea  that  the locus  of  the  advantage  is  in  the  generation process  itself  and  does not, for example, depend  on  overt  expression  of  the  generated item and  consequent  sensory  components (e.g.,  hearing one's own voice or seeing one's own  handwriting) or  on  some combination of  generation  and  sensory components.

Using  a  similar  procedure,  we have  also found  a generation  effect  after  retention  intervals  as  long  as  10 days  (Johnson,  Raye, Foley,  &amp; Foley, in press,  Experiment  2).  In addition, in one study we manipulated whether subjects overtly responded  by writing  down  E  and  S  words  as  they  occurred or whether they were simply required to respond  covertly  by  listening  to  E  words and thinking about  S words. The generation  effect was as great in both free and cued recall when the subjects thought about but did not overtly express their responses (Johnson,

In several studies, we compared  frequency judgments  of  externally  generated  events with  frequency judgments of  self-generated events (Johnson, Taylor, &amp;  Raye, 1977; Raye, Johnson, &amp;  Taylor, 1980; Taylor, Johnson,  Birnbaum, &amp; Raye,  Note  4).  The basic  paradigm  involves two  kinds of  trials, presentation and  generation.  On  presentation trials, subjects see a number of cues and to-be-remembered words; on generation trials,  the  cues  are  shown,  and  subjects  are asked  to  generate  the  items.  The  cues  are preselected so  that  they  will  elicit  the  appropriate  response  with  almost  100%  certainty (e.g., color-blue). Over  the course of the  procedure,  each  item  is seen either two, five, or eight  times and  is generated  by subjects either  two, five, or eight  times. Finally, subjects are given a surprise frequency  judg-

ment  task.  For  example,  they  are  asked  to estimate  the  number of times  they  actually saw each item,  and we explain  to them  that we are not interested  in the  number of times they  generated  it  but  only  the  number  of times we presented  it. Or,  they are  asked  to indicate the number of times they  generated an  item,  ignoring the  number  of times  they perceived  it.

These  studies  had  two  major outcomes. The  first  was  that  subjects  were  more  sensitive  to  the  relative  frequency  of  self-generated  events than  to the  relative frequency of  externally  generated events.  The second major  finding  concerned  confusion  between the two types of events. If there were no confusion between  presentations and generations, it would not matter,  for example, how often  an item had been generated  when subjects judged how  often  it  was presented. However,  generating  events  systematically increased  the  frequency  with  which  those events seemed  to have been  perceived.  Similarly, perceiving  items systematically increased the frequency  with which those items seemed  to have been  generated.  However, the two types of events did not interfere with each other  equally. The extent to which subjects  were  confused  by  internal  events when they judged external events was greater than  vice  versa.  Thus  both  the  steeper  frequency discrimination function for  self-generated information and the greater confusion in judging external events indicated that internally  generated  memories  were  superior to  or  had  some  advantage  over  externally generated  memories in this situation, as well as in recall  and  recognition  tests. A number of related findings also suggest  there  is some advantage associated with self-generated information (e.g., Bobrow  &amp;  Bower, 1969; Davies,  Milnee,  &amp;  Glennie,  1973;  Erdelyi, Buschke, &amp; Finkelstein, 1977; Jacoby,  1978; Jarvella &amp;  Collas, 1974;  Ross &amp;  Sicoly, 1979).

Another  indication  that  external  and  internal  memories differ  comes  from  Raye  et al.  (1980,  Experiment  2).  Half  the  people judging each type of event were given a limit for  their  estimates-they  were asked  to  use numbers  between 0  and  10. The  other  half of  the  subjects  were  not  given  any  limit  or range for their  estimates.  We expected  this manipulation  to  affect  the  criteria  subjects used  for  including  memories  in  an "event count." Of special interest was whether  the two  types  of  judgments  would  be  affected similarly.  If  they  were,  it  would  emphasize the  similarity  between  externally  and  internally derived memories.  However, if the two were  affected  differently,  the  results would point  to differences  in the memories or judgment  processes in  the two  cases. For  example,  if  memories  for  one  type  of  information  are  more  stable  and  faithful, they might  be  less  susceptible to variations  in judgment  criteria.  In  fact,  the  limit did not affect  the  magnitude  of confusion when people were judging the  frequency of internally generated  events. This finding suggests  that even  without  the  limit,  people  were  using a fairly  stringent  criterion  of  trace  appropriateness. (Perhaps specific would  be  more accurate  than stringent, since whatever they used  allowed for  good  discrimination of relative frequency  of  self-generated events.) When external  event frequency was judged, however,  the  limit  reduced confusion, apparently because subjects selectively excluded more  inappropriate, self-generated event  memories.  Thus,  these  two  types  of traces  must  differ  in  some  way  that  allows the  subject to  discriminate  between  them. Raye  et  al.  argued  that  these  results  were consistent  with  the  present  working model if it were  assumed  that  when judging  the frequency of internally generated  events, subjects were relying heavily on the  presence of information about cognitive operations in making  decisions  about  whether  to  include memories in an event count (see  Raye et al., 1980,  for  an  expanded  discussion).

Comparing betweenand within-class discriminations. Another  line  of  research is  based  on  the  logic  that  if  two  classes  of events are  different,  discriminating between instances from  within a class should be more difficult than discriminating  between instances drawn  from  separate  classes. For example,  is  reality  monitoring  subject to more or less error than monitoring  the origins of information derived  from  two  external  sources?  Our  model  proposes  that, along with  more  specific  information,  there are a number of general dimensions on which externally  and  internally  derived  memories

may characteristically  differ  and which may be used in the  process of reality  monitoring. That  is, decisions  could be based  simply on the  amount of  certain  types  of information (e.g.,  if  it  has  a  high  sensory component, classify it as external).  In contrast, two memories  derived from external sources could  not  be distinguished along  these  general dimensions. Thus memories from  external sources would always have to be discriminated on the basis of specific content (specific sensory information rather  than amount, etc.). It follows that, given similar situations, it  should be  easier  to  identify  the  origin of internally  versus externally  derived  memories than to identify  the sources of memories derived  from  two external  sources.

In  one experiment testing this prediction, subjects participated  in small groups during the  first  phase  of  the  experiment  (Raye  &amp; Johnson,  1980).  Within  a  group  they  were randomly  assigned  to  play  different roles: speakers, recorders, or listeners. All subjects thought that the speakers and recorders were serving as "experimenters,"  that the listeners were  the  "subjects,"  and  that  the  listeners would  later  be  tested  for  their  memory of the  "conversation."  The  group  was given a topic  of  conversation to  start  them  off,  for example, snow. Speaker A  then gave a highly  related  word such  as white. Speaker B gave a word related  to Speaker  A's word, for  example, black, then  Speaker  A replied, for example, coal, and  so  on, alternating. One  recorder  wrote  down  all  of  the  words spoken  by  Speaker A;  the  other recorder wrote down  all the  words given  by Speaker B.  The  listeners  were  instructed  to  listen carefully  to both speakers  in preparation  for a  memory test  later.  After  a  1-hour, filled, retention interval,  all subjects received a recognition  test  which  had  the  standard requirement  that subjects discriminate  between old and  new items and  the  additional requirement that, for old items, they  identify which  speaker  said  each.

The  measure of primary interest  was  the percent  correct  identification of  origin:  the total  number  of  words correctly  attributed to  each  of  the  two  speakers  divided  by  the total  number of words correctly identified as from  the  conversation (multiplied by  100). As predicted by the model, the speakers, who were  discriminating  between  internal  and external  sources,  were  better  at  identification of  origin than  the listeners and recorders, who  were  discriminating  between two external sources of  information.

This  result  was taken  as  support  for  the idea that external events as a class differ  in some ways from  the class of internal events. These  differences potentially  provide  additional cues that allow the origin of memories for  internally generated  events and external events to be distinguished  more easily  than the  memories  for  two  comparable  external events.  Such  cues would operate  in the first stage of the model. For example, greater salience  of  the  cognitive operations  that  produced internally generated  traces  may serve as a discriminative cue available in externalinternal discriminations that  is not available in external-external discriminations. Another possibility is that the semantic contents of  the  memories  differ  in  some  way.  Intuitively, internally  generated responses should be  more  idiosyncratically  determined  than external events. Internally generated  events are  not  necessarily  more  meaningful  than external  events,  but  they  are  more  likely to refer  to  biographical  information or  information  relevant  to  the  self.  Internal events reflect idiosyncratic  probabilities, whereas external  events  reflect  normative probabilities. The  presence of a difference in average idiosyncracy value for external  and internal items  could provide  a  discriminative cue: Would  I  have said  this?  Is  this  a  high  frequency response for me? Does this response have some special meaning for me? This factor  might  operate  in  the  reasoning stage of reality monitoring.

In  a  second  conversation  study  (Raye  &amp; Johnson,  1980,  Experiment  2),  the  content (as  well  as  the  idiosyncracies)  of  the  conversation was  controlled. A  subject, the "director," asked the speakers questions such as, "What is a word that is the opposite of  fast, beginning  with s and  ending with wl" The director  indicated which of the two speakers  was  to  answer,  and  the speakers' responses were essentially determined by the questions,  which, obviously, left  little  room for  idiosyncratic contributions to the content of  the  conversations.  Again,  there  were  recorders  and  listeners,  and  only the  listeners

thought  they  would get  a  memory test. All subjects,  including the  directors,  were  later given  a  recognition  and  identification-of-origin  test.

Again, the speakers were significantly better  at  identifying the  origin of an  item  they recognized  as  old  than  were  the recorders and listeners,  and the recorders and listeners did  not  differ  from  one  another.  The  directors  had  the  lowest  discrimination scores. This  finding  rules  out,  we think, the  possibility  that  the  entire  difference  in  the  previous experiment could  be attributed  to differences across conditions in the  idiosyncratic value of the content of the items. In fact,  the magnitude of the  difference  was almost exactly  the  same  as it  was in the  previous experiment,  suggesting  that idiosyncratic cues did  not  add  much. Of course,  we would not want  to  offer  this  as  a  general  conclusion, since  we  would  expect idiosyncratic  value typically  to  be  one  of  the  cues  used  in  the reasoning processes involved in reality monitoring. However, the present results are consistent with  the  possibility that, independently  of  the  personal  significance of  what an  individual says,  the  cognitive  operations that  go  into  generating  information  persist in  memory and  become  potential  cues  as to the  origin  of that information.

A parallel logic suggests  that  it should be easier to  discriminate  between  memories of external  and  internal  events  than  between memories of two internally generated events because,  for example, the  latter would both include  large  amounts  of  cognitive  operations  information, minimizing cognitive operations information as a discriminative cue. In  two developmental  studies,  Foley,  Johnson, and Raye (Note 5) had subjects  engage in two  types  of  self-generated  acts,  either saying  items  aloud  or  only  thinking about them.  Subjects  then  attempted  to  identify which items they said and which  they thought.  Consistent  with expectations  from our model, this condition was more  difficult than one in which the subjects discriminated between items they had said and items someone else  had  said.

Compared  to  older  subjects, 6-year-old children were at no disadvantage in discriminating  what they  said  from  what someone else  said  (see  also  Johnson,  Raye,  Hasher,

&amp; Chromiak,  1979). In contrast,  compared to older subjects, 6-year-olds did have a particularly difficult time  discriminating  between words they had  said  aloud and words they  had  only thought.  Within the  present framework,  these data suggest two interesting  possibilities.  First,  children as young as 6 years may have learned to take advantage of cues in memory that differentiate the  self from  others  but  not those  that differentiate various self-initiated acts such as speech and thought. Thus the special confusion of young children  could  be  a  consequence  of  a  less developed  reasoning process and  not  a consequence  of  trace  characteristics.  Alternatively,  6-year-olds,  compared  to  older  subjects, may produce memories when thinking that are, in  fact, more  like  the  memories produced  from  talking.  Similarity  between thought  and  speech would be increased,  for example,  by  subvocalizing during thought, and  there  is some evidence that  children of this age do show relatively high levels of subvocalization  (Garrity,  1977).

## Specific Dimensions  Proposed  as Discriminators

Cognitive  operators. According  to  the reality  monitoring  model,  increasing  automaticity  in  responding ought  to  reduce  information regarding  cognitive operations. The  stronger  or  more specific the  cue for  a response,  the more  automatically  the  response should be generated, reducing search and  decision  processes  that  later  could  be used  as  cues  to  the  origin  of information. Conversely, if a response requires somewhat more  effort or  search,  stored  information about these operations should become  a potential  cue  for  identifying  the  source  of  a memory. In order to manipulate this search process,  we used  a  procedure  in  which  subjects  heard  category  cues  followed  by  category instances on half of the  trials and generated  their  own category  instances  for  the other  half  of the  trials. Half  of the  subjects were  cued  with  the  first  letter  of  the  response, and half were not cued with the first letter. Our  reasoning was that providing the first-letter cue  should  more  completely  determine  the  response,  making  it  more  automatic,  than  not  providing the  first  letter.

Later,  subjects  were  asked  to  discriminate between  category  instances  that  were  presented  and  instances  they  generated.  Generating instances  of categories to fit first-letter cues resulted later in lower correct identification  of  origin  than  generating  instances of categories without first-letter cues (Johnson,  Raye,  Foley,  &amp;  Foley,  in  press, Experiment  1). In  Johnson  et  al.'s  Experiment  2,  increasing  the  difficulty of  generating  a  response  and  thus  presumably  increasing cognitive operations information by requiring  a less typical  response  (e.g., animal-p-, rather  than animal-d-) increased correct  identification of  origin. These  findings support the  notion that  cognitive operations  information is  important  in  reality monitoring  decisions.

The  cue  value  of  remembered  cognitive operations  may explain  why mediators  generated  by subjects in list learning situations are  rarely  intruded.  That  is, there  is  ample evidence  that  in  paired-associate  learning, for  example, subjects generate verbal or pictorial  elaborators (e.g., Martin,  Boersma, &amp; Cox, 1965; Yuille, 1973) and that specific qualitative  characteristics of these elaborators influence recall (Hasher, Griffin, &amp; Johnson,  1977;  Hasher &amp;  Johnson,  1975). In  addition,  self-generated  information  has a recall advantage (Slamecka  &amp; Graf, 1978), even  when  the  self-generated information occurs only covertly (Johnson, Raye,  Foley, &amp;  Foley,  in  press,  Experiment 1).  Why  is it then that intrusions of the mediator or selfgenerated components  of an image  or other types  of  elaborators  are  so rare?  From  the present perspective, it is important that when subjects  create  verbal or  imaginal  elaborators, the strategy is usually purposefully employed  and  not  the  result  of  automatic  or incidental  processes  (Brown,  1975;  Hasher &amp;  Zacks,  1979;  Posner  &amp;  Snyder, 1975; Schneider  &amp;  Shiffrin, 1977).  The  best  argument  for  the  strategic  as  opposed  to  automatic  nature  of  elaborators  is  that  it  is quite easy  to  improve people's  performance by instructing  them  to  make elaborators (e.g.,  Bower, 1972b; Paivio,  1971).

On the other hand, those elaborations that more automatically arise on the basis of past experience,  such  as  those  involved  in  processing  meaningful  prose,  should  be  more likely  to  be  confused  with  external  events. Intrusions seem  to  occur more  often  with prose. It is not that more thought necessarily goes into processing prose compared  to word lists;  it  is  perhaps  that  more  conscious  (in the sense of purposeful) thought may be expended  on the  word lists.

Similarly, daydreams often  seem less real than dreams and rarely lead  to the momentary  confusion that  dreams  produce.  Daydreams are typically more controlled by consciously  selected  schemata  than  are  dreams during sleep. In general, those  self-generated memories that do not have a voluntary quality  but  rather have been elicited  by external events  or generated  when  voluntary  processes  are  suspended  should  be  susceptible to greater confusion. Creating a thought under  voluntary  control  (or  bringing a previously involuntary idea  under voluntary  control) should  provide  a powerful  cue for localizing it as self-generated  rather than as existing externally. Consistent with this speculation  is at  least  one  finding:  Whereas repeated re-representations of perceived items increase confusion (e.g., Johnson, Raye, Wang,  &amp;  Taylor, 1979;  Johnson, Taylor, &amp;  Raye,  1977), generating  an  initially selfgenerated  item  for  a  second  time  increased correct identification  of origin  (Johnson, Raye,  &amp; Durso,  1980).

Contextual information. In  one experiment  (Johnson,  Raye,  Foley,  &amp;  Kim,  Note 6),  we compared  the  spatial location  information  associated with  perceived  pictures with  the  spatial  location  information  associated  with imagined pictures.  Subjects saw a label followed by an appropriate line drawing  projected  on  a  screen  to  the  left  or  a screen  to  the  right,  or  they  saw a  label  and then  themselves created  an  appropriate  image projected  to the  left  or  to  the  right. As a cover  task, subjects  rated the pictures and images with respect  to how easy they would be  to  draw.  This  task  produced  equal  recognition of items that had been presented as pictures  and  items  that  had  been  imagined (one  indication  of  the  effectiveness  of  this cover  task). Of  primary  interest was  the finding that, as predicted by the model,  subjects were significantly more accurate in designating  the  location  for  perceived as  compared  to  imagined  items.  In  addition,  for

those items whose location was correctly designated, subjects were more confident  about the  location  of the  perceived  pictures.

We  adapted  a  similar  procedure  to  address  the  question  of  whether  temporal  information  is  better  for  internally or  externally generated  information. Subjects  heard labels  and  then  either  saw  an appropriate line drawing  or imagined one. The cover task was the rating task just described.  Following this, each  subject received a booklet, and on each  page, in random order,  were labels for eight  items,  each  drawn  from a different eighth  of the  list. The  eight  items  either all referred to pictures or all referred to images. The subject's  task  was to  indicate  the  temporal order of occurrence of the eight  items. We used this procedure  to eliminate  differential  response  bias  across  positions  of  the list (Toglia &amp;  Kimble,  1976). This task turned  out to be quite difficult, but the  subjects were able to identify the  temporal position  of very early  and  very late  items.  For items  presented  early,  performance did  not differ  on imagined as compared to perceived items, whereas  the subjects were significantly  less accurate  in identifying temporal order of imagined items for the  most  recent portion  of the  list.  We  are  currently  following this up with an easier task; however, this initial  finding  is particularly  interesting  because some investigators (Bjork  &amp;  Whitten, 1974;  Crowder, 1976,  pp.  461-464)  have proposed that  the  recency  portion  of the serial position curve especially reflects the contribution  of temporal information.

Sensory information. The  model  also predicts that  sensory  information should be greater  for perceived  compared  to imagined items.  In  one  experiment  (Johnson,  Raye, Foley, &amp; Foley, Note 7), subjects saw a word that  was then  pronounced  by  a  male  or female  experimenter or saw a word  and  then imagined  it  as  pronounced  by  the  male  or female experimenter. Craik and Kirsner (1974) had previously shown  significant memory  for  voice  of  perceived  items,  and Geiselman  and  Glenny  (1977)  had  shown memory for the "voice" of an imagined item. Our  interest  was  in  comparing  the information  about  voice for perceived and  imagined  items.  As  a  cover  task,  subjects  rated the  harshness of the  perceived  or  imagined sound.

We asked  a  similar  question  with  a  procedure  in which subjects saw or heard  items on  some trials  or  imagined  seeing  or  imagined hearing them on other trials.  The cover task  required subjects to rate the angularity of the  visual display of a perceived  or  imagined  word  or  the  harshness of  the  sound of an auditorially perceived  or imagined  item.

Across  four  experiments,  two requiring a discrimination between male  and female voices and  two between visual and  auditory information, we have found a consistent, but not  always  significant, advantage  for  perceived  information.  We  think  these  cover tasks  very  closely  equated  the  information produced  during  perception and  thought, primarily by restricting it to a single type of sensory  information, and  were  thus  a  conservative test of the hypothesis.  The  subjectreport data described below  suggest  that when  semantic  processing is manipulated and  sensory information is left  free  to vary, sensory  information  is  more  frequently  reported  for  perceived  than  for  subject-generated  items.

Of  course,  the  model  does  not  demand that sensory information always be better for memories  created by  perception than  for those  created  by  thought;  it  only  indicates that  this is the  more typical case. The very capacity  for  some  thoughts  to  have  more sensory detail  than some perceptions creates one  of  the conditions  for  confusion. Furthermore, with the right orienting task, spatial location and temporal information  might be equated for imagined and perceived items. One  problem  for  future  work  would  be  to attempt  to  characterize  those  situations in which  contextual,  semantic,  or  sensory  information  from  imagination  is  likely to  be unusually  high,  or  from  perception, unusually low.

For  example,  the  amount  of  sensory  information in an imaginary experience should vary among individuals.  Good imagers, compared  to poor imagers, should be more able to  regenerate  accurately  the  details  of their experiences. Although  it  may be difficult  to specify  exactly  the  differences in the  nature of  the  representations  of good  and  poor im-

agers  (Pylyshyn,  1973),  a  likely difference is  in  the amount  of  sensory  detail  that  is represented  in  the  images  they  create. We might then expect  that good  imagers would more  readily  confuse  re-representations  of experiences with similar  perceptions.  In one experiment (Johnson, Raye,  Wang,  &amp; Taylor, 1979,  Experiment 1; Johnson  &amp;  Raye, Note  8),  we separated  subjects  into  groups of  good  and  poor  imagers on the  basis of an imagery  test.  Using  our re-representation paradigm,  subjects saw pictures of  common objects  taken  from  children's  books on  presentation  trials  and  were  asked  to  generate images  of the  pictures  on  generation  trials. On a later test of presentation frequency,  the judgments  of  good  imagers  were  more  affected by  the number  of  times  they  had imagined a picture than were the judgments of poor imagers. (Good and poor imagers did not differ  in their  ability  to  recall the  set of pictures).

Although  it  simplifies  the  discussion to look  at  one  type  of  information  at  a  time, we should  keep  in  mind  that  all  memories include several types of information and that any  reality  monitoring decision is the  result of  processes  that  weight  and  integrate  information  across  these dimensions. The  previously  discussed  Raye  et  al.  study  (1980, Experiment  2),  which  compared frequency judgments  with  and  without  a  limit,  demonstrated that subjects can change the weighting given to various dimensions.  Which components  of  memories  will  weigh  more heavily in reality  monitoring judgments  may depend  on  the  nature  of  the  events  being judged. For  example,  cognitive  operations may  be  particularly  important  in  decisions about language, especially words  and/or sentences  given  in  isolation.  Sensory information may prove to be the more dominant component  in  decisions  about  the  origin  of visual  information such  as  pictures.

Furthermore,  that decisions are not simply made on the basis of one type of information, without  regard  for other attributes, is  illustrated by some results reported  by Durso and Johnson  (1980). Subjects saw a concept  represented  by  a  word  or  a  line  drawing,  and on  a  later  recognition  test  (where both  targets and distractors  were given auditorially), the subjects  were asked to indicate the original  mode of presentation  of the  items they identified  as  old.  The  orienting  task  at  acquisition was manipulated for different groups of subjects. Some subjects were asked to perform tasks that  required  that  they attend  to  the  formal  properties  of  the  word symbol  (what  is the  last letter  of the  name of this concept?). Other  subjects were asked to perform tasks that explicitly  required  that they  create  an  image  of  the  concept  (How long  would  it  take  for  an  artist  to  make  a line  drawing of  this  concept?).  And  some subjects  were  asked  to  perform  tasks  that required them  to  consult  semantic  information regarding the referent of the concept (e.g., What is this thing used for?). The most interesting data  for the present purposes are the  confusions  between  the  two  modes  of representations,  that  is, the  mistaken judgments that words were presented as  pictures or  that pictures  were  presented as  words. The relative  frequency of these two types of confusions  did  not  differ  for  either  the  orienting  tasks involving the  formal  properties of words or those involving explicit imagery. However,  for  the  semantic  conditions, subjects  were significantly  more  likely  to  say a word  had  been  presented  as  a  picture  than to  say  a  picture  had  been  presented  as  a word.  This  finding  is  all  the  more striking because  there  was clearly  a  significant  bias on  false  positives (calling a  completely  new item old) to say they were presented as words rather  than  as  pictures.  The  high  rate  of misidentifications  of  words  as  pictures  by those  subjects  who did  semantic  processing suggests  they had been incidentally creating images  or  consulting  sensory  information during the orienting tasks and that they later mistook  this  self-generated  pictorial information  for externally presented  pictorial information.

Memories for words created  in the explicit imagery conditions should also  have  had considerable  sensory  information;  however, the  memories  also very  likely  included  cues indicating  that  the  image  was purposefully created. On the other hand, the  incidentally created  images,  which  had  less salient  cues that  they  were  generated by  cognitive  operations  yet  which  had  high  sensory  infer-

mation, should be more likely to be mistaken for  externally presented  pictures.  Thus,  here is a case where it makes sense to assume that decisions  about  the  origin  of memories  took into account  both  sensory  and  cognitive  operations information.

## Metamemory  Assumptions

An  important  point  incorporated in  the working  model  of  reality monitoring  that appears to be born  out  by our  experiments is  the  idea  that  subjects'  assumptions  about how their memories work will play a critical role  in  decision  strategies  and  biases  operating during reality  monitoring.

What subjects report. The  good-poor imager study above attempted  to manipulate the  similarity between  perceptions  and  rerepresentations  of those perceptions. We have also attempted  to vary the relationship between  perceptions  and  cotemporal, selfgenerated information (Johnson, Raye, Foley, &amp; Foley, in press,  Experiment  3). An experimenter  read  a  list  of  common,  unrelated  words.  Subjects  in  the related condition  were told  to  generate  a  word  for  each stimulus  word  that had  some meaningful relationship to  the  stimulus  word.  Subjects in  the unrelated condition were told  to give a  word  that  was  not  in  any  way  related  to the stimulus item. Subjects  in the first-letter condition were  told to give  a word  that started  with the same first letter as the word they  heard.  Thus  in  the  related and  unrelated conditions subjects gave some attention to the  meaning of each  externally  presented item  in  order  to  perform  the  task,  but  the internally generated product should  have been  different in the  two cases.  The  related and  the  first-letter  conditions should both produce  related items,  but  these  relationships  should  primarily  be  semantic  in  the related  group and  orthographic  in the  firstletter condition. All  subjects wrote  down both  presented  and  generated  words.

A  week  later,  subjects  received  an  identification-of-origin test. For those words  correctly  recognized  as old, the  mean  percents correct identification of the source of an item were 62, 68, and  74, for related,  first-letter, and  unrelated,  respectively,  indicating  that as cotemporal thoughts become more related to  perceptual  events,  the  likelihood  of  later confusing  their  memory  representations  increases. However,  even  though  the  related subjects  showed  the  least  ability to identify the  origin  of an  item,  they  were still significantly  above  a chance  score  of 50%.

Following the identification-of-origin  test, subjects  in this study were asked to  describe how they were able to identify  the source of various  items.  Subjects tended  to  mention sensory  cues  more  often  with  respect  to experimenter-generated items ("I differentiated  words which you said by remembering your pronunciation";  "I  could visualize your saying it";  or "The  words which the  experimenter stated were  remembered in her voice").  Cognitive processing,  additional information,  and  a  consideration  of  specific semantic  content were  mentioned more  in conjunction with subject-generated items ("When  I  was very sure  [about  my words] I  could  remember  I  had  a  very specific  reason for  making  the  association.  If  the  word [only]  seemed  familiar, I  would  say that  it was the experimenter's word";  "I  made the decision by knowing  what my train of thought was  during  the  exercise";  "Sometimes the words  I  chose  went  together  with a  certain scene, i.e., pond, cloud, tree.'And when I saw the  words again  I tried  to remember if they fit  in  any  of the  images  I  had").

Biases  in judgments. If  you  ask  them, many  subjects  expect  self-generated information  to  have  an  advantage  in  memory (Johnson,  Raye,  Foley,  &amp;  Foley,  in  press, Experiment  2).  This  expectation  is  consistent  with  a  notable  bias  we  found:  When subjects  felt  that  a completely new item was familiar  (a  false  positive), they  displayed  a much  greater  willingness to  attribute  it  to an  external  source than  to  say they  generated  it.  We  found this  "it-had-to-be-you" ("I'd remember  if it  were me")  effect  with the  three  different  instructions for  generating  responses  described  above (related,  unrelated,  first  letter),  for  high  and  low  frequency category instances and opposites (Johnson, Raye,  Foley,  &amp;  Foley,  in  press Experiment  2)  and  for  identification of origin of words from  sentences (Johnson, Raye, &amp;  Durso,  1980).  The  pervasiveness  of this bias suggests that it is probably an important component of performance in memory tasks,

contributing,  perhaps,  to  false  positives  in certain recognition  paradigms (e.g., Cramer, 1965; Johnson,  Bransford,  &amp; Solomon,  1973; Kimble,  1968; Sulin  &amp;  Dooling,  1974;  Underwood,  1965)  and  unedited  intrusions in recall  (Brewer,  1977;  Deese,  1959).  Under some circumstances, subjects can be induced with a stricter criterion  to perform in a way that more closely matches  real  external events (Raye  et al.,  1980).  An investigation of  the  circumstances  that  might  affect  this bias  could  prove  interesting.  For  example, we have recently  found that  alcohol intoxication  reduces  (but  does  not eliminate)  this bias,  reflecting  perhaps  people's  belief  that one  consequence  of  drinking is  that  it  diminishes one's ability to remember what one did  (Taylor  et  al.,  Note  4).  Of  course,  the bias  might be completely  reversed if the social  desirability  of  having  been  the  source of an idea were markedly increased ("I  don't remember  generating  it,  but  that  idea  is so good  it  has to  be  mine").

## Remembering  Occurrence Versus Remembering  Origin

Do we need a model of reality  monitoring that  is distinct  from  the  theories  of memory that  have been proposed  to  account  for  recognition and recall in general?  For example, could we simply say that  "deep"  processing of  information  leads  to  better  memory,  including  better  identification of  origin? A strength  theorist  might  propose  that  identification of origin simply requires more of the same sort of information that recall and recognition  depend  on.  However,  attempts  to characterize  memory  functioning  in  terms of  a  single dimension  have  always run  into difficulties.  For example, in the present context, both strength  and levels theories would expect a consistent correlation between memory  for  occurrence measures (recall or  recognition)  and identification-of-origin measures. Memory for occurrence and memory  for  origin  sometimes  do  respond  to  the same  variables.  For  example,  both  recognition  and  identification of origin were  better for  low as compared  to  high frequency  category  instances  (Johnson,  Raye,  Foley,  &amp; Foley,  in  press,  Experiment  2).  However, these two measures are by no means always affected similarly.  For  example,  directors, who  asked  the  questions,  were  as  good  as speakers  in  later  identifying  answers  that had  been  given but  far  worse at  identifying who said what (Raye  &amp; Johnson, 1980, Experiment 2). And 6-year-olds who said some words  and  thought  others  were  as  good  at identifying which  words  had occurred  as were  6-year-olds  who  had  listened  to  two speakers  say  the  words;  however, the  children  found  it  much  more  difficult to  discriminate what they had said from what they had  thought  than  to  discriminate between what the two speakers had said (Foley et al., Note 5).

In some cases, memory for occurrence and identification  of origin appear  actually to be affected  in opposite  ways by the  same variable.  For  example,  recall and  recognition were  both  better  when  subjects  generated semantically  related responses  than when they  generated  responses  sharing the  same first letter  as the  stimuli. However, discriminating between items heard  and items generated  was more difficult  in the  related case (Johnson, Raye,  Foley,  &amp;  Foley,  in  press).

In  the  experiments  in  which  Durso  and Johnson  (1980) compared memory  for  pictures  and  words  under  different  orienting tasks,  attending  to  the  referent  for  a word rather than properties of the verbal name of the  concept  resulted  in  higher  recognition, but  it also  resulted  in more words that were later identified as having been pictures. With the explicit imagery tasks, there was also an increase in recognition  relative to verbal tasks,  but  this  was  not  accompanied  by  an increase  in identifying  words as pictures.  In summary, it does not appear  to us that  the information  and  processes  that  are  important  in  discriminating  the  origin  of  information can  be equated  with those that  produce voluntary recall or a feeling of familiarity.

The  factor that probably  most  distinguishes the  process  of voluntary recall  from recognition  is  the  dependence  of  recall  on organizational information (Mandler, 1967; Tulving,  1968).  In  contrast,  recognition  is notable  for  the  variety of types  of  information  that can  produce  a  "familiarity" response (e.g., rapid  activation  of semantic or sensory information, cognitive operations in-

formation,  context  cues).  Reality  monitoring,  as  a  process,  has  its own properties,  although to a certain extent  it of course draws on information that is operative in recall and recognition. (For  example, the potential usefulness in recognition  of  cognitive  operations,  especially,  has  received  recent  attention,  e.g., Kolers,  1975;  Russo  &amp;  Wisher, 1976.)  Although  a  model  of  reality  monitoring  does  not  offer a  theory  of  recall  or recognition,  neither do  theories  of  recall  or recognition constitute theories of reality monitoring. Furthermore, understanding reality monitoring can contribute to our understanding  of  recall  and  recognition  processes, for  example,  by  providing  mechanisms for editing out inappropriate responses and  by  accounting  for  failures in  editing.

## Summary and Conclusions

We  have  intended  to  focus  attention  on the  processes  involved in  distinguishing between  the  perceived  and  the  self-generated in  memory (reality  monitoring). We  started with  the  assumption that  perceiving  differs from  self-generated  events such  as thinking and  imagining. That  is, they  are  either  different  operations  of  the  mind  or  operations of  the mind  resulting  in characteristically different  amounts of various types of information.  Furthermore, we  believe  that  the processes involved in reality monitoring, when  they  are  functioning optimally,  capitalize on these characteristic  differences. We have  outlined  a  working  model  of  reality monitoring  and  have  investigated  some  of the  questions  it  raises.  The  present model proposes that reality monitoring  can be based  on  some  general  dimensions-rather independent  of  the  particular  content  of  a memory-that  serve  as  distinguishers  between the two classes of memories.  It is proposed  that  dimensions  or  attributes particularly  central  to  reality  monitoring  include amount of contextual  information (time and place), semantic detail,  sensory information, and  cognitive  operations.  The  model  additionally assumes that reality monitoring may involve  more  extended  reasoning processes that  take  into account  the  content  of  particular  memories  and  their  relation  to  other knowledge  available  to  the  person,  as  well as metamemory  assumptions of the  person.

Overall,  our  results  support  these  ideas: Memories from  external and internal sources appear to differ  in class-characteristic ways; confusion  is increased  by  semantic  and  sensory  similarity between  memories  from  the two  sources;  confusion  is  reduced  with  increases  in  the  information  about  cognitive operations  associated with  internally  generated memories; memories based in perception have better spatial, temporal, and sensory information; and people's tacit assumptions  about  these  characteristic  differences  are  reflected  in  metamemory  assumptions that  influence  reality  monitoring judgments.

For the  most  part,  the materials  and procedures  we have used  seem  to  be extremely conducive to confusing external and internal sources  of  memories.  The  words,  sentences, and  pictures  were  not,  after  all,  embedded in  social  or  emotional  contexts  that  might provide cues from  related  information stored in  memory about  the  origin  of  a  particular trace.  Given  the  seemingly  meager  cues,  it is perhaps remarkable that significant reality monitoring was obtained  in some conditions with  retention  intervals as  long as  7  and  10 days.  This  sensitivity to  the  origin  of  information,  when a  discrimination is called  for, further  recommends  the  usefulness of making  a  distinction  between  external  and  internal  sources  of  information  and  the  usefulness  of  attempting  to  incorporate  such  a distinction  into models of  memory.

The  overall  picture  suggested  by  the evidence reviewed here is one of a memory system  that  preserves  information  about  the origin  of  information  remarkably  well;  the decision  criteria  through  which  this  information  is  filtered,  however, allow  for  some error in attributing memories to sources. We feel  that  the  working model  proposed  here is  a  viable  framework  for  generating  questions  and  integrating  results  of  studies  directed  at  the  processes involved  in  reality monitoring.

## Reference  Notes

1. Johnson, M. K.,  &amp; Raye, C.  L. A  working model  of reality monitoring. Paper  presented  at  the  annual

meeting  of  the  Psychonomic Society, San  Antonio, Texas, November 1978.

- 2. Levine,  M.,  &amp;  Jankovic,  I.  N. An  introduction to spatial  problem  solving. Manuscript submitted for publication.
- 3.  Johnson,  M.  K. Constructive aspects  of memory: Historical  antecedents. Paper  presented  at  the symposium on constructive processes in memory,  annual meeting of the  American Psychological Association, Chicago, September  1975.
- 4.  Taylor,  T.  H.,  Johnson,  M.  K.,  Birnbaum,  I.  M., &amp; Raye, C. L. Alcohol and reality  monitoring. Manuscript  submitted for  publication.
- 5. Foley,  M.  A.,  Johnson,  M.  K.,  &amp;  Raye,  C.  L. A developmental  study  of reality  monitoring,  comparing  two  types  of judgments  about  memories. Paper presented at  the  annual meeting of the  Eastern Psychological Association, Hartford, Connecticut, April 1980.
- 6.  Johnson, M.  K.,  Raye, C.  L.,  Foley, M. A., &amp; Kim, J. Pictures  and images: Spatial  and temporal information compared. Manuscript in preparation, 1980.
- 7.  Johnson, M. K., Raye, C.  L., Foley, M. A., &amp; Foley, H.  J. Perceptions  and  imaginations:  sensory information compared. Manuscript in preparation,  1980.
- 8.  Johnson, M.  K.,  &amp;  Raye,  C.  L. Fact  and fantasy: Confusion  between perceptual  experience  and  imaginations. Paper  presented  at  the  annual  meeting of the  Psychonomic Society,  St.  Louis,  Missouri, November  1976.

## References

Atkinson, R. C., &amp; Juola, J. F. Factors  influencing speed and  accuracy  of  word  recognition.  In  S.  Kornblum (Ed.), Attention  and  performance, IV. New  York: Academic Press,  1973.

Atwood, G. An experimental  study of visual  imagination and  memory. Cognitive  Psychology, 1971, 2, 290299.

Bartlett,  F. C. Remembering:  A  study  in  experimental and social psychology. Cambridge,  Eng.: Cambridge University  Press,  1932.

Bjork,  R.  A.,  &amp;  Whitten, W.  B. Recency-sensitive retrieval  processes  in  long-term  free  recall. Cognitive Psychology, 1974, 6, 173-189.

Bobrow,  S.  A.,  &amp;  Bower, G.  H.  Comprehension  and recall  of  sentences. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1969, 80, 455-461.

Bower, G. H. A multi-component  theory of the memory trace.  In K. W. Spence &amp; J.  T. Spence (Eds.), The psychology  of learning and motivation (Vol. 1). New York: Academic  Press,  1967.

Bower, G. H. A selective review of organizational factors in  memory. In  E.  Tulving &amp;  W.  Donaldson, (Eds.), Organization of memory. New  York:  Academic Press,  1972. (a)

Bower, G. H. Mental imagery and associative learning. In L.  W.  Gregg  (Ed.), Cognition  in  learning  and memory. New York: Wiley,  1972.  (b)

- Bransford,  J.  D.,  &amp;  Franks,  J.  J.  The  abstraction  of linguistic ideas. Cognitive Psychology, 1971, 2, 331350.

Bransford, J.  D.,  &amp; Johnson, M. K. Contextual prereq- uisites for understanding:  Some investigations of comprehension  and  recall. Journal of Verbal Learning and  Verbal Behavior, 1972, 11, 717-726.

- Bransford,  J.  D.,  &amp;  Johnson, M.  K.  Considerations of some problems of comprehension. In W. Chase (Ed.), Visual information  processing. New York: Academic Press,  1973.
- Brewer,  W.  F.  Memory  for  pragmatic  implications of sentences. Memory  &amp; Cognition, 1977, 5, 673-678.
- Brooks, L. R. Spatial  and verbal components of the act of  recall. Canadian Journal  of Psychology, 1968, 22, 349-368.

Brown,  A.  L.  The  development of  memory:  Knowing about  knowing, and  knowing  how to know. In  H.  W. Reese  (Ed.), Advances  in child  development  and behavior (Vol.  10).  New York:  Academic Press,  1975.

- Bruner,  J.  S.  Going  beyond the  information given. In Contemporary  approaches  to  cognition. Cambridge, Mass.:  Harvard  University Press,  1957.
- Cameron,  N. Personality  development  and  psychopathology:  A dynamic approach. Boston:  Houghton Mifflin,  1963.
- Cofer,  C. N.  Constructive processes  in memory. American Scientist, 1973, 61, 537-543.
- Cole,  W. G.,  &amp;  Loftus,  E.  F. Incorporating new  information  into memory. American  Journal  of  Psychology, 1979, 92, 413-425.
- Corbett,  A. T.,  &amp;  Dosher, B. A.  Instrument  inferences in sentence encoding. Journal  of  Verbal Learning and Verbal  Behavior, 1978, 17, 479-491.
- Craik,  F.  I.  M.,  &amp;  Kirsner, K.  The  effect  of  speaker's voice on  word recognition. Quarterly  Journal  of  Experimental Psychology, 1974, 26, 274-284.

Craik, F. I. M.,  &amp; Lockhart, R. S. Levels of processing: A framework for memory research. Journal  of  Verbal Learning  and  Verbal Behavior, 1972, //, 671-684.

Cramer, P.  Recovery of a discrete  memory. Journal  of Personality  and Social  Psychology, 1965, /, 326-332.

- Crowder,  R.  G. Principles  of  Learning  and memory. Hillsdale, N.J.:  Erlbaum, 1976.

Davies, G.  M.,  Milnee, J.  E.,  &amp; Glennie, B. S. On  the significance of "double encoding" for the superior  recall  of  pictures  to  names. Quarterly  Journal  of Experimental  Psychology, 1973, 25, 413-423.

Deese,  J.  On  the  prediction of occurrence  of particular verbal  intrusions  in immediate  recall. Journal  of  Experimental Psychology, 1959, 58, 17-22.

Dooling,  D.  J.,  &amp;  Lachman, R.  Effects  of comprehension  on  retention of  prose. Journal  of Experimental Psychology, 1971, 88, 216-222.

Durso, F. T.,  &amp; Johnson, M. K. The  effects  of  orienting tasks  on  recognition, recall,  and  modality  confusion of  pictures  and  words. Journal  of Verbal  Learning and  Verbal Behavior, 1980, 19, 416-429.

Erdelyi, M.,  Buschke,  H.,  &amp;  Finkelstein, S. Hyperamnesia  for socratic stimuli: The  growth of recall for internally  generated  memory list  abstracted from  a series of riddles. Memory  &amp; Cognition, 1977, 5, 283286.

Finke,  R.  A.  The  functional  equivalence  of mental images and  errors of movement. Cognitive  Psychology, 1979,  //, 235-264.

Freud,  S. Negation (Standard Ed.,  Vol.  19.  James

Strachey, Ed.). Toronto, Canada: Clarke, Irwin, 1961.  (Originally published, 1925.)

Freud, S. Project for  a scientific  psychology (Standard Ed., Vol.  1. James  Strachey,  Ed.). Toronto,  Canada:

Clarke,  Irwin,  1966.  (Originally published, 1895.) Garrity, L. I. Electromyography: A review of the current status of subvocal speech  research. Memory &amp;  Cognition, 1977, 5, 615-622. Geiselman,  R.  E.,  &amp;  Glenny,  J.  Effects  of imagining speakers'  voices  on  the  retention  of  words  presented visually. Memory &amp; Cognition, 1977, 5, 499-504. Gibson, J.  J. The  senses  considered  as perceptual systems. Boston: Houghton  Mifflin,  1966. Gibson, J. J. The ecological  approach  to visual  perception. Boston:  Houghton  Mifflin,  1979. Hart,  J.  T.  Memory  and  the  memory-monitoring  process. Journal  of  Verbal  Learning  and  Verbal  Behavior, 1967, 6, 685-691. Hasher,  L.,  &amp;  Griffin,  M.  Reconstructive  and  reproductive processes  in memory. Journal  of  Experimental  Psychology, 1978, 4, 318-330. Hasher,  L.,  Griffin, M.,  &amp;  Johnson,  M.  K.  More  on interpretive  factors  in  forgetting. Memory &amp;  Cognition, 1977, 5, 41-45. Hasher,  L.,  &amp;  Johnson,  M.  K.  Interpretive factors  in forgetting. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human  Learning  and Memory, 1975, /,  567-575. Hasher,  L.,  &amp;  Zacks,  R.  T.  Automatic  and effortful processes  in  memory. Journal of  Experimental Psychology:  General, 1979, 108, 356-388. Heidbreder,  E. Seven psychologies. New  York: Appleton-Century-Crofts,  1933. Hochberg, J. Perception. Englewood Cliffs,  N.J.:  Prentice-Hall,  1979. Horowitz,  M. J. Image  formation  and cognition. New York:  Appleton-Century-Crofts,  1978. Hume,  D. A  treatise  of  human  nature. Oxford,  Eng.: Clarendon  Press,  1978. (Originally published,  1739.) Jacoby,  L.  L.  On  interpreting the  effects  of  repetition: Solving  a  problem  versus  remembering  a  solution. Journal of Verbal  Learning and Verbal  Behavior, 1978, 17, 649-667. James,  W. The  principles of  psychology. New  York: Dover,  1950. (Originally published,  1890.) Jarvella,  R.  J.,  &amp;  Collas,  J.  G.  Memory  for  the intentions  of  sentences. Memory &amp;  Cognition, 1974, 2, 185-188. Jenkins,  J.  J.  Remember  that  old  theory  of  memory? Well,  forget  it! American  Psychologist, November 1974,  pp. 785-795. Johnson,  M.  K.  What  is being counted  none the  less? In  I.  M.  Birnbaum  &amp;  E.  S.  Parker  (Eds.), Alcohol and human memory. Hillsdale, N.J.:  Erlbaum,  1977. Johnson,  M.  K.,  Bransford,  J.  D.,  &amp;  Solomon, S.  K. Memory for tacit  implications of  sentences. Journal of  Experimental  Psychology, 1973, 98, 203-205.

Johnson,  M.  K.,  Raye,  C.  L.,  &amp;  Durso,  F.  T.  Reality monitoring:  Second perceptions  and  thoughts. Bulletin of  the Psychonomic Society, 1980, 15, 402-404. Johnson,  M.  K.,  Raye,  C.  L.,  Foley,  H.  J.,  &amp;  Foley, M. A. Cognitive operations and decision bias in reality monitoring. American  Journal of Psychology, in press.

Johnson, M. K., Raye, C. L., Hasher,  L., &amp;  Chromiak,

W.  Are  there  developmental differences in  reality monitoring? Journal of Experimental Child Psy- chology, 1979, 27, 120-128. Johnson,  M.  K.,  Raye,  C.  L.,  Wang,  A.  Y.,  &amp; Taylor, T.  H.  Fact  and  fantasy: The  roles  of  accuracy  and variability  in confusing  imaginations  with perceptual experiences. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human  Learning  and Memory, 1979, 5, 229-240. Johnson, M. K., Taylor, T.  H.,  &amp; Raye, C.  L. Fact  and fantasy:  The  effects of internally generated  events on the apparent frequency of externally generated events. Memory &amp; Cognition, 1977, 5,  116-122. Kimble, G.  A.  Mediating associations. Journal of Experimental  Psychology, 1968, 76, 263-266. Kintsch,  W.  Memory for  prose.  In  C.  N.  Cofer  (Ed.), The  structure  of human  memory. San  Francisco: Freeman,  1976. Klatzky,  R.  L. Human  memory:  Structure  and  processes. San  Francisco:  Freeman, 1980. Kohler,  W. Gestalt psychology. New  York:  Mentor Books,  1959. (Originally published,  1947.) Kolers,  P.  A.  Specificity of  operations  in  sentence  recognition. Cognitive  Psychology, 1975, 7, 289-306. Kosslyn, S. M. Can  imagery be distinguished from other forms of internal representation? Evidence from  studies  of  information  retrieval  times. Memory &amp;  Cognition, 1976, 4, 291-297. Krech, D. Notes toward a psychological theory. Journal of  Personality, 1949, 18, 66-87. Kreutzer,  M.  A.,  Leonard,  C.,  &amp;  Flavell, J.  H.  An  interview study of children's knowledge about memory. Monographs of  the  Society for Research in Child Development, 1975, 40 (1,  Serial  No.  159). Landauer, T.  K.  Memory  without  organization: Properties of a model with random storage  and  undirected retrieval. Cognitive  Psychology, 1975, 7, 495-531. Lashley, K. S. The  problem of serial order  in behavior. In N. J. Slamecka  (Ed.), Human learning and  memory. New  York: Oxford  University Press,  1967. Mandler,  G. Organization  and memory.  In K. W. Spence  &amp;  J.  T.  Spence  (Eds.), The  psychology of learning  and  motivation (Vol.  1).  New  York:  Academic Press,  1967. Mandler, G.  Organization  and  recognition. In  E. Tulving &amp; W. Donaldson (Eds.), Organization  of  memory. New  York: Academic  Press,  1972. Martin, C. J.,  Boersma,  F. J.,  &amp;  Cox,  D.  L.  A  classification  of  associative  strategies in paired-associate learning. Psychonomic  Science, 1965, 3, 455-456. McGuigan, F. J. Covert  oral behavior and auditory hallucinations. Psychophysiology, 1966, 3(1), 73-80. Mellor, C.  S.  First  rank  symptoms of schizophrenia. I: The  frequency in schizophrenics on admission to hospital.  II: Differences  between  individual  first  rank symptoms. British Journal  of  Psychiatry, 1970, 117, 15-23. Mill, J. Analysis  of the phenomena of the human mind, by James Mill (edited  with additional  notes  by J.  S. Mill). New York: Kelley, 1967. (Originally published, 1829.)

Mill,  J.  S. Analysis  of  the  phenomena of  the  human mind, by James Mill (edited  with additional notes by J. S. Mill). New York: Kelley, 1967. (Originally published, 1869.)

Mintz, S., &amp; Alpert, M. Imagery vividness, reality testing, and schizophrenic hallucinations. Journal  of  Abnormal  Psychology, 1972, 79, 310-316.

Neisser,  U. Cognitive  Psychology. New York:  Appleton-Century-Crofts,  1967.

Neisser, U. Cognition and reality. San  Francisco:  Freeman,  1976.

- Paivio,  A.  Mental  imagery in  associative  learning and memory. Psychological  Review, 1969, 76, 241-263.

Paivio,  A. Imagery  and  verbal  processes. New  York: Holt,  Rinehart  &amp;  Winston,  1971.

Perky,  C.  W.  An  experimental study of imagination. American Journal  of Psychology, 1910, 21, 422-452.

Posner,  M.  I.,  &amp;  Snyder,  C.  R.  R.  Attention and  cognitive control. In  R.  L. Solso (Ed.), Information  processing and cognition: The Loyola Symposium. Hillsdale,  N.J.:  Erlbaum,  1975.

Posner,  M.  I.,  &amp;  Warren,  R.  E.  Traces,  concepts  and conscious construction. In A. W. Melton &amp; E. Martin (Eds.), Coding processes  in human memory. Washington,  D.C.:  Winston, 1972.

Postman,  L.  Toward  a  general  theory  of  cognition.  In J.  H. Rohrer  &amp; M. Sherif  (Eds.), Social  psychology at  the  crossroads. New  York: Harper,  1951.

Pylyshyn,  Z.  W.  What  the  mind's eye tells the  mind's brain:  A  critique of  mental  imagery. Psychological Bulletin, 1973, 80, 1-23.

Raye,  C.  L.  Recognition:  Frequency  or organization? American Journal  of Psychology, 1976, 89, 645-658.

Raye, C.  L.,  &amp;  Johnson, M.  K.  Reality  monitoring vs. discrimination  between external sources. Bulletin  of the  Psychonomic Society, 1980, 15, 405-408.

- Raye, C. L., Johnson,  M.  K.,  &amp; Taylor,  T.  H.  Is there something special about  memory  for  internally-generated  information? Memory  &amp;  Cognition, 1980, 8, 141-148.

Reid, T.  An  inquiry into the  human mind, on the principles of common sense. In  K. Lehrer  &amp;  R.  E. Beanblossom  (Eds.), Thomas  Reid's  inquiry  and  essays. Indianapolis,  Ind.:  Bobbs-Merrill,  1975. (Originally published,  1764.)

Ross,  M.,  &amp; Sicoly, F. Egocentric biases  in availability and  attribution. Journal of  Personality and  Social Psychology, 1979, 37, 322-336.

- Russo,  J.  E.,  &amp;  Wisher,  R.  A.  Reprocessing  as  a  recognition  cue. Memory &amp;  Cognition, 1976, 4, 683689.
- Sachs, J.  S.  Recognition  memory  for syntactic and semantic  aspects  of  connected  discourse. Perception &amp;  Psychophysics, 1967, 2, 437-442.
- Schneider, W.,  &amp;  Shiffrin,  R.  M. Controlled  and  automatic  human information processing:  I.  Detection, search,  and  attention. Psychological Review, 1977, 84, 1-66.
- Segal, S. J.,  &amp; Fusella, V. Influence of imaged pictures and sounds on detection of visual  and auditory signals. Journal  of  Experimental Psychology, 1970, 83,  458464.
- Slamecka,  N.  J.,  &amp;  Graf,  P.  The  generation  effect: Delineation  of  a  phenomenon. Journal of Experimental  Psychology:  Human  Learning  and Memory, 1978,4,592-604.

Sulin,  R.  A.,  &amp;  Dooling, D. J.  Intrusion of a  thematic idea  in  retention  of  prose. Journal  of Experimental Psychology, 1974, 103, 255-262.

- Toglia, M. P.,  &amp; Kimble, G. A. Recall and use of serial position  information. Journal  of  Experimental Psychology:  Human  Learning  and  Memory, 1976, 2, 431-445.
- Tolman,  E.  C.  Cognitive maps  in  rats  and  men. Psychological  Review, 1948,  55,  189-208.

Tulving,  E.  Theoretical  issues  in  free  recall.  In  T.  R. Dixon  &amp;  D.  L.  Horton (Eds.), Verbal behavior  and general behavior theory. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall,  1968.

Underwood, B. J. False recognition produced by implicit verbal  responses. Journal  of  Experimental Psychology, 1965,70,  122-129.

Underwood, B. J.  Attributes of memory. Psychological Review, 1969, 76, 559-573.

- Wickens,  D.  D.  Encoding categories  of words: An  empirical  approach  to  meaning. Psychological Review, 1970,  77, 1-15.
- Yuille,  J.  C.  A  detailed  examination  of  mediation  in paired-associate learning. Memory  &amp; Cognition, 1973, /,  333-342.

Received  February 29, 1980 