## Neurodiversity and autism - Neurodiversité et autisme

Neurodiversity and autism: between disability and difference, science and ideology Rebecchi Kevin, PhD

## Author affiliations:

Development of Individuals, Processes and Disabilities in Education Research Unit University Lumière Lyon 2, France

Education and Diversity in French-speaking Areas Research Unit University of Limoges, France

------------

Neurodiversité et autisme : entre handicap et différence, science et idéologie Rebecchi Kevin, PhD

Affiliation de l'auteur :

Unité de recherche Développement Individu Processus Handicap Éducation Université Lumière Lyon 2, France

Unité de recherche Éducation et Diversités en Espaces Francophones Université de Limoges, France

------------ https://orcid.org/0000-0001-6948-1584

## Neurodiversity and autism - Neurodiversité et autisme

## Abstract

The concept of neurodiversity has been developing for more than twenty years under a sociopolitical angle and has since been strongly criticized for its lack of scientificity, the vagueness of its boundaries,  the  highlighting  of  a  certain  conception  of  autism,  the  problems  linked  to  intellectual disability,  inability  to  support  the  theory  of  a  non-disabling  difference, and  an  excessive alignment sometimes with the medical model of disability and sometimes with the social model of disability. Furthermore, neurodiversity is considered from different angles depending on the discipline and the individual. The medical model of disability based on a personal problem, the social model of disability based  on  a  societal  problem,  the  neurodiversity  mixing  innate,  acquired,  neurodevelopment  and psychology in opposition to a norm, and the cognitive diversity highlighting the existence of different cognitions and neurophenotypes outside of psychopathology and the healthy-pathological opposition.

This article thus proposes to explore these two challenges of neurodiversity using the case of autism and suggests that the development of a neurobiological and genetic pan in neurodiversity and a more thorough work on the definition and conception of autism could allow inscribing neurodiversity in a scientific field outside political and partisan ideologies.

Keywords : Neurodiversity, Neurodivergence, Disability, Difference, Autism, Science, Ideology

## Résumé

Le concept de neurodiversité se développe depuis plus de vingt ans sous un angle sociopolitique et il est depuis vivement critiqué pour son manque de scientificité, le flou de ses frontières, la mise en lumière d'une certaine conception de l'autisme, les problématiques liées à la déficience intellectuelle, une incapacité à étayer la théorie d'une différence non handicapante, un trop grand alignement tantôt sur  le  modèle  médical  du  handicap  et  tantôt  sur  le  modèle  social  du  handicap.  Par  ailleurs,  la neurodiversité est considérée sous différents angles selon les disciplines et les individus. Le modèle médical du handicap basé sur un problème de personne, le modèle social du handicap basé sur un problème de société, la neurodivergence mêlant inné, acquis, neurodéveloppement et psychologie en opposition à une norme, et la diversité cognitive mettant un exergue l'existence de différentes cognitions et neurophénotypes en dehors de la psychopathologie et de l'opposition sain-pathologique.

Cet article propose ainsi d'explorer ces deux défis de la neurodiversité en utilisant le cas de l'autisme et suggère que le développement d'un pan neurobiologique et génétique dans la neurodiversité et  un  travail  plus  approfondi  sur  la  définition  et  la  conception  de  l'autisme  pourraient  permettre d'inscrire la neurodiversité dans un champ scientifique hors des idéologies politiques et partisanes.

Mots-clés : Neurodiversité, Neurodivergence, Handicap, Différence, Autisme, Science, Idéologie

## Neurodiversity and autism - Neurodiversité et autisme

## Introduction

Schröder (1938) explained that psychopathy should be  understood from a characterological point of view and that it is a matter of character variations of considerable magnitude, of human beings with an unusual character structure, out of the average, with a wider range of those mental differences that exist among all human beings and that they represent nothing qualitatively new or pathological. Thus, the differences that appear to the observer in the case of obviously abnormal and difficult-toeducate children are exactly the same, only within the narrow framework of the so-called norm, which distinguishes each person from one of the others. Plomin (2018) also argues that abnormal is normal and that the distinction between the two is artificial. He suggests that the use of the concept of spectrum to talk about autism is a nod to a quantitative dimensional approach. Scheepers (2021) suggests that neurodevelopmental  disorders  are  primarily  about  predisposition  and  characteristics  suggesting individual variation.

More recently, in her doctoral dissertation, Singer presented a politics of neurodiversity seen as "a new addition to the familiar political categories of class, gender, and race" to "enrich knowledge of the social model of disability" (2018, p. 13). She also presented the concept as a "new social movement" -especially in the context of autism- in opposition to the medical view of disability (2017, p. 38). Only on her blog does she indicate that the concept of neurodiversity also refers to the "virtually infinite neurocognitive variability within the Earth's human population" and that this concept "highlights the fact that each human has a unique nervous system, with a unique combination of abilities and needs" (Singer, 2019). However, she does not really elaborate on this issue in either her 1998 dissertation or her 2017 book and makes it clear on her blog in 2019 that this is not a scientific term, but a political term that was "never intended" to be scientific (Singer, 2019). One of the reasons she gives for her reasoning is that neurodiversity, like nature, "does not distinguish between difference and disability" (Singer, 2019, personal translation). All of this information allows us to better understand why the term neurodiversity is mostly discussed in the social sciences (Muskat, 2017; Runswick-Cole, 2014), why it is  presented  as  a  related  movement  to  that  of  intersectionality  (Strand,  2017)  and  why  it  might  be considered more as political activism like transactivism (Kollman &amp; Waites, 2009) rather than a real field  of  scientific  study  beyond  the  social  sciences,  and  finally  why  it  does  not  enjoy  consensus (Chapman, 2020; Milton, 2019).

Thus, neurodiversity is a recent concept, both in the general public and in scientific discussions. The PubMed site references 305 results for the term "neurodiversity" including 218 over the last two years, the CAIRN site presents us with 95 results including 55 in scientific journals, the OpenEdition site shows 57 results including 17 articles, and finally Google Scholar gives us 343 results for the term "neurodiversité" and 16,000 for "neurodiversity". On the other hand, the French website theses.fr only records 10 theses with the keyword "neurodiversité". Beyond the interest of the general public for the issue, this shows that French-speaking research has not yet fully grasped this question and that many debates and dissensus emerge such as the limits of the neurodiversity spectrum (inclusion or not of personality disorders, intellectual disabilities, personality traits...) or the main discipline in which to discuss this new paradigm (philosophy, sociology, biology, medicine, genetics...).

In this article, I will analyze neurodiversity around two elements: the terminologies used to refer to it (medical disability, social disability, neurodivergence and cognitive diversity) as well as the debates on its scientificity and contours. Finally, I will conclude this article with a discussion on the implications and emerging perspectives of this analysis.

## I/ Neurodiversity and autism: the challenge of terminology

The  concept  of  neurodiversity  is  invoked  in  various  theoretical  frameworks,  with  different meanings. Among these various frameworks, I have selected four: medical disability, social disability, neurodivergence and cognitive diversity.

## A/ Medical disability and social disability

In 1980, the World Health Organization (WHO, or OMS in French) published a manual entitled "International Classification of Impairments, Disabilities and Handicaps: A Manual of Classification of the Consequences of Disease" which was translated into French by the National Institute of Health and Medical Research eight years later (OMS, 1988). The WHO explained that it had chosen this title because the concept of disability alone is confusing and it summarizes impairments, disabilities and

## Neurodiversity and autism - Neurodiversité et autisme

disadvantages. Thus, a change in classifications took place, and the "disability axis" was renamed the "disadvantage axis" (OMS, 1988, p. 1). These three levels of classifications - impairments, disabilities, disadvantages - refer to "a specific level of disease consequences" (OMS, 1988, p. 10). Impairments refer to "any alteration in body or physical appearance, as well as organic or functional abnormality, regardless of cause" and are "disorders manifested at the organ level" (OMS, 1988, p. 10). Impairments refer to "the consequences of impairments in terms of the functional activity of the individual" and represent "disturbances at the level of the individual" (OMS, 1998, p. 10). Finally, disadvantages refer to  "the  harm  to  the  individual  resulting  from  his  or  her  impairment  or  disability"  and  reflect  "the adaptation of the individual and the interaction between him or her and the environment. Examples of impairments include "heterosexual role impairment" including "homosexuality" and "lack of interest in relationship  or  contact  with  individuals  of  the  opposite  sex"  (OMS,  1988,  p.  58)  or  "severe communication  impairment"  combining  "central  speech  and  vision  disorders  resulting  in  severe communication impairment" including "autism" (OMS, 1988, p. 64).

Then  in  2001,  the  WHO  updated  its  first  manual  and  published  a  new  "International Classification  of  Functioning,  Disability  and  Health"  (ICF)  (OMS,  2001)  with  the  objective  of "providing  a  standardized  language  and  framework  for  the  description  of  health  and  health-related states" (OMS, 2001, p. 3). This classification is also intended to serve as a statistical, research, clinical, social policy and educational tool. This manual refers to the "functioning" of the individual, i.e. his or her "organic functions", "activities" and "participation in society" (OMS, 2001, p. 3) and the concept of disability refers to impairments, activity limitations and participation restrictions. With this manual, the WHO wanted to move away from a classification based on the "consequences of the disease" (as in the first version of 1980) to a "classification of the components of health" (OMS, 2001, p. 4). Moreover, the WHO recalls that in its international classifications, "health problems (diseases, disorders, injuries and trauma) are classified essentially according to ICD-10 (International Classification of Diseases)" (OMS, 2001, p. 3). Thus, ICF and ICD-10 consider impairments within the framework of anatomical structures and organ functions related to a disease process. However, while impairment referred to "a problem of functioning and structure related to a health problem" (OMS, 2001, p.4) in ICF, it is a constituent of a disease with signs and symptoms in ICD-10. Here organ functions refer to "physiological functions of organ systems (including psychological functions)" (OMS, 2001, p. 10). Anatomical structures refer to "anatomical parts of the body, such as organs, limbs and their components" (OMS, 2001, p. 10). A deficiency is "an abnormality, deficiency, loss, or other significant deviation from a norm in anatomical structures" (OMS, 2001, p. 12). Finally, activity limitations refer to "the difficulties a person encounters in  performing activities", participation restrictions refer to "the problems a person may encounter in being  involved  in  a  real-life  situation"  and  environmental  factors  refer  to  "the  physical,  social  and attitudinal environment in which people live and conduct their lives" (OMS, 2001, p. 10). This can include such things as gender, race, age, lifestyle, habits, education, social background, occupation, psychological  traits,  among  others.  On  the  other  hand,  activities  refer  to  such  things  as  mobility, domestic activities, communication, relationships with others among others. In addition, the manual states that impairments are "defined in the light of current knowledge at the tissue or cellular level, and at the subcellular or molecular level" (OMS, 2001, p. 12) and that they represent, among other things, "deviations from certain generally accepted norms of the biomedical status of the body and its functions" (OMS, 2001, p. 13). Thus, in this classification, the components of impairment "rely primarily on the judgment  of  those  competent  to  assess  physical  and  mental  functioning  against  generally  accepted standards" (OMS, 2001, p. 14). Unlike the 1980 version, where autism appeared in central speech and visual impairments, it appears here in the "global psychosocial functions" that develop over the life course and that are "necessary for understanding and constructively integrating the mental functions that preside over the formation of reciprocal social relationship skills that enable interactions in society" (OMS, 2001, p. 50).

Ultimately, these two successive WHO classifications both refer to two visions and models of disability, the medical model and the social model:

-  In  the  first  model,  disability  is  perceived  "as a  problem of the person, as a direct consequence of disease, injury or other health problem, which requires medical care provided in the form of individual treatment  by  professionals"  (OMS,  2001,  p.  21)  and  its  treatment  aims  at  "healing  or  adapting  the individual, or changing his or her behavior" (OMS, 2001, p. 21). Thus, WHO states that the main issue

## Neurodiversity and autism - Neurodiversité et autisme

is medical care, while at the policy level "the main response is to change or reform health policies" (OMS, 2001, p. 21).

- In the second model, disability is seen "as primarily a socially created problem and an issue of full integration of individuals into society" and is not "an attribute of the individual, but rather a complex set of situations, many of which are created by the social environment" (OMS, 2001, p. 21). In this model, the solution must be social and it is "the collective responsibility of society as a whole to make the environmental changes necessary to enable people with disabilities to participate fully in all aspects of social life" (OMS, 2001, p. 21). Thus, the WHO states that disability is a political issue and is at the level of ideology or attitudes and "requires social change, which at the political level is translated into human rights"  (OMS,  2001,  p.  21).  One  of  the  problems  with  the  WHO  classifications  is  that  the definition and components of disability are based on human judgments that are themselves based on relatively arbitrary standards that have led to the classification of  homosexuality as a disability, for example. Frances (2014) noted that dictionaries cannot provide a satisfactory definition of normality, that statisticians and psychologists measure it endlessly but fail to capture its essence, and that doctors of the mind and body are busy gnawing away at its boundaries and that by dint of looking good enough perhaps,  everyone  will  eventually  become  more  or  less  ill.  At  the  same  time,  the  Diagnostic  and Statistical  Manual  of  Mental  Disorders  (DSM)  V  explains  that  mental  disorders  are  defined  with cultural, social, and family norms and values in mind (American Psychiatric Association, 2013), and several points have been and are still being debated (i.e., diagnostic criteria and conflicts of interest with pharmaceutical companies). Thus, it is observed that even though the social model shifts the issue of disability to the political realm, this disability is based on impairments - and thus does not seem to be fully in line with the idea of variability of neurodiversity (as a political concept) -, (sometimes moral) judgments, and constantly evolving medical and scientific knowledge. This thus leads to a potentially distorted view of the true nature of certain particularities or conditions such as autism. History has shown us several examples of the pathologization of difference due to limited scientific knowledge, and we have seen simple differences find their way into the field of disability  and/or  mental  disorders  like homosexuality. This is why it seems important to me to question the themes of neurodivergence and cognitive  diversity  which  are  more  linked  to  the  question  of  difference  than  those  of  disability  and disorder.

## B/ Neurodivergence and cognitive diversity

The term "neurodivergence" is often attributed to an autism activist named Kassiane Asasumasu (Wiktionary,  2014;  The  University  of  Edinburgh,  2020).  It  would  refer  to  all  neurology  and/or psychocognitive  functioning  that  is  antagonistic  or  at  least  discordant  to  what  would  be  normal neurology or psychocognitive functioning. This concept might seem vague, but it is in opposition to what is put forward by the social model of disability, namely that the scientific body would judge what is considered as a deficiency or not in the light of socio-cultural norms, following the example of the definition  of  what  is  a  mental  disorder  in  the  DSM.  Contrary  to  the  concept  of  neurodiversity,  the concept of neurodivergence encompasses absolutely all differences, whether they are innate or acquired, neurodevelopmental or psychological, and brings together autism with personality disorders, intellectual disability or depression. This concept thus appears even more political than the concept of neurodiversity and can serve as a basis for philosophical and social discussions of public policies on difference and disability.

I propose here another level of discussion based on the idea of a neurophenotype and a cognitive diversity (Stich, 1988; Horn, 1989) which I define as the diversity of mental processes and cognitive functioning  (language,  perceptions,  information  processing,  problem  solving,  attention,  intelligence, creativity...). This is observed, for example, in autism with the issue of double empathy and the fact that communication  problems  are  reciprocal  between  autistic  and  non-autistic  people  (Crompton,  2019; Crompton et al., 2020; Milton, 2012). This concept - different from that of learning styles (Newton et al., 2021) - already exists in the scientific field of intelligence and theories of intelligence such as in the case of multiple intelligences (Gray &amp; Viens, 1994) or autism (Mottron, 2004). It is a complementary concept to that of neurodiversity, because it is scientific, unlike neurodiversity which was intended to be  a  political  concept  in  its  original  sense  and  can  be considered  as  the  study  of  the  socio-cultural consequences of cognitive diversity with the aim of extending participation to society. This concept of cognitive diversity could thus be considered as a scientific paradigm (studied in genetics, psychology,

## Neurodiversity and autism - Neurodiversité et autisme

neurology...) and whose contours are still to be discussed. It would also have implications in ergonomics, education, work and organizational psychology, management and public social policies. In retrospect, this  concept  of  cognitive  diversity  is  more  appropriately  applied  than  those  of  psychopathology  or medical disability in the case of women (whose hysteria has long been studied) and homosexuals (in the animal kingdom, there are sexual relations of all types without any moral judgement being made on them by animals). We can thus observe that in the context of autism, the real debate concerns the nature of  autism  and  the  way  in  which  it  will  be  considered  (whether  from  a  moral,  philosophical, neurobiological, social or political point of view). For autism, we observe, for example, that depending on experimental settings, autistic people can appear just as or more intelligent (Courchesne et al., 2015, 2019; Nader et al., 2015, 2016), creative (Best et al., 2015; Hetzroni et al., 2019; Kasirer &amp; Mashal, 2014; Kasirer et al., 2020), and rational (Brosnan &amp; Ashwin, 2022; Rozenkrantz et al., 2021) than nonautistic people. According to the times and the mores, it could be observed that the contours of disability (medical and social) fluctuate and that this theme sometimes evolves towards the question of social domination more than anatomical deficiency. The question of cognitive diversity seems essential to question and develop, because it represents the neurobiological part of neurodiversity (a socio-political concept linked to discriminations), whereas cognitive diversity is relative to the way of considering and thinking  the  difference  (without  moral  judgment,  comparison  with  a  normality,  nor  question  of deficiency).

Several issues thus emerge from this first part: in the case of autism, is neurodiversity as a concept  more  or  less  coherent  than  social  disability?  Should  autism  be  considered  as  a  disorder,  a disability,  a  difference,  an  illness  or  an  in-between  condition  depending  on  certain  elements  (for example, in the case of intellectual disability)? Are the participation restrictions and activity limitations of people with autism related to the environment or an anatomical impairment or both? However, the main question here is: is the concept of neurodiversity a scientific field or a political activist movement?

## II/ Neurodiversity and autism: the challenge of scientificity

I will address the question of the scientificity of neurodiversity through its socio-political pan, the criticisms made of it and the highlighting of scientific perspectives.

## A/ The socio-political movement of neurodiversity

Chamak (2009) has worked on autism activism, including tracing the history of the movement to  view  autism  as  a  difference  instead  of  a  disability  since  the  founding  of  the  Autism  Network International in the United States in 1991. She reports that some autistic people feel more objective, more rational and less driven by their emotions and reports on the words of Michelle Dawson, an autistic researcher  affiliated  with  the  laboratory  for  the  study  of  information  processing  in  pervasive developmental disorders at Rivière-des-Prairies Hospital in Montreal, according to whom autism is no more a disease than homosexuality was (Chamak, 2009). She highlights (Chamak, 2010a, 2010b, 2010c) the  differences  between  certain  international  movements  that  "redefine  autism  as  another  mode  of cognitive functioning" (2010a, p. 103) and the French movements that integrate "the notion of disability and adopt an attitude of cooperation with the public authorities and not of resistance to the medical model  of  autism"  (2010a,  p.  103).  Thus,  while  on  the  international  forum  Aspies  for  Freedom  the messages are "oriented towards the dissemination of a valorizing representation of autism and an activist mobilization that fights against the medical model of autism," on the French-speaking forum Spectre Autistique,  troubles  envahissants  du  développement,  International  the  members  seem  to  have "integrated the notion of disability" (Chamak &amp; Bonniau, 2014, p. 229). Furthermore, Chamak also points out that even if the neurodiversity movement allows for some destigmatization, the heterogeneity of autism causes a great deal of confusion and misunderstandings for parents with children with severe developmental delays and behavioral disorders (Chamak, 2015). This would explain why some methods are rejected by some autistic people (behavioral methods), but still favored by parents of some autistic people despite the lack of effectiveness and all the ethical questions they raise (Chamak, 2013). She also highlights  the  lobbyist  operation  of  certain  associations  that  "derive  benefits  (financial,  network  or prestige) from them and discredit other groups that do not agree with their orientation" (2018a, p. 286). Finally, she explains that the "positive representations and increased media coverage of people with Asperger's syndrome result in a lack of interest in those who do not have their skills" (Chamak, 2018b, p. 63). Thus, we can clearly see how neurodiversity is primarily part of a sociopolitical movement with

## Neurodiversity and autism - Neurodiversité et autisme

different  claims.  Nugent  reminds  us  that  some  subgroups  of  autistic  people  are  working  "for  the recognition of their 'neurological identity'" through an "activist social movement" (2017, p. 38). Fritz, proposes that  "neurodiversity  be  inscribed  on  UNESCO's  Representative List  of  Intangible  Cultural Heritage"  (2022,  p.  7)  "to  provide  symbolic  and  financial  support  for  the  practices  and  writings  of neurodiversity by participating in the destigmatization of neurodifferent identity" (2022, p. 4). Speranza (2020)  proposes  to  apply  some  philosophical  reflections  on  intelligence  and  neurodiversity  to  the education of children and the training of adults, and Mottron expresses his desire to "lay the foundations of what would be a pedagogy for children with autism that starts from their specificity, that takes the highest  possible  advantage  of  their  intelligence  and  their  interests"  (2010,  p.  46).  Ortega  notes  the clashes between autism self-advocates, parents of autistic children, and professionals seeking a cure for autism and discusses the emergence of autistic cultures and identities related to "a 'neurological selfawareness' and a rejection of psychological interpretations" (2009, p. 425). Yet, Dvck &amp; Russell (2020) note  that  the  concept  of  neurodiversity  avoids  the  pitfalls  of  diagnostic  language  that  distinguishes healthy from unhealthy, but that the neurodiversity movement still co-opts medical language to avoid being associated with the anti-psychiatry movement. Much more than the concept of neurodiversity itself, it is this movement and its socio-political essence that crystallize many criticisms.

## B/ Criticisms of neurodiversity

Forest  analyzes  the  rejection  of  the autism-disease  model  as  "institutionalized  bigotry masquerading  as  science"  (2022,  p.  S  156).  According  to  him,  neurodiversity  refers  to  "a  state  of scientific knowledge (...) linking autism and the brain" that "arises on the margins of science" via a "reappropriation  of  research  findings"  (2016,  p.  413).  He  presents  it  as  a  set  of  psychological hypothetical mechanisms based on no theory that reaches consensus nor "a clear distinction between what in the brain would work badly and what in it would work otherwise" (2016, p. 414). Forest explains that neurodiversity neglects the main consensus research finding, that of the autism spectrum "where difficulties, disabilities, and idiosyncrasies can exist in widely varying degrees" (2016, p. 415) and tends "to make high-functioning autism the prototype for autism in general" (2016, p. 415). Furthermore, Kapp et al. (2013) advocate for compatibility between "a deficit-as-difference view of autism" where "neurological disorders may represent equally valid pathways within human diversity (2013, p. 59). Dwyer proposes that the best approach to neurodiversity is "halfway between the social and medical models" (2022, p. 86) and Shields &amp; Beversdorf argue that "denying autism's disorder status could compromise the exculpatory role of autism in cases where people with autism are accused of a crime" (2021,  p.  125)  such  as  in  cases  of  harassment,  stalking,  or  arson.  Also,  Nelson  believes  that neurodiversity fails "to provide convincing arguments for its conceptual claim that neurodiversity is merely a difference rather than a disorder" (2020, p. 345). Hughes further observes that neurodiversity fails to extricate itself from the idea of an autistic disorder, as it encompasses "ways of being autistic that  are  harmful  in  ways  that  cannot  be  entirely  attributed  to  discrimination  or  unfair  social arrangements" (2020, p. 47) and fails to separate "high-functioning autism from low-functioning autism" and "autism from co-occurring illnesses" (2020, p. 47). At the same time, we can also observe that psychoanalyses are seizing on the notion of neurodiversity by presenting it as a new controversy to criticize psychiatry by putting on the same level the criticisms made of Hans Asperger and that made of Bruno Bettelheim (Hochmann, 2020). Some of these criticisms thus seem perfectly justified, even if others much less so, and are only the result of the vagueness surrounding the concept of neurodiversity and its scientificity.

The contours of who is neurodiverse and who is not remain unclear (Dwyers, 2022; Russell, 2020) and there is a very clear contradiction about including "people with a medical diagnosis who are against the idea of medical disability" (2020, p. 287). He also notes that neurodiversity raises questions about  intellectual  disability  and  neurodegenerative  conditions  (such  as  Parkinson's  and  Alzheimer's disease). Milton (2019) reports criticisms, disagreements, and different, sometimes conflicting views of neurodiversity such as too much alignment with the medical model, too much alignment with the social model, inability to use the concept for intellectual disabilities and the needs that arise from them, stifling of  scientific  research  on  autism,  and  minimization  of  disability.  Barn  &amp;  Dierickx  finally  note  the "enormous lack of research information on the medical and social implications of neurodiversity" (2021, p. 2), that it is a topic of "great debate and controversy" (2021, p. 2), and that a better understanding of neurodivergences could improve the lives of those affected. These criticisms, which focus on the socio-

## Neurodiversity and autism - Neurodiversité et autisme

political aspect of neurodiversity, do not seem to refer to its neurobiological and genetic aspect, which has not been highlighted.

## C/ The scientific perspectives of neurodiversity

Armstrong points out that there may be an evolutionary explanation for neuroatypical people who have many strengths and abilities and "a more sensible approach to treating mental disorders would be to replace the paradigm of 'disability' or 'illness' with a 'diversity' perspective that takes into account strengths and weaknesses" (2015, p. 349). Georgieff notes that while there is "a consensus scientific and policy discourse" that "predominates in defining autism" (2017, p. 308), the contemporary neuroscientific and cognitive literature suggests three models "underpinned by clinical and experimental data" (2017, p. 308): the deficit model, the over-functioning model, and the difference model. According to  Mottron,  the  neurodiversity  stream  views  autism  "as  a  human  variant,  with  adaptive,  sometimes extreme, advantages and disadvantages" (2016, p. 423) and takes its cue "from the fact that autistic people can perform specifically human tasks in ways that are sometimes equivalent to, but also superior to, those of neurotypical people" (2016, p. 423). This echoes Ortega's observation of the domination of the neurodiversity movement by autistic people believing that their condition is not a disease to be treated  and  cured,  but  "rather  a  human  specificity  (such  as  gender  or  race)  that  must  be  respected equally" (2009, p. 425). Baron-Cohen highlights that when looking at definitions of the word disorder, "none...seem appropriate to describe autism" (2017, p. 744). Especially since there is "ample evidence that the autistic brain is different from the typical brain, but it would be difficult to identify an example of a brain disorder in autism" (2017, p. 744) because it would be more like signs showing "that the autistic brain develops differently from the typical brain-not direct evidence of neuropathology" (2017, p. 744). In his view, the primary argument for invalidating the idea of a disorder for autism is that "in an autism-friendly environment, the person can function not only well, but sometimes even at a higher level than a typical individual" (2017, p. 746). Thus, the term disorder should be used "when there is nothing  positive  about  the  person's  condition,  or  when,  despite  trying  various  environmental modifications, the person is still unable to function" (2017, p. 746), disease when "the biomedical and mechanistic cause of a disorder is known, perhaps through medical testing or scientific research" (2017, p. 746), that of disability when "the person falls below an average level of functioning in one or more psychological or physical functions, and requires support or intervention" (2017, p. 746) while that of difference should be used "when the person is simply atypical, for biological reasons, of a population norm, but this difference does not necessarily affect functioning or well-being" (2017, p. 746). However, he believes that different forms of autism need to be distinguished and that some could be disorders when others would be differences.

Thus, the scientific perspectives of neurodiversity could be found primarily outside the field of disability  and  in  the  disciplines  of  evolutionary  psychology,  cognitive  psychology,  genetics,  and neurobiology. All of these disciplines could explain the origins and contours of individual variations as in the case of autism.

## Conclusion

The  conclusion  will  focus  on  the  discussion  of  three  elements:  some  drifts  linked  to  the consequences of the terminological and scientific vagueness of neurodiversity, the questioning of its scientificity and then the problem linked to the nature, conception and definition of autism. Finally, I will propose some scientific and social implications to the real development of the neurobiological and genetic part of the scientific field of neurodiversity.

## A/ The drifts resulting from the terminological and scientific vagueness

The first consequence of the terminological and scientific vagueness that surrounds the concept of neurodiversity is the inability of science to theorize and conceptualize difference, thus provoking conceptual drifts. The scientific world splitting reality between the healthy and the pathological allows a large number of people on the borderline to get caught up in concepts (sometimes New Age and pseudoscientific)  such  as  indigo  children  (Carroll  &amp;  Tober,  1999),  zebras  (Siaud-Facchin,  2008), hypersensitives and emotional high potentials (Aron, 2017) or philo-cognitives (Nusbaum et al., 2017). All these concepts, whose problems and drifts are sometimes proven, at least allow a path to emerge to objectify lived experiences that science is not able to do. Thus, if the scientific world appears to be the

## Neurodiversity and autism - Neurodiversité et autisme

solution to work around the concept of difference and cognitive diversity, it can also be considered for the moment as one of the causes of these drifts.

## B/ A socio-political movement falsely claiming to be science?

We observe that the concept of neurodiversity refers to many things: the medical model of disability, the social model of disability, an in-between, a socio-political movement or a scientific field situated between neurobiology, genetics and cognitive psychology (Rebecchi, 2022a). Thus, if we stick to what Judy Singer's "neurodiversity" represents, it should rather be called "(socio-political) movement for the recognition and defense of the rights of disabled, discriminated and/or dominated people" and not "neurodiversity" which suggests that it would be a scientific concept. Judy Singer states on her blog (2019) that it is a political term and not a scientific one, but it is probably because of this vagueness that many debates and criticisms have arisen that sometimes seem justified. Thus, many published works on neurodiversity are based almost exclusively on the social sciences (Rosqvist et al., 2022; Silberman, 2015; Singer, 2017) or focus on the world of work (Bruyère &amp; Colella, 2022; Honeybourne, 2019; Kirby &amp; Smith, 2021; Wood et al., 2022) thus reinforcing this feeling of a field outside of science or of sociopolitical activism. All of these questions again raise the question: is neurodiversity an ideology or a  scientific  field?  Moreover,  don't  some  people  use  the  words  "neuroatypical",  "neurodiversity"  or "neurodivergence" as elements of language euphemizing the notion of handicap, thus provoking the incomprehension and the ire of parents of severely handicapped children?

## C/ The problem linked to the nature, conception and definition of autism

Like neurodiversity, the concept of autism is used to refer to completely different situations. Thus, to solve the terminological and scientific problem of neurodiversity it would be appropriate to try to  better  conceptualize  autism.  Contrary  to  what  Forest  (2016)  asserts,  there  is  no  real  scientific consensus on the idea of spectrum nor on the work of Wing who based himself on an epidemiological study identifying almost exclusively intellectually disabled children and modified the work of Hans Asperger after his death to bring it within the framework of his observations (Wing, 1981, 1986). Thus, children with predominantly intellectual disabilities described by Lorna Wing (Wing &amp; Gould, 1979; Wing,  2005)  who  should  not  necessarily  be  diagnosed  with  autism  if  symptoms  are  explained  by intellectual disability or global developmental delay are considered in autism (Thurm et al, 2019) and the children, where intellectual disability was the exception, described by Grunya Sukhareva (1926a, 1926b, 1927a, 1927b translated by Rebecchi, 2022d), Leo Kanner (1943, 1971) and Hans Asperger (1944)  who are  perfectly  capable  of  fitting  in  socially  and  sometimes  even  doing  better  than  nonautistics. It would thus be appropriate to dissociate autism from intellectual disability and to exclude the latter from the neurobiological and genetic part of neurodiversity, just as high intellectual potential is not included. Thus, nothing would prevent a person from having a difference such as  autism and a disability such as an intellectual disability, a language disorder or an executive function disorder. Rather, the problem arises when autism is compartmentalized by level or when the whole concept of autism is based  on  the  work  of  Lorna  Wing.  To  this  day,  there  is  no  unanimous  definition  of  autism.  For Waterhouse (2009), it is a Portmanteau syndrome, whereas for Mottron (2021) it should be returned to prototypical autism. We also do not find a single etiology, instead, autism has a shared etiology with most  other  neurodevelopmental  disorders  (Brainstorm  Consortium  et  al.,  2018).  Furthermore,  the medical characteristics of autism correspond to arbitrary cultural choices (Hyman, 2021) and not to neurobiological  or  genetic  characterizations.  Thus,  all  of  these  arguments  raise  the  question  of  the refutability of conceptions of autism and the epistemology of autism: can the claim that a person is autistic or not be contradicted by an empirical test such as the current tests like the ADOS-2? The answer is  obviously  no,  since  some  people  outside  the  autism  spectrum  score  higher  than  autistic  people themselves (Grzadzinski et al., 2016; Maddox et al., 2017; Trevisan et al., 2020), and the tests are not sensitive enough for women or people with high intelligence (Lai &amp; Baron-Cohen, 2015; Rynkiewicz et al., 2016). Furthermore, autism nosologies (such as the DSM) change over time and move people in and out of autism in arbitrary ways (Smith et al., 2015). Thus, until the definition and conception of autism becomes clearer, it seems that it will be difficult for neurodiversity to emerge as a fully scientific field.

## D/ Implications

## Neurodiversity and autism - Neurodiversité et autisme

Solving the scientific puzzle of autism and developing the neurobiological and genetic part of the  scientific  field  of  neurodiversity  by  creating,  for  example,  a  neurobiology  applied  to  autism (Abrahams &amp; Geschwind, 2008) could allow a better consideration of autism and neurodiversity in society. This could have repercussions in health care (by developing approaches that are respectful and more in line with the physiological particularities of autistic people), in education and the professional world (by developing autistic-friendly pedagogies and management methods and environments that are accessible to everyone) and in society in general (by integrating, for example, the notion of cognitive diversity into the elements that can lead to discrimination in the penal code).

## Neurodiversity and autism - Neurodiversité et autisme

## Introduction

Schröder  (1938)  expliquait  que  la  psychopathie  devrait  être  comprise  d'un  point  de  vue caractérologique et qu'il s'agit de variations caractérielles d'une ampleur considérable, d'êtres humains dotés d'une structure caractérielle inhabituelle, hors de la moyenne, avec un éventail plus large de ces différences  mentales  qui  existent  entre  tous  les  êtres  humains  et  qu'elles  ne  représentent  rien  de qualitativement nouveau ou de pathologique. Ainsi, les différences qui apparaissent à l'observateur dans le cas d'enfants manifestement anormaux et difficiles à éduquer sont exactement les mêmes, uniquement dans le cadre étroit de ce que l'on appelle la norme, qui distingue chaque personne d'une des autres. Plomin (2018) soutient également que l'anormal est normal et que la distinction entre les deux est artificielle. Selon lui, l'utilisation du concept de spectre pour parler de l'autisme est un clin d'œil à une approche quantitative dimensionnelle. Scheepers (2021) suggère que les troubles neurodéveloppementaux  concernent  surtout  la  prédisposition  et  les  caractéristiques  suggérant  des variations individuelles.

Plus récemment, dans sa thèse de doctorat, Singer présentait une politique de la neurodiversité considérée comme « un nouvel ajout aux catégories politiques familières de classe, de sexe et de race » pour « enrichir les connaissances du modèle social du handicap » (2018, p. 13, traduction personnelle). Elle présentait aussi ce concept comme un « nouveau mouvement social » - particulièrement dans le cadre  de  l'autisme  -  en  opposition  avec  la  vision  médicale  du  handicap  (2017,  p. 38,  traduction personnelle).  Ce  n'est  que  sur  son  blog  qu'elle  indique  que  le  concept  de  neurodiversité  fait  aussi référence à la « variabilité neurocognitive pratiquement infinie au sein de la population humaine de la Terre » et que ce concept « met en évidence le fait que chaque humain possède un système nerveux unique, avec une combinaison unique de capacités et de besoins » (Singer, 2019, traduction personnelle). Cependant, elle ne développe pas réellement cette question ni dans sa thèse de 1998 ni dans son livre de 2017 et indique clairement sur son blog en 2019 qu'il ne s'agit pas d'un terme scientifique, mais d'un terme politique qui n'a « jamais été destiné » à être scientifique (Singer, 2019, traduction personnelle). Elle justifie notamment son raisonnement par le fait que la neurodiversité, comme la nature, « ne fait pas  de  distinction  entre  différence  et  handicap »  (Singer,  2019,  traduction  personnelle).  Toutes  ces informations nous permettent de mieux comprendre pourquoi le terme de neurodiversité est surtout discuté  dans  les  sciences  sociales  (Muskat,  2017 ;  Runswick-Cole,  2014),  pourquoi  il  est  présenté comme un mouvement connexe à celui de l'intersectionnalité (Strand, 2017) et pourquoi il pourrait être considéré davantage comme de l'activisme politique à l'instar du transactivime (Kollman &amp; Waites, 2009) plutôt qu'un réel champ d'étude scientifique dépassant les sciences sociales, et enfin pourquoi il ne fait pas consensus (Chapman, 2020 ; Milton, 2019).

Ainsi,  la  neurodiversité  est  un  concept  récent,  tant  au  niveau  du  grand  public  que  dans  les discussions scientifiques. Le site PubMed référence 305 résultats pour le terme « neurodiversity » dont 218 sur les deux dernières années, le site CAIRN nous présente 95 résultats dont 55 dans des revues scientifiques, le site OpenEdition fait apparaître 57 résultats dont 17 articles, et enfin Google Scholar nous donne 343 résultats pour le terme « neurodiversité » et 16 000 pour celui de « neurodiversity ». Par ailleurs le site français theses.fr n'enregistre que 10 thèses avec le mot-clé « neurodiversité ». Au-delà de l'intérêt du grand public pour la question, cela montre que la recherche francophone ne s'est pas encore pleinement emparée de cette question et que de nombreux débats et dissensus émergent tels que les limites du spectre de la neurodiversité (inclusion ou non des troubles de la personnalité, déficience intellectuelle, traits de personnalité…) ou la discipline principale dans laquelle discuter de ce nouveau paradigme (philosophie, sociologie, biologie, médecine, génétique…).

Dans  cet  article,  j'analyserai  la  neurodiversité  autour  de  deux  éléments :  les  terminologies utilisées pour s'y référer (handicap médical, handicap social, neurodivergence et diversité cognitive) ainsi que les débats sur sa scientificité et ses contours. Enfin je terminerai cet article par une discussion sur les implications et perspectives émergentes de cette analyse.

## I/ Neurodiversité et autisme : le défi de la terminologie

Le  concept  de  neurodiversité  est  invoqué  dans  divers  cadres  théoriques,  avec  diverses acceptions. Parmi ces divers cadres, j'ai fait le choix dans sélectionné quatre : le handicap médical, le handicap social, la neurodivergence et la diversité cognitive.

A/ Handicap médical et handicap social

## Neurodiversity and autism - Neurodiversité et autisme

En 1980, l'Organisation mondiale de la santé (OMS) a publié un manuel intitulé « Classification internationale des handicaps : déficiences, incapacités et désavantages, un manuel de classification des conséquences des maladies » qui a été traduit en français par l'Institut  national  de  la  santé et  de  la recherche  médicale  huit  ans  plus  tard  (OMS,  1988).  L'OMS  expliquait  avoir  choisi  ce  titre,  car  le concept de handicap seul porte à confusion et qu'il résume globalement les déficiences, les incapacités et les désavantages. Ainsi, un changement eut lieu dans les classifications, et l'« axe des handicaps » fut renommé  l'« axe  des  désavantages »  (OMS,  1988,  p. 1).  Ces  trois  niveaux  de  classifications  déficiences, incapacités, désavantages - se réfèrent « à un niveau spécifique des conséquences des maladies »  (OMS,  1988,  p. 10).  Les  déficiences  font  référence  « à  toute  altération  du  corps  ou  de l'apparence physique, ainsi qu'à une anomalie organique ou fonctionnelle, quelle qu'en soit la cause » et constituent les « troubles manifestés au niveau de l'organe » (OMS, 1988, p. 10). Les déficiences font référence  aux  « conséquences  de  déficiences  en  termes  d'activité  fonctionnelle  de  l'individu »  et représentent « des perturbations au niveau de la personne elle-même » (OMS, 1998, p. 10). Enfin, les désavantages  font  référence  « aux  préjudices  résultant  pour  l'individu  de  sa  déficience  ou  de  son incapacité » et reflètent « l'adaptation de l'individu et l'interaction entre lui et son milieu ». Parmi les déficiences,  nous  pouvons  citer  par  exemple  la  « déficience  du  rôle  hétérosexuel »  comprenant « l'homosexualité » et l'« absence d'intérêt pour une relation ou un contact avec des individus du sexe opposé »  (OMS,  1988,  p. 58)  ou  encore  la  « déficience  sévère  de  la  communication »  associant  les « troubles centraux de la parole et de la vue entraînant une déficience sévère de la communication » comprenant l'« autisme » (OMS, 1988, p. 64).

Puis en 2001, l'OMS a actualisé son premier manuel et a publié une nouvelle « Classification internationale du fonctionnement, du handicap et de la santé » (CIF) (OMS, 2001) ayant pour objectif de « proposer un langage uniformisé et normalisé ainsi qu'un cadre pour la description des états de la santé et des états connexes de la santé » (OMS, 2001, p. 3). Cette classification a aussi pour dessein de servir d'outil statistique, d'outil de recherche, d'outil clinique, d'outil de politique sociale et d'outil pédagogique.  Dans  ce  manuel  il  est  question  du  « fonctionnement »  de  l'individu,  c'est-à-dire  ses « fonctions organiques », ses « activités » et sa « participation au sein de la société » (OMS, 2001, p. 3) et  le  concept de handicap désigne ici les déficiences, les limitations d'activités et les restrictions de participation.  À  travers  ce  manuel  l'OMS  a  souhaité  sortir  d'une  classification  basée  sur  les « conséquences  de  la  maladie »  (comme  dans  la  première  version  de  1980)  pour  basculer  vers  une « classification des composantes de la santé » (OMS, 2001, p. 4). Par ailleurs, l'OMS rappelle que dans ses classifications internationales, « les problèmes de santé (maladies, troubles, lésions et traumatismes) sont  classés  essentiellement  en  fonction  de  la  CIM-10  (Classification  internationale  des  maladies) » (OMS, 2001, p. 3). Ainsi, la CIF et la CIM-10 considèrent les déficiences dans le cadre de structures anatomiques et de fonctions organiques liées à un processus pathologique. Cependant, alors que la déficience a fait référence à « un problème de fonctionnement et de structure lié à un problème de santé » (OMS, 2001, p.4) dans la CIF, elle est un élément constitutif d'une maladie avec des signes et des symptômes dans la CIM-10. Ici les fonctions organiques font référence aux « fonctions physiologiques des systèmes organiques (y compris les fonctions psychologiques) » (OMS, 2001, p. 10). Les structures anatomiques font référence aux « parties anatomiques du corps, telles que les organes, les membres et leurs composantes » (OMS, 2001, p. 10). Une déficience est une « anomalie, carence, perte ou autre écart important par rapport à une norme au niveau des structures anatomiques » (OMS, 2001, p. 12). Enfin, les limitations d'activité désignent « les difficultés que rencontre une personne dans l'exécution d'activités », les restrictions de participation désignent « les problèmes qu'une personne peut rencontrer dans  son  implication  dans  une  situation  de  vie  réelle »  et  les  facteurs  environnementaux  désignent « l'environnement physique, social et attitudinal dans lequel les gens vivent et mènent leur vie » (OMS, 2001, p. 10). Cela peut comprendre ainsi des choses comme le sexe, la race, l'âge, le mode de vie, les habitudes, le niveau d'instruction, l'origine sociale, la profession, les traits psychologiques entre autres. Par ailleurs les activités font référence à des éléments tels que la mobilité, les activités domestiques, la communication, les relations avec autrui entre autres. En outre, le manuel précise que les déficiences sont « définies à la lumière des connaissances actuelles aux niveaux tissulaire ou cellulaire, et au niveau infracellulaire ou moléculaire » (OMS, 2001, p. 12) et qu'elles représentent notamment « des écarts par rapport à certaines normes généralement acceptées de l'état biomédical du corps et de ses fonctions » (OMS,  2001,  p. 13).  Ainsi,  dans  cette  classification  les  composantes  de  la  déficience  « reposent principalement sur le jugement des personnes compétentes pour évaluer le fonctionnement physique et

## Neurodiversity and autism - Neurodiversité et autisme

mental par rapport à des normes généralement reconnues (OMS, 2001, p. 14). Contrairement à la version de 1980 où l'autisme apparaissait dans les troubles centraux de la parole et de la vue, il apparaît ici dans les « fonctions psychosociales globales » se développant au cours de la vie et qui sont « nécessaires pour comprendre et pour intégrer de manière constructive les fonctions mentales qui président à la formation des aptitudes aux relations sociales réciproques permettant les interactions en société » (OMS, 2001, p. 50).

En définitive ces deux classifications successives de l'OMS renvoient toutes les deux à deux visions et modèles du handicap, le modèle médical et le modèle social :

- dans le premier modèle, le handicap est perçu « comme un problème de la personne, conséquence directe  d'une  maladie,  d'un  traumatisme  ou  d'un  autre  problème  de  santé,  qui  nécessite  des  soins médicaux fournis sous forme de traitement individuel par des professionnels » (OMS, 2001, p. 21) et son traitement vise « la guérison ou l'adaptation de l'individu, ou le changement de son comportement » (OMS,  2001,  p. 21).  Ainsi,  l'OMS  précise  que  la  principale  question  se  situe  au  niveau  des  soins médicaux,  alors  qu'au  niveau  politique « la  principale  réponse  est  de  modifier  ou  de  réformer  les politiques de santé » (OMS, 2001, p. 21).

- dans le second modèle, le handicap est perçu « comme étant principalement un problème créé par la société et une question d'intégration complète des individus dans la société » et il n'est pas « un attribut de  la  personne,  mais  plutôt  un  ensemble  complexe  de  situations,  dont  bon  nombre  sont  créées  par l'environnement social » (OMS, 2001, p. 21). Dans ce modèle, la solution doit s'inscrire dans l'action sociale  et  c'est  « la  responsabilité  collective  de  la  société  dans  son  ensemble  que  d'apporter  les changements environnementaux nécessaires pour permettre aux personnes handicapées de participer pleinement  à  tous  les  aspects  de  la  vie  sociale »  (OMS,  2001,  p. 21).  Ainsi,  l'OMS  précise  que  le handicap est une question politique et se situe au niveau de l'idéologie ou des attitudes et « nécessite un changement social, ce qui, au niveau politique, se traduit en termes de droits de la personne humaine » (OMS, 2001, p. 21).

L'un  des  problèmes  concernant  les  classifications  de  l'OMS  porte  sur  la  définition  et  les composantes  de  la  déficience  basées  sur  des  jugements  humains  basés  eux-mêmes  sur  des  normes relativement arbitraires qui ont par exemple amené à classifier l'homosexualité parmi ces déficiences.

Frances (2014) notait que les dictionnaires ne peuvent pas fournir une définition satisfaisante  de  la normalité, que les statisticiens et les psychologues la mesurent sans fin, mais ne parviennent pas à en saisir l'essence, et que les médecins de l'esprit et du corps s'affairent à en ronger les frontières et qu'à force  de  paraître  assez  bien  peut-être,  tout  le  monde  finira  par  devenir  plus  ou  moins  malade.  En parallèle, le Manuel diagnostique et statistique des troubles mentaux (DSM) V explique que les troubles mentaux  sont  définis  en  tenant  compte  des  normes  et  des  valeurs  culturelles,  sociales  et  familiales (American Psychiatric Association, 2013) et plusieurs points ont été et sont encore débattus (à savoir les critères de diagnostic et les conflits d'intérêts avec les entreprises pharmaceutiques). On observe ainsi que même si le modèle social décale la question du handicap vers le domaine politique, ce handicap est basé sur des déficiences - et ne semble donc pas en totale adéquation avec l'idée de variabilité de la neurodiversité (en tant que concept politique) -, des jugements (parfois moraux) et des connaissances médicales  et  scientifiques  en  constante  évolution.  Cela  entraîne  ainsi  une  vision  potentiellement déformée de la réelle nature de certaines particularités ou conditions comme l'autisme. L'histoire nous a montré plusieurs exemples de pathologisation de la différence liée à des connaissances scientifiques limitées et on a pu voir de simples différences se retrouver dans le champ du handicap et/ou des troubles mentaux comme l'homosexualité. C'est pourquoi il me semble important d'interroger les thématiques de la neurodivergence et de la diversité cognitive qui sont davantage liées à la question de la différence que celles du handicap et du trouble.

## B/ Neurodivergence et diversité cognitive

Le terme de « neurodivergence » est souvent attribué à une activiste autiste nommée Kassiane Asasumasu (Wiktionary, 2014 ; The University of Edinburgh, 2020). Il désignerait tous les neurologies et/ou  fonctionnements  psychocognitifs  antagonistes  ou  a  minima  discordants  de  ce  que  serait  une neurologie  ou  un  fonctionnement  psychocognitif  normal.  Ce  concept  pourrait  paraître  flou,  mais  il s'inscrit en opposition avec ce qui est avancé par le modèle social du handicap, à savoir que le corps scientifique jugerait de ce qui est considéré comme une déficience ou non à la lumière des normes socioculturelles à l'instar de la définition de ce qu'est un trouble mental dans le DSM. Contrairement

## Neurodiversity and autism - Neurodiversité et autisme

au concept de neurodiversité, le concept de neurodivergence enrobe absolument toutes les différences, qu'elles soient innées ou acquises, neurodéveloppementales ou psychologiques et rassemblent l'autisme avec les troubles de la personnalité, la déficience intellectuelle ou encore la dépression. Ce concept apparaît  ainsi  encore  plus  politique  que  le  concept  de  neurodiversité  et  peut  servir  de  base  à  des discussions philosophiques et sociales de politiques publiques sur la différence et le handicap.

Je  propose  ici  un  autre  niveau  de  discussion  basé  sur  l'idée  d'un  neurophénotype  et  d'une diversité cognitive (Stich, 1988 ; Horn, 1989) que je définis comme la diversité de processus mentaux et  de  fonctionnement  cognitifs  (langage,  perceptions,  traitement  de  l'information,  résolution  de problème,  attention,  intelligence,  créativité…).  On  l'observe  par  exemple  dans  l'autisme  avec  la question de la double empathie et le fait que les problèmes de communication sont réciproques entre autistes et non-autistes (Crompton, 2019 ; Crompton et al., 2020 ; Milton, 2012). Ce concept - différent de celui des styles d'apprentissages (Newton et al., 2021) - existe déjà dans le champ scientifique de l'intelligence et des théories de l'intelligence comme dans le cas des intelligences multiples (Gray &amp; Viens, 1994) ou de l'autisme (Mottron, 2004). Il s'agit d'un concept complémentaire à celui de la neurodiversité, car il est scientifique, contrairement à la neurodiversité qui se voulait être un concept politique  dans  son  acception  originelle  et  peut  être  considéré  comme  l'étude  des  conséquences socioculturelles de la diversité cognitive avec pour objectif une extension de participation à la société. Ce concept de diversité cognitive pourrait ainsi être considéré comme un paradigme scientifique (étudié en génétique, psychologie, neurologie…) et dont les contours doivent encore être discutés. Il aurait aussi des implications en ergonomie, éducation, psychologie du travail et des organisations, en management et dans les politiques sociales publiques. A posteriori, ce concept de diversité cognitive s'applique plus adéquatement que ceux de psychopathologie ou de handicap médical dans le cas des femmes (dont on a longtemps étudié l'hystérie) et des homosexuels (dans le règne animal, il existe des relations sexuelles de tout type sans qu'il y ait un quelconque jugement de moralité émis dessus par les animaux). On peut ainsi observer que dans le cadre de l'autisme le véritable débat porte sur la nature de l'autisme et sur la manière dont on va le considérer (que ce soit d'un point de vue moral, philosophique, neurobiologique, social ou politique). Pour l'autisme, on observe par exemple que selon les cadres expérimentaux, les autistes peuvent apparaître tout autant voire plus intelligents (Courchesne et al., 2015, 2019 ; Nader et al., 2015, 2016), créatifs (Best et al., 2015 ; Hetzroni et al., 2019 ; Kasirer &amp; Mashal, 2014 ; Kasirer et al.,  2020) et rationnels (Brosnan &amp; Ashwin, 2022 ; Rozenkrantz et al., 2021) que les personnes non autistes. Selon les époques et les mœurs, on a pu observer que les contours du handicap (médical et social) fluctuent et que cette thématique évolue parfois vers la question de la domination sociale plus que de la déficience anatomique. La question de la diversité cognitive apparaît essentielle à questionner et développer, car elle représente le pan neurobiologique de la neurodiversité (un concept sociopolitique lié aux discriminations), alors que la diversité cognitive est relative à la manière de considérer et penser la différence (sans jugement moral, comparaison avec une normalité, ni question de déficience).

Plusieurs problématiques ressortent ainsi de cette première partie : dans le cas de l'autisme, la neurodiversité en tant que concept est-elle plus ou moins cohérente que le handicap social ? L'autisme doit-il être considéré comme un trouble, un handicap, une différence, une maladie ou un entre-deux en fonction de certains éléments (par exemple dans le cas de la déficience intellectuelle) ? Les restrictions de  participation  et  les  limitations  d'activités  des  autistes  sont-elles  liées  à  l'environnement  ou  une déficience anatomique ou aux deux ? Cependant, la principale question qui se pose ici est la suivante : le concept de neurodiversité est-il un champ scientifique ou un mouvement d'activisme politique ?

## II/ Neurodiversité et autisme : le défi de la scientificité

Je  vais  aborder  la  question  de  la  scientificité  de  la  neurodiversité  à  travers  son  pan sociopolitique, les critiques qui lui sont faites et la mise en lumière des perspectives scientifiques.

## A/ Le mouvement sociopolitique de la neurodiversité

Chamak (2009) a travaillé sur le militantisme dans l'autisme et a notamment retracé l'historique du mouvement de conception de l'autisme comme une différence au lieu d'une déficience depuis la création de l'Autism Network International aux États-Unis en 1991. Elle rapporte que certains autistes se sentent plus objectifs, plus rationnels et moins dirigés par leurs émotions et rapporte des propos de Michelle Dawson, chercheuse autiste affiliée au laboratoire d'étude du traitement de l'information dans les  troubles envahissants  du  développement  de  l'hôpital  Rivière-des-Prairies  de  Montréal,  selon  qui

## Neurodiversity and autism - Neurodiversité et autisme

l'autisme ne serait pas plus une maladie que ne l'était l'homosexualité (Chamak, 2009). Elle met en lumière (Chamak, 2010a, 2010b, 2010c) les différences entre certains mouvements internationaux qui « redéfinissent  l'autisme  comme  un  autre  mode  de  fonctionnement  cognitif »  (2010a,  p. 103)  et  les mouvements français qui intègrent « la notion de handicap et adoptent une attitude de coopération avec les pouvoirs publics et non de résistance au modèle médical de l'autisme » (2010a, p. 103). Ainsi, alors que sur le forum international Aspies for Freedom les messages sont « orientés vers la diffusion d'une représentation de l'autisme valorisante et une mobilisation activiste qui lutte contre le modèle médical de l'autisme », sur le forum francophone Spectre Autistique, troubles envahissants du développement, International les membres semblent avoir « intégré la notion de handicap » (Chamak &amp; Bonniau, 2014, p. 229). Par ailleurs, Chamak souligne aussi que même si le mouvement de la neurodiversité permet une certaine déstigmatisation, l'hétérogénéité de l'autisme provoque  une  grande  confusion  et  des incompréhensions  pour  les  parents  avec  des  enfants  ayant  de  graves  retards  de  développement  et troubles du comportement (Chamak, 2015). Cela expliquerait pourquoi certaines méthodes sont rejetées par certains autistes (méthodes comportementales), mais toujours plébiscitées par les parents de certains autistes malgré les manques d'efficacité et toutes les questions éthiques qu'elles posent (Chamak, 2013). Elle met d'ailleurs en exergue le fonctionnement lobbyiste de certaines associations qui « en tire des bénéfices (financiers, réseau ou de prestige) et qui discrédite les autres groupes qui ne sont pas en accord avec  leur  orientation »  (2018a,  p. 286).  Enfin  elle  explique  que  les  « représentations  positives  et la médiatisation  accrue  des  personnes  présentant  un  syndrome  d'Asperger  ont  pour  conséquence  un désintérêt pour ceux qui n'ont pas leurs compétences » (Chamak, 2018b, p. 63).

Ainsi,  on  observe  clairement  comment  la  neurodiversité  s'inscrit  en  premier  lieu  dans  un mouvement sociopolitique avec différentes revendications. Nugent rappelle que certains sous-groupes d'autistes œuvrent « pour la reconnaissance de leur 'identité neurologique' » à travers un « mouvement social militant » (2017, p. 38). Fritz, propose d'inscrire « la neurodiversité à la liste représentative du patrimoine culturel  immatériel  de  l'UNESCO » (2022, p. 7 »  pour  « offrir  un  soutien  symbolique  et financier aux pratiques et écritures de la neurodiversité en participant à la déstigmatisation de l'identité neurodifférente » (2022, p. 4). Speranza (2020) propose d'appliquer certaines réflexions philosophiques sur  l'intelligence  et  la  neurodiversité  à  l'éducation  des  enfants  et  la  formation  des  adultes  et Mottron exprime sa volonté de « jeter les bases de ce que serait une pédagogie des enfants autistes qui parte de leur spécificité, qui tire le parti le plus élevé possible de leur intelligence et de leurs intérêts » (2010,  p. 46).  Ortega  fait  état  des  oppositions  entre  autodéfenseurs  de  l'autisme,  parents  d'enfants autistes  et  professionnels  cherchant  un  remède  à  l'autisme  et  discute  de  l'émergence  de  cultures  et identités  autistiques  liées  à  « une 'conscience  de  soi  neurologique'  et à  un  rejet  des  interprétations psychologiques »  (2009,  p. 425).  Pourtant,  Dvck  &amp;  Russell  (2020)  note  que  le  concept  de  la neurodiversité évite les pièges du langage diagnostique qui distingue le sain du malsain, mais que le mouvement pour la neurodiversité coopte tout de même le langage médical pour éviter d'être associé au mouvement antipsychiatrie. Beaucoup plus que le concept même de neurodiversité, c'est ce mouvement et son essence sociopolitique qui cristallisent de nombreuses critiques.

## B/ Les critiques faites à la neurodiversité

Forest analyse le rejet du modèle de l'autisme-maladie comme un « sectarisme institutionnalisé se faisant passer pour de la science » (2022, p. S 156). Selon lui, la neurodiversité fait référence « un état de la connaissance scientifique (...) liant autisme et cerveau » qui « naît en marge de science » via une « réappropriation des résultats de la recherche » (2016, p. 413). Il la présente comme un ensemble mécanismes hypothétiques psychologiques basés sur aucune théorie faisant consensus ni « distinction bien nette entre ce qui dans le cerveau marcherait mal et ce qui en lui marcherait autrement » (2016, p. 414).  Forest  explique  que  la  neurodiversité  néglige  le  principal  acquis  de  la  recherche  qui  ferait consensus, à savoir celui du spectre de l'autisme « où les difficultés, les incapacités et les particularités peuvent exister à des degrés très divers » (2016, p. 415) et tend « à faire de l'autisme de haut niveau le prototype de l'autisme en général » (2016, p. 415). En outre, Kapp et al. (2013) prônent la compatibilité entre  « une  conception  de  l'autisme  fondée  sur  le  déficit  comme  différence »  où  « les  troubles neurologiques peuvent représenter des voies tout aussi valables au sein de la diversité humaine (2013, p. 59). Dwyer propose que la meilleure approche pour la neurodiversité se « situe à mi-chemin entre les modèles social et médical » (2022, p. 86) et Shields &amp; Beversdorf soutiennent que la « négation du statut de trouble de l'autisme pourrait compromettre le rôle disculpatoire de l'autisme dans les  cas où des

## Neurodiversity and autism - Neurodiversité et autisme

personnes  autistes  sont  accusées  d'un  crime »  (2021,  p. 125)  comme  dans  les  cas  de  harcèlement, stalking ou incendie. Aussi, Nelson pense que la neurodiversité ne parvient pas « à fournir des arguments convaincants  pour  son  affirmation  conceptuelle  selon  laquelle  la  neurodiversité  est  une  simple différence  plutôt  qu'un  trouble »  (2020,  p. 345).  Hugues  observe  par  ailleurs  que  la  neurodiversité échoue à s'extraire de l'idée d'un trouble autistique, car elle englobe « des façons d'être autiste qui sont nuisibles  d'une  manière  qui  ne  peut  pas  être  entièrement  attribuée  à  la  discrimination  ou  à  des arrangements sociaux injustes » (2020, p. 47) et qu'elle n'arrive pas à séparer « l'autisme de haut niveau et l'autisme de bas niveau » et « l'autisme et les maladies concomitantes » (2020, p. 47). En parallèle on observe aussi que les psychanalyses s'emparent de la notion de neurodiversité en la présentant comme une nouvelle controverse pour critiquer la psychiatrie en mettant sur un même plan les critiques faites à Hans Asperger et celle faite à Bruno Bettelheim (Hochmann, 2020). Certaines de ces critiques semblent ainsi parfaitement justifiées, même si d'autres beaucoup moins, et ne sont que le résultat du flou qui entoure le concept de neurodiversité et sa scientificité.

Les  contours  de  qui  est  neurodivergent  et  qui  ne  l'est  pas  restent  obscurs  (Dwyers,  2022 ; Russell, 2020) et il existe une contradiction très claire sur le fait d'y inclure « des gens avec un diagnostic médical qui sont contre l'idée du handicap médical » (2020, p. 287). Il note aussi que la neurodiversité pose  des  questions  sur  la  déficience  intellectuelle  et  les  conditions  neurodégénératives  (comme  la maladie de Parkinson et la maladie d'Alzheimer). Milton (2019) rapporte les critiques, désaccords et différents, parfois contradictoires entre eux sur la neurodiversité comme un trop grand alignement sur le modèle médical, un trop grand alignement sur le modèle social, l'impossibilité d'utiliser ce concept pour  les  déficiences  intellectuelles  et  les  besoins  qui  en  découlent,  l'étouffement  de  la  recherche scientifique  sur  l'autisme et  la  minimisation  du  handicap.  Barn  &amp;  Dierickx  notent  enfin  « l'énorme manque d'informations de recherche sur les implications médicales et sociales de la neurodiversité » (2021, p. 2), qu'elle est un sujet de « grand débat et de controverse » (2021, p. 2) et qu'une meilleure compréhension des neurodivergences pourrait améliorer la vie des personnes concernées. Ces critiques portant essentiellement sur le pan sociopolitique de la neurodiversité ne semblent pas faire référence à son pan neurobiologique et génétique peu mis en lumière.

## C/ Les perspectives scientifiques de la neurodiversité

Armstrong souligne qu'il pourrait y avoir une explication évolutive aux personnes neuroatypiques  qui  ont  beaucoup  de  forces  et  de  capacité  et  « qu'une  approche  plus  judicieuse  du traitement des troubles mentaux consisterait à remplacer le paradigme du "handicap" ou de la "maladie" par une perspective de "diversité" qui prend en compte les forces et les faiblesses » (2015, p. 349). Georgieff note que même s'il existe « un discours scientifique et politique consensuel » qui « prédomine pour définir l'autisme » (2017, p. 308), la littérature neuroscientifique et cognitive contemporaine laisse apparaître trois modèles « étayés sur des données cliniques et expérimentales » (2017, p. 308) : celui des déficits,  celui  du  sur-fonctionnement  et  celui  de  la  différence.  Selon  Mottron,  le  courant  de  la neurodiversité  considère  l'autisme  « comme  un  variant  humain,  comportant  des  avantages  et  des désavantages  adaptatifs,  parfois  extrêmes »  (2016,  p. 423)  et  prend  sa  source  « dans  le  fait  que  les autistes peuvent réaliser des tâches spécifiquement humaines d'une façon parfois équivalente, mais aussi supérieure à celle des personnes neurotypiques » (2016, p. 423). Cela rejoint le constat d'Ortega sur la domination du mouvement pour la neurodiversité par des autistes estimant que leur état n'est pas une maladie à traiter et guérir, mais « plutôt une spécificité humaine (comme le sexe ou la race) qui doit être respectée  de  manière  égale »  (2009,  p. 425).  Baron-Cohen  met  en  exergue  qu'en  observant  les définitions du mot trouble, « aucune (…) ne semble appropriée pour décrire l'autisme » (2017, p. 744). D'autant  plus  qu'il  existe  de  « nombreuses  preuves  que  le  cerveau  autiste  est  différent  du  cerveau typique, mais il serait difficile d'identifier un exemple de trouble cérébral dans l'autisme » (2017, p. 744) car il s'agirait plutôt de signes montrant « que le cerveau autiste se développe différemment du cerveau typique - et non des preuves directes de neuropathologie » (2017, p. 744). Selon lui, l'argument principal permettant d'invalider l'idée d'un trouble pour l'autisme est que « dans un environnement favorable à l'autisme, la personne peut fonctionner non seulement bien, mais parfois même à un niveau supérieur à celui d'un individu typique » (2017, p. 746). Ainsi, le terme de trouble devrait être utilisé « lorsqu'il n'y a rien de positif dans l'état de la personne, ou lorsque, malgré l'essai de différentes modifications de l'environnement, la personne est toujours incapable de fonctionner » (2017, p. 746), celui de maladie quand « la cause biomédicale et mécaniste d'un trouble est connue, peut-être grâce à des tests médicaux

## Neurodiversity and autism - Neurodiversité et autisme

ou à la recherche scientifique » (2017, p. 746), celui de handicap quand « la personne se situe en dessous d'un niveau moyen de fonctionnement dans une ou plusieurs fonctions psychologiques ou physiques, et qu'elle a besoin d'un soutien ou d'une intervention » (2017, p. 746) alors que celui de différence devrait être utilisé « lorsque la personne est simplement atypique, pour des raisons biologiques, par rapport à une norme de la population, mais que cette différence n'affecte pas nécessairement le fonctionnement ou le bien-être » (2017, p. 746). Cependant il pense qu'il faut distinguer les différentes formes d'autisme et que certaines pourraient être des troubles quand d'autres seraient des différences.

Ainsi, les perspectives scientifiques de la neurodiversité pourraient se trouver en premier lieu en  dehors  du  champ  du  handicap  et  dans  les  disciplines  de  la  psychologie  évolutionniste,  de  la psychologie cognitive, de la génétique et de la neurobiologie. Toutes ces disciplines pourraient expliquer les origines et les contours des variations individuelles comme dans le cas de l'autisme.

## Conclusion

La  conclusion  va  porter  sur  la  discussion  de  trois  éléments :  certaines  dérives  liées  aux conséquences  du flou  terminologique et  scientifique  de  la  neurodiversité,  le  questionnement  sur  sa scientificité  puis  le  problème  lié  à  la  nature,  la  conception  et  la  définition  de  l'autisme.  Enfin,  je proposerai quelques  implications  scientifiques et sociales au véritable développement  du  pan neurobiologique et génétique du champ scientifique de la neurodiversité.

## A/ Les dérives résultant du flou terminologique et scientifique

La première conséquence de ce flou terminologique et scientifique qui entoure le concept de neurodiversité  se  trouve  dans  l'incapacité  de  la  science  à  théoriser  et  conceptualiser  la  différence provoquant ainsi des dérives conceptuelles. Le monde scientifique scindant la réalité entre le sain et le pathologique  laisse  un  grand  nombre  de  personnes  se  situant  à  la  frontière  s'engouffrer  dans  des concepts (parfois New Age et pseudoscientifiques) tels que les enfants indigo (Carroll &amp; Tober, 1999), les zèbres (Siaud-Facchin, 2008), les hypersensibles et les hauts potentiels émotionnels (Aron, 2017) ou encore les philo-cognitifs (Nusbaum et al., 2017). Tous ces concepts, dont les problématiques et dérives sont parfois avérées, permettent au minimum de faire émerger un chemin pour objectiver des vécus que la  science  n'est  pas  capable  de  faire.  Ainsi,  si  le  monde  scientifique  apparaît  être  la  solution  pour travailler autour du concept de différence et de diversité cognitive il peut aussi être considéré pour le moment une des causes de ces dérives.

## B/ Un mouvement sociopolitique se réclamant faussement de la science ?

On observe que le concept de neurodiversité fait référence à de nombreuses choses : le modèle médical du handicap, le modèle social du handicap, un entre-deux, un mouvement sociopolitique ou encore  un  champ  scientifique  situé  entre  la  neurobiologie,  la  génétique  et  la  psychologie  cognitive (Rebecchi, 2022a). Ainsi, si on s'en tient à ce que « la neurodiversité » de Judy Singer représente, cela devrait plutôt s'appeler « Mouvement (sociopolitique) pour la reconnaissance et la défense des droits des personnes handicapées, discriminées et/ou dominées » et non « neurodiversité » qui laisse penser qu'il s'agirait d'un concept scientifique. Judy Singer affirme d'ailleurs sur son blog (2019) qu'il s'agit d'un terme politique et non d'un terme scientifique, mais c'est probablement en raison de ce flou que sont  nés  beaucoup  de  débats  et  de  nombreuses  critiques  qui  semblent  parfois  justifiées.  Ainsi  de nombreux ouvrages publiés sur la neurodiversité se basent quasi exclusivement sur les sciences sociales (Rosqvist et al., 2022 ; Silberman, 2015 ; Singer, 2017) ou se focalisent sur le monde du travail (Bruyère &amp; Colella, 2022 ; Honeybourne, 2019 ; Kirby &amp; Smith, 2021 ; Wood et al., 2022) renforçant ainsi cette sensation de champ en dehors de la science ou d'activisme sociopolitique. Toutes ces questions nous amènent une nouvelle fois à nous interroger : la neurodiversité est-elle  une  idéologie  ou  un  champ scientifique ?  Par  ailleurs,  certaines  personnes  n'utilisent-elles  pas  les  mots  « neuroatypiques », « neurodiversité » ou « neurodivergence » comme des éléments de langage euphémisant la notion de handicap provoquant ainsi l'incompréhension et l'ire des parents d'enfants lourdement handicapés ?

## C/ Le problème lié à la nature, la conception et la définition de l'autisme

À l'instar de celui de neurodiversité, le concept d'autisme est utilisé pour désigner des situations totalement  différentes.  Ainsi, pour  résoudre  le  problème  terminologique  et  scientifique  de  la neurodiversité  il  conviendrait  d'essayer  de  mieux  conceptualiser  l'autisme.  Contrairement  à  ce

## Neurodiversity and autism - Neurodiversité et autisme

qu'affirme Forest (2016), il n'y a pas de réel consensus scientifique sur l'idée de spectre ni sur le travail de  Wing  qui  s'est  basé  sur  une  étude  épidémiologique  identifiant  quasi  exclusivement  des  enfants déficients intellectuels et a modifié le travail d'Hans Asperger après sa mort pour le faire entrer dans le cadre  de  ses  observations  (Wing,  1981,  1986).  On  considère  ainsi  dans  l'autisme  les  enfants majoritairement déficients intellectuels décrits par Lorna Wing (Wing &amp; Gould, 1979 ; Wing, 2005) qui ne devraient pas forcément être diagnostiqués autistes si les symptômes sont expliqués par la déficience intellectuelle ou un retard de développement global (Thurm et al., 2019) et les enfants, où la déficience intellectuelle était l'exception, décrits par Grunya Sukhareva (1926a, 1926b, 1927a, 1927b traduits par Rebecchi, 2022b), Leo Kanner (1943, 1971 traduits par  Rebecchi, 2022c) et Hans Asperger (1944, traduit par Rebecchi, 2021) qui sont parfaitement capables de s'insérer socialement et même parfois de faire  mieux  que  les  non-autistes.  Il  conviendrait  ainsi  de  dissocier  l'autisme  de  la  déficience intellectuelle et  d'exclure  cette  dernière  du  pan  neurobiologique  et  génétique  de  la  neurodiversité  à l'instar du haut potentiel intellectuel qui n'y est pas inclue. Ainsi, rien n'empêcherait une personne d'avoir une différence comme l'autisme et un handicap comme la déficience intellectuelle, un trouble du langage ou un trouble des fonctions exécutives. Le problème apparaît plutôt lorsque l'on cloisonne l'autisme  par  niveau  ou  que  l'on  base  toute  la  conception  autistique  sur  le  travail  de  Lorna  Wing. Jusqu'aujourd'hui, aucune définition de l'autisme ne fait l'unanimité. Pour Waterhouse (2009), il s'agit d'un syndrome porte-manteau alors que pour Mottron (2021) il faudrait revenir à l'autisme prototypique. Nous ne trouvons pas non plus d'étiologie unique, au contraire, l'autisme a une étiologie partagée avec la plupart des autres troubles neurodéveloppementaux (Brainstorm Consortium et al., 2018). Par ailleurs, les  caractéristiques  médicales  de  l'autisme  correspondent  à  des  choix  arbitraires  culturels  (Hyman, 2021)  et  non  pas  à  des  caractérisations  neurobiologiques  ou  génétiques.  Aussi,  tous  ces  arguments amènent à se poser la question de la réfutabilité des conceptions de l'autisme et de l'épistémologie de l'autisme : peut-on contredire l'affirmation qu'une personne est autiste ou non par un test empirique tels que les tests actuels comme l'ADOS-2 ? La réponse est évidemment non, puisque certaines personnes, en dehors du spectre autistique scorent plus haut que des autistes eux-mêmes (Grzadzinski et al., 2016 ; Maddox et al., 2017 ; Trevisan et al., 2020), et que les tests ne sont pas assez sensibles pour les femmes ou les personnes avec une haute intelligence (Lai &amp; Baron-Cohen, 2015 ; Rynkiewicz et al., 2016). Par ailleurs, les nosologies de l'autisme (comme le DSM) évoluent dans le temps et font entrer et sortir des personnes dans l'autisme de manière arbitraire (Smith et al., 2015). Ainsi, tant que la définition et la conception de l'autisme ne se seront pas éclaircies, il semble qu'il sera difficile pour la neurodiversité d'apparaître comme un champ pleinement scientifique.

## D/ Implications

Résoudre  le  casse-tête  scientifique  de  l'autisme  et  développer  le  pan  neurobiologique  et génétique du champ scientifique de la neurodiversité en créant par exemple une neurobiologie appliquée à  l'autisme  (Abrahams  &amp;  Geschwind,  2008)  pourrait  permettre  une  meilleure  prise  en  compte  de l'autisme et de la neurodiversité dans la société. Cela pourrait avoir des répercussions au niveau de la santé  (en  développant  des  approches  respectueuses  et  plus  en  adéquation  avec  les  particularités physiologiques des autistes), dans l'éducation et le monde professionnel (en développant des pédagogies et de méthodes de management autistic-friendly et des environnements accessibles à tout le monde) et dans la société en général (en intégrant par exemple la notion de diversité cognitive dans les éléments pouvant engendrer une discrimination dans le Code pénal).

## Neurodiversity and autism - Neurodiversité et autisme

## References

Abrahams, B. S., &amp; Geschwind, D. H. (2008). Advances in autism genetics: on the threshold of a new neurobiology. Nature reviews. Genetics, 9(5), 341-355. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrg2346

American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.).

Armstrong, T. (2015). The Myth of the Normal Brain: Embracing Neurodiversity. AMA Journal of Ethics, 17(4), 348-352. https://doi.org/10.1001/journalofethics.2015.17.4.msoc1-1504.

Aron,  E.  N.  (2017). Hypersensibles  -  Mieux  se  comprendre,  mieux  s'accepter  :  Transformer l'hypersensibilité en atout. Marabout.

Asperger, H. (1944). Die 'Autistischen Psychopathen' im Kindesalter. Archiv f. Psychiatrie 117, 76136. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01837709

Barnhart, A. J., &amp; Dierickx, K. (2021). Cultures and cures: Neurodiversity and brain organoids. BMC Medical Ethics, 22(1), 1-6. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12910-021-00627-1.

Baron-Cohen, S. (2017), Editorial Perspective: Neurodiversity - a revolutionary concept for autism and psychiatry. J Child Psychol Psychiatr, 58, 744-747. https://doi.org/10.1111/jcpp.12703

Best, C., Arora, S., Porter, F., &amp; Doherty, M. (2015). The Relationship Between Subthreshold Autistic Traits, Ambiguous Figure Perception and Divergent Thinking. Journal of autism and developmental disorders, 45(12), 4064-4073. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-015-2518-2

Brainstorm  Consortium,  Anttila,  V.,  Bulik-Sullivan,  B.,  Finucane,  H.  K.,  Walters,  R.  K.,  Bras,  J., Duncan, L., Escott-Price, V., Falcone, G. J., Gormley, P., Malik, R., Patsopoulos, N. A., Ripke, S., Wei, Z., Yu, D., Lee, P. H., Turley, P., Grenier-Boley, B., Chouraki, V., Kamatani, Y., … Murray, R. (2018). Analysis of shared heritability in common disorders of the brain. Science (New York, N.Y.), 360(6395), eaap8757. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aap8757

Brosnan, M., &amp; Ashwin,  C. (2022). Thinking, fast and slow on  the autism spectrum. Autism :  the international  journal  of  research  and  practice,  13623613221132437.  Advance  online  publication. https://doi.org/10.1177/13623613221132437

Bruyère, S. M., &amp; Colella, A. (Eds.) (2022). Neurodiversity in the Workplace: Interests, Issues, and Opportunities. Routledge.

Carroll, L. &amp; Tober, J. (1999). Les Enfants Indigo : Enfants du 3e millénaire. Ariane.

Chamak B. (2015) Le concept de neurodiversité ou l'éloge de la différence, in « Regards croisés sur l'idée de guérison et de rétablissement en santé mentale », sous la direction de Catherine Déchamp-Le Roux et de Florentina Rafael, pp. 41-49. John Libbey eurotext.

Chamak,  B.  (2009).Autisme  et  militantisme  :  de  la  maladie  à  la  différence.  Quaderni,  68,  61-70. https://doi.org/10.4000/quaderni.268

Chamak, B. (2010a). Autisme, handicap et mouvements sociaux. Alter, 4(2), 103-115. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.alter.2010.02.001

Chamak, B. (2010b). Le militantisme des associations d'usagers et de familles : l'exemple de l'autisme. Sud/Nord, 25, 71-80. https://doi.org/10.3917/sn.025.0071

## Neurodiversity and autism - Neurodiversité et autisme

| Chamak, B. (2010c). Autismes : des représentations multiples, sources de controverses. Enfances & Psy, 47, 150-158. https://doi.org/10.3917/ep.047.0150                                                                                                                                               |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Chamak, B. (2013). Autisme : nouvelles représentations et controverses. Psychologie Clinique, 36, 59- 67. https://doi.org/10.1051/psyc/201336059                                                                                                                                                      |
| Chamak, B. (2018a). Les associations de parents: démocratie participative ou lobbying ? Le cas de l'autisme, in Coutant I. & Simeng W. (eds.), Santé mentale & souffrance psychique : un objet pour les sciences sociales (p. 273-288). Éditions du CNRS.                                             |
| Chamak, B. (2018b). Modifications des représentations sociales de l'autisme et introduction du concept « autism-friendly ». Enfances &Psy, 80, 63-73. https://doi.org/10.3917/ep.080.0063                                                                                                             |
| Chamak, B. &Bonniau B. (2014) Neurodiversité : une autre façon de penser. In Chamak B. &Moutaud B. (dir.) Neurosciences et Société : enjeux des savoirs et pratiques sur le cerveau (pp. 211-230). Armand Colin.                                                                                      |
| Chapman, R. (2020). Defining neurodiversity for research and practice. In H. Rosqvist, N Chown &A. Stenning (Eds.), Neurodiversity Studies, A New Critical Paradigm (pp. 218-220). Routledge.                                                                                                         |
| Cook, B., & Purkis, Y. (2022). The Autism and Neurodiversity Self Advocacy Handbook. Jessica Kingsley Publishers                                                                                                                                                                                      |
| Courchesne, V., Girard, D., Jacques, C., & Soulières, I. (2019). Assessing intelligence at autism diagnosis: mission impossible? Testability and cognitive profile of autistic preschoolers. Journal of autism and developmental disorders, 49(3), 845-856. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-018-3786-4 |
| Courchesne, V., Meilleur, A. A., Poulin-Lord, M. P., Dawson, M., & Soulières, I. (2015). Autistic children at risk of being underestimated: school-based pilot study of a strength-informed assessment. Molecular autism, 6, 12. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13229-015-0006-3                            |
| Crompton, C. J., Fletcher-Watson, S. (2019, May 2). Efficiency and interaction during information transfer between autistic and neurotypical people [Poster presentation]. International Society for Autism Research Annual Conference, Montreal, Ontario, Canada.                                    |
| Crompton, C. J., Ropar, D., Evans-Williams, C. V., Flynn, E. G., &Fletcher-Watson, S. (2020). Autistic peer-to-peer information transfer is highly effective. Autism, 24(7), 1704-1712. https://doi.org/10.1177/1362361320919286                                                                      |
| Dwyer, P. (2022). The Neurodiversity Approach(es): What Are They and What Do They Mean for Researchers?. Human Development, 66, 73-92 https://doi.org/10.1159/000523723                                                                                                                               |
| the Neurodiversity Movement. In: Taylor, S.J., Brumby, A. (eds) Healthy Minds in the Twentieth Century. Mental Health in Historical Perspective. Palgrave Macmillan, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-27275-3_8                                                                                |
| Forest, D. (2022). Avantage et limite du concept de « neurodiversité ». Revue Neurologique, 178, S156. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neurol.2022.02.044                                                                                                                                                   |
| Frances, A. (2014). Saving Normal: An Insider's Revolt against Out-of-Control Psychiatric Diagnosis, DSM-5, Big Pharma, and the Medicalization of Ordinary Life. William Morrow Paperbacks.                                                                                                           |

## Neurodiversity and autism - Neurodiversité et autisme

Fritz, L. (2022). Suivre les fils du magma social : la neurodiversité à l'épreuve du patrimoine culturel immatériel de l'humanité (UNESCO). Hybrid, 8. https://doi.org/10.4000/hybrid.1778

Georgieff,  N.  (2017).  Les  paradoxes  de  l'autisme  :  limites  des  modèles  et  théories,  perspectives  de recherche. Perspectives Psy, 56, 308-319. https://doi.org/10.1051/ppsy/2017564308

Gray, J. H., &amp; Viens, J. T. (1994). The theory of multiple intelligences: understanding cognitive diversity in school. National Forum, 74(1), 22+. https://link.gale.com/apps/doc/A15135168/AONE?u=anon~5469c755&amp;sid=googleScholar&amp;xid=c385 822a

Grzadzinski, R., Dick, C., Lord, C., &amp; Bishop, S. (2016). Parent-reported and clinician-observed autism spectrum disorder (ASD) symptoms in children with attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD): implications  for  practice  under  DSM-5.  Molecular  autism,  7,  7.  https://doi.org/10.1186/s13229-0160072-1

Hetzroni, O., Agada, H., &amp; Leikin, M. (2019). Creativity in Autism: An Examination of General and Mathematical Creative Thinking Among Children with Autism Spectrum Disorder and Children with Typical Development. Journal of autism and developmental disorders, 49(9), 3833-3844. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-019-04094-x

Hochmann, J. (2020). Les chemins de l'autisme : des psychopathies à la neurodiversité. Journal de la psychanalyse de l'enfant, 10, 15-93. https://doi.org/10.3917/jpe.020.0015

Honeybourne, V. (2019). The Neurodiverse Workplace. Jessica Kingsley Publishers.

Horn, J. L. (1989). Cognitive diversity: A framework of learning. In P. L. Ackerman, R. J. Sternberg, &amp; R. Glaser (Eds.), Learning and individual differences: Advances in theory and research (pp. 61-116). W H Freeman/Times Books/ Henry Holt &amp; Co.

Hugues,  J.  A.  (2020).  Does  the  heterogeneity  of  autism  undermine  the  neurodiversity  paradigm? Bioethics, 35(1), 47-60. https://doi.org/10.1111/bioe.12780

Hyman, S.  E.  (2021).  Psychiatric  Disorders:  Grounded  in  Human  Biology  but  Not  Natural  Kinds. Perspectives in biology and medicine, 64(1), 6-28. https://doi.org/10.1353/pbm.2021.0002

Kanner, L. (1943). Autistic disturbances of affective contact. Nervous Child, 2, 217-250.

Kanner, L. (1971). Follow-up study of eleven autistic children originally reported in 1943. Journal of Autism and Childhood Schizophrenia, 1(2), 119-145. https://doi.org/ 10.1007/bf01537953

Kapp, S. K., Gillespie-Lynch, K., Sherman, L. E., &amp; Hutman, T. (2013). Deficit, difference, or both? Autism and neurodiversity. Developmental psychology, 49(1), 59-71. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0028353

Kasirer,  A.,  &amp;  Mashal,  N.  (2014).  Verbal  creativity  in  autism:  comprehension  and  generation  of metaphoric language in high-functioning autism spectrum disorder and typical development. Frontiers in human neuroscience, 8, 615. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00615

Kasirer, A., Adi-Japha, E., &amp; Mashal, N. (2020). Verbal and Figural Creativity in Children With Autism Spectrum Disorder and Typical Development. Frontiers in psychology, 11, 559238. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.559238

## Neurodiversity and autism - Neurodiversité et autisme

Kirby, A., &amp; Smith, T. (2021). Neurodiversity at Work: Drive Innovation, Performance and Productivity with a Neurodiverse Workforce. Kogan Page.

Kollman, K., &amp; Waites, M. (2009). The global politics of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender human rights: an introduction, Contemporary Politics, 15(1), 1-17. https://doi.org/10.1080/13569770802674188

Lai, M. C., &amp; Baron-Cohen, S. (2015). Identifying the lost generation of adults with autism spectrum conditions. The lancet. Psychiatry, 2(11), 1013-1027. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2215-0366(15)00277-1

Maddox, B. B., Brodkin, E. S., Calkins, M. E., Shea, K., Mullan, K., Hostager, J., Mandell, D. S., &amp; Miller, J. S. (2017). The Accuracy of the ADOS-2 in Identifying Autism among Adults with Complex Psychiatric Conditions. Journal of autism and developmental disorders, 47(9), 2703-2709. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-017-3188-z

Milton, D. (2012) On the ontological status of autism: the 'double empathy problem', Disability &amp; Society, 27:6, 883-887. http://doi.org/10.1080/09687599.2012.710008

Milton,  D.  (2019).  Disagreeing  over  Neurodiversity.  Psychologist,  32(8),  ISSN  0952-8229.  (KAR id:77891)

Milton,  Damian (2019) Disagreeing over Neurodiversity.  Psychologist, 32 . p. 8.  ISSN 0952-8229. (KAR id:77891)

Mottron, L. (2004). L'autisme : une autre intelligence: Diagnostic, cognition et support des personnes autistes sans déficience intellectuelle. Mardaga. https://doi.org/10.3917/mard.mottr.2004.01

Mottron, L. (2010). Que fait-on de l'intelligence autistique ?. Enfance, 1, 45-57. https://doi.org/10.3917/enf1.101.0045

Mottron, L. (2016). L'autisme, une autre intelligence, Is autism a different kind of intelligence? New insights from cognitive neurosciences. Bulletin de l'Académie Nationale de Médecine, 200(3), 423-434. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0001-4079(19)30719-8

Mottron, L. (2021). A radical change in our autism research strategy is needed: Back to prototypes. Autism research: official journal of the International Society for Autism Research, 14(10), 2213-2220. https://doi.org/10.1002/aur.2494

Muskat,  B.  (2017).  Celebrating  Neurodiversity:  An  Often-Overlooked  Difference  in  Group  Work, Social Work with Groups, 40(1-2), 81-84. https://doi.org/10.1080/01609513.2015.1067131

Nader, A. M., Courchesne, V., Dawson, M., &amp; Soulières, I. (2016). Does WISC-IV Underestimate the Intelligence of Autistic Children?. Journal of autism and developmental disorders, 46(5), 1582-1589. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-014-2270-z

Nader,  A.  M.,  Jelenic,  P.,  &amp;  Soulières,  I.  (2015).  Discrepancy  between  WISC-III  and  WISC-IV Cognitive  Profile  in  Autism  Spectrum:  What  Does  It  Reveal  about  Autistic  Cognition?.  PloS  one, 10(12), e0144645. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0144645

Nelson, R. H. (2020). A Critique of the Neurodiversity View. Journal of Applied Philosophy, 38(2), 345-347. https://doi.org/10.1111/japp.12470

Newton, P. M., Najabat-Lattif, H. F., Santiago, G., &amp; Salvi, A. (2021) The Learning Styles Neuromyth Is Still Thriving in Medical Education. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 15:708540. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2021.708540

## Neurodiversity and autism - Neurodiversité et autisme

Nugent,  B.  (2017).  Voies  |  Voix  autistes  franco-ontariennes  :  quand  la  reconnaissance  de  la neurodiversité devient-elle une voie émancipatrice militante? Reflets, 23(2), 32-68. https://doi.org/10.7202/1043302ar

Nusbaum, F., Revol, O., &amp; Sappey-Marinier, D. (2019). Les Philo-cognitifs : Ils n'aiment que penser et penser autrement. Odile Jacob.

OMS. (1988). Classification internationale des handicaps : déficiences, incapacités et désavantages : un manuel de classification des conséquences des maladies. INSERM. https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/41005

OMS. (2001). Classification internationale du fonctionnement, du handicap et de la santé : CIF. Organisation mondiale de la Santé. https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/42418

Ortega, F. (2009). The Cerebral Subject and the Challenge of Neurodiversity. BioSocieties, 4(4), 425445. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1745855209990287

Plomin, R. (2018). Blueprint: How DNA Makes Us Who We Are. Allen Lane.

Rebecchi, K. (2021). Les enfants autistes : Hans Asperger. Kindle Direct Publishing.

Rebecchi, K. (2022a). La neurodiversité. L'Harmattan.

Rebecchi, K. (2022b). Les enfants autistes : Grunya Sukhareva. Kindle Direct Publishing.

Rebecchi, K. (2022c). Les enfants autistes : Leo Kanner. Kindle Direct Publishing.

Rebecchi, K. (2022d). Autistic children. Kindle Direct Publishing.

Rosqvist,  H.,  Chown,  N.,  &amp;  Stenning,  A.  (Eds.).  (2022).  Neurodiversity  Studies,  A  New  Critical Paradigm. Routledge.

Rozenkrantz, L., D'Mello, A. M., &amp; Gabrieli, J. D. E. (2021). Enhanced rationality in autism spectrum disorder. Trends in cognitive sciences, 25(8), 685-696. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2021.05.004

Runswick-Cole, K. (2014). 'Us' and 'them': the limits and possibilities of a 'politics of neurodiversity' in neoliberal times, Disability &amp; Society, 29(7), 1117-1129. https://doi.org/10.1080/09687599.2014.910107

Russell, G. (2020). Critiques of the Neurodiversity Movement. In S. K. Kapp (Ed.) Autistic Community and the Neurodiversity Movement, Stories from the Frontline (pp. 287-304). Palgrave Macmillan.

Rynkiewicz,  A.,  Schuller,  B.,  Marchi,  E.,  Piana,  S.,  Camurri,  A.,  Lassalle,  A.,  &amp;  Baron-Cohen,  S. (2016). An investigation of the 'female camouflage effect' in autism using a computerized ADOS-2 and a test of sex/gender differences. Molecular autism, 7, 10. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13229-016-0073-0

Scheepers, F. (2021). Mensen zijn ingewikkeld: Een pleidooi voor acceptatie van de werkelijkheid en het loslaten van modeldenken.  De Arbeiderspers.

Schröder, P. (1938). Kinderpsychiatrie. Monatsschr Psychiatr Neurol 99, 267-293. https://doi.org/10.1159/000148673

Shields,  K.,  &amp;  Beversdorf,  D.  A.  (2021).  Dilemma  For  Neurodiversity.  Neuroethics,  14,  125-141. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12152-020-09431-x

## Neurodiversity and autism - Neurodiversité et autisme

Siaud-Facchin, J. (2008). Trop intelligent pour être heureux ? L'adulte surdoué. Odile Jacob.

Silberman, S. (2015). NeuroTribes The Legacy of Autism and the Future of Neurodiversity. Avery.

Singer, J. (1998). Odd People In: The Birth of Community amongst people on the Autistic Spectrum. A personal exploration based on neurological diversity. [Thèse de doctorat, Faculty of Humanities and Social Science University of Technology, Sydney]. https://www.academia.edu/27033194/Odd_People_In_The_Birth_of_Community_amongst_people_o n_the_Autistic_Spectrum_A_personal_exploration_based_on_neurological_diversity

Singer, J. (2017). NeuroDiversity: The Birth of an Idea. Independently published.

Singer, J. (2019). What is Neurodiversity?. https://neurodiversity2.blogspot.com/p/what.html

- Smith, I. C., Reichow, B., &amp; Volkmar, F. R. (2015). The Effects of DSM-5 Criteria on Number of Individuals Diagnosed with Autism Spectrum Disorder: A Systematic Review. Journal of autism and developmental disorders, 45(8), 2541-2552. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-015-2423-8

Speranza, J. (2020). Le concept de neurodiversité peut-il révolutionner l'école ?. Rhizome, 78, 6-7. https://doi.org/10.3917/rhiz.078.0006

Stich,  S.  (1988).  Reflective  Equilibrium,  Analytic  Epistemology  and  the  Problem  of  Cognitive Diversity. Synthese, 74(3), 391-413. http://www.jstor.org/stable/20116509

Strand,  L.  R.  (2017).  Charting  Relations  between  Intersectionality  Theory  and  the  Neurodiversity Paradigm. Disability Studies Quarterly, 37(2). https://doi.org/10.18061/dsq.v37i2.5374

Sukhareva,  G.  E.  (1926a).  Die  schizoiden  Psychopathien  im  Kindesalter.  (Part  1  of  2).  European Neurology, 60(3-4), 235-247. https://doi.org/10.1159/000190478

Sukhareva,  G.  E.  (1926b).  Die  schizoiden  Psychopathien  im  Kindesalter.  (Part  2  of  2).  European Neurology, 60(3-4), 248-261. https://doi.org/10.1159/000316609

Sukhareva, G. E. (1927a). Die Besonderheiten der schizoiden Psychopathien bei den Madchen. (Part 1 of 2). European Neurology, 62(3), 171-185. https://doi.org/10.1159/000166291

Sukhareva, G. E. (1927b). Die Besonderheiten der schizoiden Psychopathien bei den Madchen. (Part 1 of 2). European Neurology, 62(3), 186-200. https://doi.org/10.1159/000323311

The University of Edinburgh (2020). Neurodiverse or Neurodivergent? It's more than just grammar. https://dart.ed.ac.uk/neurodiverse-or-neurodivergent/

Thurm, A., Farmer, C., Salzman, E., Lord, C., &amp; Bishop, S. (2019). State of the Field: Differentiating Intellectual Disability From Autism Spectrum Disorder. Frontiers in psychiatry, 10, 526. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyt.2019.00526

Trevisan, D. A., Foss-Feig, J. H., Naples, A. J., Srihari, V., Anticevic, A., &amp; McPartland, J. C. (2020). Autism Spectrum Disorder and Schizophrenia Are Better Differentiated by Positive Symptoms Than Negative Symptoms. Frontiers in psychiatry, 11, 548. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyt.2020.00548

Waterhouse, L. (2009). Autism is a Portmanteau Syndrome. Neuropsychology Review, 19(2), 275-276. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11065-009-9100-7

Wiktionary. (2014). Neurodivergent. https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/neurodivergent

## Neurodiversity and autism - Neurodiversité et autisme

Wing L. (1981). Asperger's syndrome: a clinical account. Psychological medicine, 11(1), 115-129. https://doi.org/10.1017/s0033291700053332

Wing L. (1986). Clarification on Asperger's syndrome. Journal of autism and developmental disorders, 16(4), 513-515. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01531716

Wing, L. (2005). Problems of Categorical Classification Systems. Handbook of Autism and Pervasive Developmental Disorders, 583-605. https://doi.org/10.1002/9780470939345.ch21

Wing, L., &amp; Gould, J. (1979). Severe impairments of social interaction and associated abnormalities in children: epidemiology and classification. Journal of autism and developmental disorders, 9(1), 11-29. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01531288

Wood, R., Crane, L., Happé, F., Morrison, A., &amp; Movse, R. (Eds.) (2022). Learning From Autistic Teachers: How to Be a Neurodiversity-Inclusive School. Jessica Kingsley Publishers.

World Health Organization. (2001). International classification of functioning, disability and health : ICF. World Health Organization. https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/42407

World  Health  Organization. (1980). International classification of impairments,  disabilities, and handicaps : a manual of classification relating to the consequences of disease, published in accordance with  resolution  WHA29.35 of the Twenty-ninth World Health Assembly, May 1976. World Health Organization. https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/41003