HYPERACUSIS AND MISOPHONIA MEASURES:     
AN EXAMINATION OF THE PSYCHOMETRIC 
PROPERTIES AND THE IMPACT ON HEALTH 
 
by 
Fatma Betul Kula  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Thesis submitted to the University of Surrey for the award of 
Doctor of Philosophy 
 
 
School of Psychology 
Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences 
University of Surrey 
 
January 2025 
 
 
©Fatma Betul Kula 2025

DEDICATION 
 
     This thesis dedicated to my daughter, Miray Ece, who reminds me daily of life’s joys and 
beauty, and to my dear husband, Halil Ibrahim, whose unwavering love and support have been 
the foundation of my success. This accomplishment is as much yours as it is mine.

DECLARATION OF ORIGINALITY 
 
     This thesis and the work to which it refers are the results of my own efforts. Any ideas, data, 
images, or text resulting from the work of others (whether published or unpublished) are fully 
identified as such within the work and attributed to their originator in the text, bibliography or 
in footnotes. This thesis has not been submitted in whole or in part for any other academic 
degree or professional qualification. I agree that the University has the right to submit my work 
to the plagiarism detection service Turnitin for originality checks. Whether or not drafts have 
been so assessed, the University reserves the right to require an electronic version of the final 
document (as submitted) for assessment as above. 
 
 
Signature: 
 
Date: 10/01/2025

ABSTRACT 
HYPERACUSIS AND MISOPHONIA MEASURES: AN EXAMINATION OF THE 
PSYCHOMETRIC PROPERTIES AND THE IMPACT ON HEALTH 
 
Fatma Betul Kula 
University of Surrey 
 
     Hyperacusis is characterised by an increased sensitivity to everyday sounds, while 
misophonia involves strong emotional, behavioural and physical reactions to specific trigger 
sounds, such as chewing or tapping. Despite their significant impact, some questionnaires used 
to assess these conditions exhibit varying psychometric robustness, and the psychological links 
between these conditions and health outcomes—such as fatigue, stress, and sleep quality—
remain incompletely understood. 
     This thesis addressed these gaps through a systematic review and three empirical studies. 
The systematic review assessed eight widely used questionnaires against COSMIN standards, 
identifying gaps in reliability and validity, which provided the basis for the subsequent 
empirical studies. The first study validated the English version of MisoQuest, a 14-item 
misophonia questionnaire, demonstrating adequate model fit in CFA but finding that a one-
factor structure was not fully supported due to shared variance among some items. While it 
showed good convergent and discriminant validity, moderate correlations with fatigue 
indicated potential construct overlaps, requiring further investigation. The second study 
explored this relationship between misophonia and fatigue, identifying stress and sleep quality 
as partial mediators, highlighting the potential for targeted interventions. The final study 
validated the 4C Hyperacusis and Misophonia Management Questionnaires in clinical 
population, demonstrating a one-factor structure for the 4C Hyperacusis Management and two-

factor structure for the 4C Misophonia Management, both with acceptable model fit. The 
questionnaires also showed strong reliability, along with good convergent and discriminant 
validity. These tools assess patients' confidence in managing symptoms, particularly within the 
context of cognitive-behavioural therapy. 
     To summarise, the results of this thesis provide novel evidence of the assessment of 
hyperacusis and misophonia by validating questionnaires and examining the relationships 
between psychological factors and health outcomes.

AUTHORSHIP DECLARATION 
 
     This thesis is structured as a series of separate manuscripts, with Chapter two has already 
been published, while Chapter three and Chapter four have been submitted to journals and are 
currently under peer-review. Chapter five will be submitted to American Journal of Audiology.  
 Chapter Two:   
     Kula, F.B.,  Cropley, M., & Aazh, H., 2022. ‘Hyperacusis and Misophonia: a systematic 
review of psychometric measures’, Journal of the American Academy of Audiology , 
33(07/08), pp.417-428. 
 Chapter Three: 
     Kula, F.B.,  Cropley, M., & Aazh, H. ‘Evaluation of Psychometric Properties of the English 
MisoQuest and Its Relationship with Audiological and Psychological Factors’, International 
Journal of Audiology [under review]. 
 Chapter Four: 
     Kula, F.B.,  Cropley, M., & Aazh, H. ‘The Relationship Between Misophonia and Fatigue: 
The Role of Sleep Quality and Stress as Mediators’, International Journal of Audiology [under 
review]. 
 Chapter Five:  
Kula, F.B.,  Cropley, M., & Aazh, H. ‘Evaluating the 4C Misophonia and Hyperacusis 
Management Questionnaires: Psychometric Validation in a Clinical Population’ ( to be 
submitted to American Journal of Audiology).

OTHER OUTPUTS DURING CANDIDATURE 
 
Accepted Conference Presentations 
Oral Presentation  “Mediation Analysis on the Correlation Between Misophonia and Fatigue, 
Sleep, Stress, Hyperacusis, and Mental Health: Preliminary Results.” at the 36th World 
Congress of Audiology in Paris, 19th and 22nd of September 2024.  
Oral Presentation  “Validity and Reliability of Misophonia Impact Questionnaire in 
Misophonia Patients” at the 10th Misophonia Convention on November 2nd and 4th 2023, 
Albuquerque, USA.  
Oral Presentation  “Validity and Reliability of English Version of MisoQuest and Its 
Correlation with Misophonia Impact Questionnaire (MIQ), Hyperacusis Impact Questionnaire 
(HIQ) and Sound Sensitivity Symptoms Questionnaire (SSSQ).” at the 6th International 
Conference on Hyperacusis and Misophonia on July 1st and 2nd, 2022, London, UK. 
Poster Presentation  "Hyperacusis and Misophonia: A Systematic Review of Psychometric 
Measures" at the British Academy of Audiology Conference on November 18th and 19th, 2021, 
Manchester, UK. 
 
Awards 
     Awarded the Travel Grant (Student Scholarship) by the International Society of Audiology 
to attend the World Congress of Audiology in Paris, 2024. This prestigious scholarship was 
awarded to only six students worldwide, recognising their academic contributions to the field.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
 
     First and foremost, I would like to express my deepest gratitude to my supervisors, Prof. 
Mark Cropley and Dr. Hashir Aazh, for their exceptional guidance, constructive feedback, and 
unwavering support throughout my PhD journey. Their expertise and encouragement have 
been invaluable in shaping this thesis and my development as a researcher. 
     I extend my heartfelt thanks to the Republic of Türkiye Ministry of National Education for 
funding my graduate studies in the UK. This financial support has been crucial in enabling me 
to pursue my academic aspirations and complete this project. 
     I am grateful to SoQuiet Misophonia Charity, International Society of Audiology (ISA), and 
Hashir International Institute for their support in data collection and dissemination of my 
research findings. 
     I am especially thankful to Beyza, who has been more than a friend throughout this journey, 
and to my friends Elif, Gulin, Arcan, Karen, Fatima and Nancy for their constant support. My 
gratitude extends to my office mates in the 24AC04 room and the Department of Psychology 
at the University of Surrey for their kindness and encouragement during this time. 
     Finally, I would like to express my heartfelt gratitude to my parents and my brother for their 
unwavering love, encouragement, and belief in me. Their support has been a constant source 
of strength throughout this journey.

i 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
LIST OF TABLES…………………………………………………………………………….v 
LIST OF FIGURES…………………………………………………………………………vii 
ABBREVIATIONS………………………………………………………………………….viii 
CHAPTER ONE: GENERAL INTRODUCTION….………………………………………..1 
     Overview……………………………………………………………………………………1 
     Introduction to Misophonia……………………………………………………………….2 
          Definitions and Key Characteristics…………………………………………………….2 
          Prevalence………………………………………………………………………………4 
          Underlying Mechanisms………………………………………………………………..5 
          Comorbid Conditions…………………………………………………………………...6  
          Diagnosis and Measuring Approaches…………………………………………………..8 
     Introduction to Hyperacusis……………………………………………………………..10 
          Definitions and Key Characteristics…………………………………………………...10   
          Aetiology and Prevalence……………………………………………………………...12   
          Underlying Mechanisms……………………………………………………………….12 
          Comorbid Conditions………………………………………………………………….14  
          Diagnosis and Measuring Approaches…………………………………………………15 
     Interim Summary…………………………………………………………………………17 
     COSMIN and Psychometric Properties…………………………………………….........18 
     Overall Summary…………………………………………………………………………19 
     Scope of Thesis……………………………………………………………………………20 
     Structure of Thesis ……………………………………………………………………......21  
CHAPTER TWO: HYPERACUSIS AND MISOPHONIA: A SYSTEMATIC REVIEW OF 
PSYCHOMETRIC MEASURES 
     Overview…………………………………………………………………………………..23 
     Introduction………………………………………………………………………………27 
    Methods……………………………………………………………………………………29

ii 
 
     Results……………………………………………………………………………………33 
     Discussion………………………………………………………………… .……….........44 
     Conclusions………………………………………………………………………………49 
     References………………………………………………………………………………...50 
CHAPTER THREE: EVALUATION OF PSYCHOMETRIC PROPERTIES OF THE 
ENGLISH MISOQUEST AND ITS RELATIONSHIP WITH AUDIOLOGICAL AND 
PSYCHOLOGICAL FACTORS 
     Overview…………………………………………………………………………………..57 
     Introduction………………………………………………………………………………61 
     Materials and Methods…………………………………………………………………...63 
     Results…………………………………………………………………………………….70  
     Discussion………………………………………………………………… .…………….76 
     Conclusions………………………………………………………………………………80 
     References………………………………………………………………………………...81 
CHAPTER FOUR: THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN MISOPHONIA AND FATIGUE: 
THE ROLE OF SLEEP QUALITY AND STRESS AS MEDIATORS 
     Overview………………………………………………………………………………….88 
     Introduction………………………………………………………………………………91 
     Materials and Methods…………………………………………………………………...93 
     Results…………………………………………………………………………………....97 
     Discussion………………………………………………………………… .…………...103 
     Conclusions……………………………………………………………………………..105  
     References……………………………………………………………………………….107  
CHAPTER FIVE: EVALUATING THE 4C MISOPHONIA AND HYPERACUSIS 
QUESTIONNAIRES: PSYCHOMETRIC VALIDATION IN A CLINICAL POPULATION

iii 
 
     Overview…………………………………………………………………………………113 
     Introduction……………………………………………………………………………..117 
     Methods………………………………………………………………………………….120 
     Results…………………………………………………………………………………...128  
     Discussion………………………………………………………………… .…………...133 
     Conclusions……………………………………………………………………………..137 
     References……………………………………………………………………………….138  
CHAPTER SIX: GENERAL DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS 
     Overview…………………………………………………………………………………143 
     Summary of main findings……………………………………………………………...145 
     Research and clinical implications……………………………………………………...146 
     Challenges and limitations……………………………………………………………...148 
     Directions for future research…………………………………………………………..150  
     Overall conclusions……………………………………………………………………..152   
REFERENCES FOR GENERAL INTRODUCTION AND DISCUSSION 
CHAPTERS………………………………………………………………………………...153  
APPENDICES……………………………………………………………………………...165 
     Appendix A- University Ethics Committee Approval Letter Study 1 and 2……………..165 
     Appendix B- University Ethics Committee Approval Letter (Study 3) ………………… 166 
     Appendix C- Definitions and criteria for good measurement properties by COSMIN 
guidance…………………………………………………………………………………….167 
     Appendix D- English MisoQuest………………………………………………………..169 
    Appendix E- SF 1: Flowchart of the participant involvement process in the three phases 
of this study (Study 1) ………………………………………………………………………170 
     Appendix F- SF 2: Factor structure of the English version of MisoQuest from CFA 
(Study 1) ……………………………………………………………………………………171

iv 
 
 
     Appendix G- SF 3: Bland-Altman plot (Study 1) ……………………………………...172 
 
     Appendix H: Three-Dimensional Fatigue Inventory (Study 1 and 2) ……………......173 
 
     Appendix I: Amsterdam Misophonia Scale – Revised (Study 1) ……………………...175 
 
     Appendix J: Misophonia Impact Questionnaire- Adult (Study 1 and 3) …………......176 
 
     Appendix K: Sound Sensitivity Symptoms Questionnaire (Study 1) ………………….177 
 
     Appendix L: Hyperacusis Impact Questionnaire (Study 1, 2 and 3) ………………….178 
 
     Appendix M: Tinnitus Impact Questionnaire (Study 1 and 3) ………………………..179 
 
     Appendix N: The Screening for Anxiety and Depression in Tinnitus/Sound Intolerance 
 (Study 1, 2 and 3) ……………………………………………………………………….....180 
     Appendix O: Hearing Handicap Inventory (Study 1) ………………………………....181 
 
     Appendix P: A Single Item Measure of Stress Symptoms (study 1 and 2) …………....183 
 
     Appendix R: Single Item Sleep Quality Scale (study 1 and 2) ………………………...184

v 
 
 
LIST OF TABLES  
 
CHAPTER TWO: HYPERACUSIS AND MISOPHONIA: A SYSTEMATIC REVIEW OF 
PSYCHOMETRIC MEASURES 
     Table 1. Search term strategies applied in databases……………………………………..31 
     Table 2. Summary of study characteristics……………………………………………… 36 
     Table 3. Description of questionnaires…………………………………………………...38 
     Table 4. Methodological quality ratings of each study based on COSMIN……………….40  
     Table 5. Ratings for each psychometric property quality…………………………………42   
 
CHAPTER THREE: EVALUATION OF PSYCHOMETRIC PROPERTIES OF THE 
ENGLISH MISOQUEST AND ITS RELATIONSHIP WITH AUDIOLOGICAL AND 
PSYCHOLOGICAL FACTORS 
     Table 1. Descriptive Statistics and Reliability of Administered Questionnaires…………71 
     Table 2. Descriptive Statistics, Factor Loadings and Item Reliability for MisoQuest 
items………………………………………………………………………………………….72 
     Table 3. Discriminant validity: correlations coefficients………………………………...75 
 
CHAPTER FOUR: THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN MISOPHONIA AND FATIGUE: 
THE ROLE OF SLEEP QUALITY AND STRESS AS MEDIATORS 
     Table 1. Means and Standard deviations of total scores…………………….....................98 
     Table 2. The correlation matrix presents the relationships between misophonia, 
hyperacusis, anxiety/depression, fatigue, sleep quality and stress……………………………99 
     Table 3. The multiple regression analysis results……………………………………….100

vi 
 
CHAPTER FIVE: EVALUATING THE 4C MISOPHONIA AND HYPERACUSIS 
QUESTIONNAIRES: PSYCHOMETRIC VALIDATION IN A CLINICAL PATIENTS 
     Table 1. 4C Hyperacusis Management Questionnaire………………………………….121 
     Table 2. 4C Misophonia Management Questionnaire…………………………………...122  
     Table 3. Misophonia Diagnostic Criteria……………………………………………….124 
     Table 4. Hyperacusis Diagnostic Criteria……………………………………………….125  
     Table 5. Descriptive Statistics and Psychometric Properties of the 4C Hyperacusis 
Management items and Total………………………………………………………………129 
     Table 6. Correlations among items and total scores of 4C Hyperacusis, HIQ, TIQ, MIQ, 
and SAD-T…………………………………………………………………………………..132 
     Table 7. Correlations among items and total scores of 4C Misophonia, HIQ, TIQ, MIQ, and 
SAD-T………………………………………………………………………………………133

vii 
 
LIST OF FIGURES 
 
CHAPTER ONE: GENERAL INTRODUCTION 
     Figure 1. Measurement Properties of Outcome Measurement Instruments……………...20  
CHAPTER TWO: HYPERACUSIS AND MISOPHONIA: A SYSTEMATIC REVIEW OF 
PSYCHOMETRIC MEASURES 
     Figure 1.  Flowchart of paper selection based on PRISMA guidance……………………34  
CHAPTER THREE: EVALUATION OF PSYCHOMETRIC PROPERTIES OF THE 
ENGLISH MISOQUEST AND ITS RELATIONSHIP WITH AUDIOLOGICAL AND 
PSYCHOLOGICAL FACTORS 
     Figure 1. SF 1: Flowchart of the participant involvement process in the three phases of 
this study……………………………………………………………………………………187 
     Figure 2. SF 2: Factor structure of the English version of MisoQuest from CFA……...188 
     Figure 3. SF 3: Bland-Altman plot……………………………………………………...189  
CHAPTER FOUR: THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN MISOPHONIA AND FATIGUE: 
THE ROLE OF SLEEP QUALITY AND STRESS AS MEDIATORS 
     Figure 1. Parallel mediation analysis model for fatigue and misophonia by sleep and 
stress mediators……………………………………………………………………………..102

viii 
 
ABBREVIATIONS  
 
CFA Confirmatory Factor Analysis  
HIQ Hyperacusis Impact Questionnaire 
MIQ Misophonia Impact Questionnaire  
TIQ Tinnitus Impact Questionnaire 
SAD-T  Screening for Anxiety & Depression in 
Tinnitus and Sound intolerance  
AMISOS-R The Amsterdam Misophonia Scale- Revised 
HHI Hearing Handicap Inventory 
3D-WFI Three-Dimensional Fatigue Inventory 
SSSQ Sound Sensitivity Symptoms Questionnaire 
WLSMV Weighted Least Squares Mean and Variance 
RMSEA Root Means Square of Approximation 
SRMR Standardized Root Mean Square Residual 
TLI Tucker Lewis Index 
CFI Comparative Fit Index 
CMIN Chi-square/ df 
COSMIN COnsensus-based Standards for the selection 
of health Measurement INstruments 
ASD Autism Spectrum Disorder 
HQ Hyperacusis Questionnaire

1 
 
CHAPTER ONE: GENERAL INTRODUCTION 
 
Overview 
     
     In this introductory chapter, an overview is presented on the definitions, diagnostic 
challenges, prevalence, and underlying mechanisms of hyperacusis and misophonia. 
Hyperacusis is characterised by the perception of certain everyday sounds, such as household 
or environmental noises, as excessively loud or uncomfortable, leading to significant distress 
and disruption to daily activities, including social and occupational functioning. Different 
forms of hyperacusis have been identified: loudness hyperacusis, which involves perceiving 
specific sounds (e.g., voices, traffic, or household appliances) as intolerably loud, sometimes 
accompanied by physical symptoms such as ear fullness or spasms; pain hyperacusis 
(noxacusis), where certain sounds trigger sensations of pain (e.g., stabbing, throbbing, or 
burning), even at levels below those known to cause cochlear damage; and fear hyperacusis 
(phonophobia), which is dominated by a fear of sounds due to concerns about their potential 
impact, such as worsening tinnitus or hearing sensitivity. 
     Misophonia, in contrast, is defined by strong emotional, physiological, and behavioural 
reactions, such as anger, disgust, or anxiety, triggered by specific sounds. These are often 
sounds produced by humans (e.g., chewing, breathing) or objects (e.g., tapping, clock ticking), 
which are perceived as particularly aversive. Despite the overlap in some aspects, hyperacusis 
and misophonia have distinct triggers, responses, and underlying mechanisms, necessitating 
tailored approaches to their assessment.  
     A systematic review conducted as part of this thesis examined existing hyperacusis and 
misophonia questionnaires. This review later published (Kula et al., 2023) (see Chapter 2), 
evaluated the psychometric properties of widely used tools such as the Misophonia 
Questionnaire (MQ), MisoQuest, and Hyperacusis Questionnaire (HQ) against the COSMIN

2 
 
standards. The findings revealed significant gaps in these measures, including inconsistencies 
in psychometric measurements and lack of cross-cultural validations. Building on this review, 
the thesis evaluates the English version of the MisoQuest, a 14-item questionnaire originally 
developed in Polish to measure misophonia. This study establishes the psychometric properties 
of the English MisoQuest, including its reliability, validity, and factor structure, while also 
exploring its relationships with audiological and psychological variables such as hyperacusis 
and fatigue. Additionally, the thesis explores the broader psychological and health impacts of 
these conditions, with a particular focus on the relationships between misophonia, fatigue, 
stress, and sleep quality. It further evaluates novel measurement tools aimed at assessing 
symptom management confidence, particularly within the context of Cognitive Behavioral 
Therapy (CBT), emphasizing their clinical applicability and relevance. 
     Towards the conclusion of this chapter, the scope of this thesis is outlined, including a 
systematic review and a series of empirical studies aimed at advancing the understanding and 
measurement of misophonia and hyperacusis. The subsequent chapters present a structured 
approach to addressing these gaps through systematic evaluations, psychometric validations, 
and new questionnaires validation. The rationale for each study is provided, alongside their 
specific aims, to illustrate how this body of work contributes to field of hyperacusis and 
misophonia and their relationship and assessment.  
Introduction to Misophonia 
Definitions and Key Characteristics   
     Misophonia is a condition characterised by intense negative emotional and physiological 
responses to specific auditory and visual stimuli, often referred to as “triggers”. As noted by 
Ferrer-Torres and Giménez-Llort (2022), the condition was initially identified in the late 1990s 
by audiologist Marsha Johson under the term “Sensitivity to Soft Sound” or “Selective Sound 
Sensitivity Syndrome”. In 2002, Jastreboff and Jastreboff (2002) introduced the term

3 
 
“misophonia ” to describe negative reactions of limbic and autonomic systems triggered by the 
perception of specific sounds. Between June 2020 and January 2021, a multidisciplinary 
committee, including audiologists, psychologists, psychiatrists, and neuroscientists, conducted 
a systematic review of the existing literature using a modified Delphi method. Their aim was 
to establish a standardised definition of misophonia for the scientific community. The 
committee evaluated potential definitions based on clinical and scientific evidence, including 
only those statements that achieved at least 80% agreement among its members. 
The final definition, published by Swedo et al. (2022), defines misophonia as follows: 
     Misophonia is a disorder characterised by a heightened sensitivity and reduced tolerance 
to specific sounds or related stimuli, known as "triggers". These triggers are experienced as 
unpleasant or distressing and elicit strong emotional, physiological, and behavioural 
responses that are atypical in most people. Misophonic reactions are not typically caused by 
the loudness of sounds but by their particular pattern or meaning to the individual. Triggers 
are often repetitive and are frequently, though not exclusively, associated with sounds 
produced by others, especially those made by the human body. Once a trigger is noticed, 
individuals with misophonia may find it difficult to distract from it, resulting in significant 
distress or impairment in areas such as social, occupational, or academic functioning. The 
severity of symptoms can range from mild to severe, and some individuals with misophonia 
are aware that their reactions are disproportionate to the situation. Symptoms commonly 
emerge in childhood or early adolescence. 
    Key characteristics of misophonia include a range of emotional, physiological, and 
behavioural responses to specific auditory (e.g., gum chewing, lip smacking or pen clicking) 
or visual cues (e.g., leg swinging) (Swedo et al., 2022). Emotional responses often involve 
intense anger, disgust, frustration, anxiety, or panic when exposed to these triggers (Holohan 
et al., 2023, Savard et al., 2022). Behavioural responses may include avoidance of triggering

4 
 
situations, escape from the source of the sound, or even aggressive reactions, often driven by 
the intensity of the emotional distress (Lewin et al., 2024). Physiological symptoms associated 
with misophonia include muscle tension, increased body temperature, elevated blood pressure, 
and a heightened heart rate (Rouw and Erfanian, 2018).  
     These symptoms can significantly interfere with daily life, making it harder for individuals 
to maintain relationships, carry out work or studies, and take part in social activities. Over time, 
this can lead to withdrawal and social isolation (Hadjipavlou et al., 2008). This is reflected in 
a longitudinal study by Dibb and Golding (2022), which found that individuals with self-
reported misophonia had significantly lower quality of life compared to the general population. 
By interfering with daily functioning and social interactions, misophonia creates challenges 
that extend beyond the distress caused by the triggers themselves. Recognising and 
understanding these complexities is crucial for improving support and outcomes for those 
affected. 
 Prevalence   
     The reported prevalence of misophonia varies considerably across populations, with studies 
reporting a wide range of affected individuals. For instance, a survey of 483 undergraduate 
students found that 22.8% frequently or consistently experienced irritation or sensitivity to 
specific sounds, such as eating, tapping, or nasal noises (Wu et al., 2014). Similarly, a study of 
336 medical students in UK revealed that 49.1% exhibited clinically significant symptoms, 
with 37% experiencing mild symptoms, 12% moderate, and 0.3% severe levels of misophonia 
(Naylor et al., 2021a). In a large, nationally representative sample of the UK population, 
Vitoratou et al. (2023) estimated the prevalence of misophonia to be 18%.  
     Recent studies further illustrate the variability in prevalence across populations. Pfeiffer et 
al. (2024) found that 33.3% of German participants reported sensitivity to at least one specific 
misophonic sound. Within this sample, 21.3% experienced subthreshold symptoms, 9.9%

5 
 
reported mild symptoms, 2.1% reported moderate to severe symptoms, and 0.1% reported 
severe to extreme symptoms. Dixon et al. (2024) reported that 78.5% of adults were sensitive 
to misophonic sounds, with 4.6% exhibiting clinical levels of misophonia.  
    Accurately determining the prevalence of misophonia is challenging due to the lack of 
standardised diagnostic criteria and variability in measurement tools, such as self-reports and 
structured interviews. Additionally, misophonia often co-occurs with other auditory and mental 
health disorders, leading to potential underdiagnosis or misclassification with other hearing-
related conditions (Jastreboff and Jastreboff, 2015). These discrepancies highlight the need for 
robust, standardised methodologies to improve the understanding and quantification of this 
condition's prevalence. These issues, along with a detailed discussion of diagnostic criteria, 
will be address in the subsequent sections.  
Underlying Mechanisms 
     Initial theories about misophonia proposed hyperconnectivity between auditory and limbic 
systems, supported by evidence of structural differences in regions such as the left auditory 
cortex, bilateral hippocampus, and right anterior insula (Jastreboff and Jastreboff, 2002, 
Kliuchko et al., 2018). Early research suggested that emotional processing, rather than auditory 
sensitivity alone, play a critical role. For instance, San Giorgi (2015) observed heightened 
amygdala activity in response to misophonic triggers, indicating a stronger emotional response 
rather than over-responsivity to sound.  
    Functional neuroimaging studies have consistently linked the anterior insular cortex (AIC) 
and salience network in misophonia. Kumar et al. (2017) reported increased AIC activity in 
individuals with misophonia when exposed to trigger sounds, alongside heightened heart rate 
and galvanic skin response, indicating elevated emotional and physiological arousal. Schröder 
et al. (2019) similarly observed heightened activation in the right insula, anterior cingulate 
cortex (ACC), and right superior temporal cortex (STC) during audiovisual exposure to trigger

6 
 
sounds. These findings suggest that trigger sounds engage both auditory processing regions 
and the salience network, contributing to physiological arousal and emotional reactivity. 
    Further research indicates that misophonic reactions are not solely mediated by an auditory-
limbic response but involve higher-order mechanisms. For instance, Cerliani and Rouw (2020) 
identified the involvement of the orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) and its connections with the mid-
cingulate cortex (MCC) and premotor areas, suggesting difficulties with emotional regulation. 
These findings provide an explanation for the compulsive nature of misophonic reactions and 
highlight the role of an indirect auditory-limbic pathway in interpreting the emotional 
significance of sounds rather than their physical characteristics. Eijsker et al. (2021) provided 
further evidence of structural abnormalities in misophonia, reporting increased white matter in 
the left inferior fronto-occipital fasciculus (IFOF), anterior thalamic radiation (ATR), and the 
corpus callosum. These findings suggest alterations in connectivity within networks associated 
with social-emotional processing, particularly the recognition of facial affect, and attention to 
affective information. Hansen et al. (2022) demonstrated the increased connectivity between 
auditory cortex and insula but with extending across multiple sensorimotor regions. They 
identified a potential neural basis for non-orofacial triggers in misophonia, showing significant 
connectivity differences between finger-related motor and somatosensory regions and the 
insula in individuals with higher misophonia scores. This challenges the idea that misophonia 
is limited to oral or nasal triggers. This might be important to understand the multitude 
presentation of misophonia. The aetiology of misophonia remains uncertain and complex. 
Understanding the relationship of sensory, emotional, and motor networks in misophonia could 
significantly enhance future assessment and diagnostic tools.  
Comorbid Conditions  
     Misophonia frequently coexists with a variety of psychiatric, neurological, and auditory 
conditions, complicating its clinical presentation and management. Research indicates a strong

7 
 
association between misophonia and psychiatric conditions such as obsessive-compulsive 
disorder (OCD), anxiety and depression as well as neurological disorders like Tourette’s 
syndrome and auditory disorders (Ferrer-Torres and Giménez-Llort, 2022). Comorbidity rates 
appear vary depending on the population studied, i.e., whether participants are from the general 
population, psychiatric settings or a misophonia-focused sample. For instance, Cusack et al. 
(2018) found a strong association between misophonia and OCD, particularly with obsessive 
traits, in both community and student samples. Anxiety sensitivity was also shown to mediate 
the relationship between OCD and misophonia severity, supporting the role of shared cognitive 
mechanisms in these conditions.  
     In a misophonia-specific clinical population, Jager et al. (2020) reported that 26% of 
individuals exhibited traits of obsessive-compulsive personality disorder (OCD), while 10% 
were diagnosed with mood disorders, 5% with ADHD, and 3% with autism spectrum 
conditions. These findings emphasise the diverse range of comorbidities associated with 
misophonia. Furthermore, from a community sample of 207 individuals, Rosenthal et al. (2022) 
demonstrated significant correlations between misophonia severity and anxiety disorders, 
OCD, borderline personality disorder, and depression. Notably, these psychiatric conditions 
were found to be strong predictors of misophonia symptoms, even after controlling for 
demographic variables. Further comparisons with clinical groups emphasise the psychiatric, 
rather than audiologic basis of misophonia, for example, Siepsiak et al. (2022) showed that 
71% of individuals with misophonia had at least one psychiatric diagnosis, most commonly 
major depressive disorder, panic disorder, and suicidality.  
    The overlap between misophonia and other auditory conditions such as hyperacusis and 
tinnitus further complicates its clinical presentation (Meltzer and Herzfeld, 2014). Hyperacusis 
involves discomfort or pain from everyday sounds, while tinnitus is the perception of sound 
without an external source (Cederroth et al., 2020). Studies suggest that individuals with

8 
 
misophonia often experience co-occurring auditory symptoms. Jager et al. (2020) reported that 
2% of individuals with misophonia also had tinnitus, and 1% had hyperacusis. Conversely, 
among patients seeking help for tinnitus and/or hyperacusis, 23% were classified as having 
misophonia symptoms (Aazh et al., 2022a). These findings suggest that misophonia is linked 
to both psychiatric and auditory aspects, highlighting the need for integrated clinical 
approaches for its diagnosis and treatment. 
Diagnosis and Measuring Approaches  
     Misophonia is a complex condition with unclear diagnostic boundaries and significant 
comorbidities with other disorders, as highlighted by Taylor (2017). Although Swedo et al. 
(2022) provided a consensus definition, debates surrounding its classification and overlap with 
other conditions persist. Some researchers propose that misophonia should be classified as a 
new mental health disorder with specific diagnostic criteria (Schröder et al., 2013), while others 
suggest that it may be a symptom of broader psychiatric conditions (Ferreira et al., 2013) or 
linked to certain personality traits or disorders (Cassiello-Robbins et al., 2021). Supporting this 
perspective, Rosenthal et al. (2022) reported a high prevalence of psychiatric comorbidities, 
particularly anxiety disorders, among individuals with misophonia. From an audiological 
perspective, however, the current definition by Swedo et al. (2022) does not clearly 
differentiate misophonia from related conditions such as hyperacusis or noise sensitivity, partly 
due to the limited understanding of its underlying mechanisms (Aazh, 2023). This ambiguity 
has led to ongoing debate about whether misophonia should be categorised primarily as an 
audiological, psychiatric, psychological, neurological, or a distinct condition (Danesh and 
Aazh, 2020).  
    Given the limited literature, and the absence of a formal diagnostic framework for 
misophonia, this has resulted in a lack of clarity and consensus regarding its assessment and 
typical clinical presentations. Despite this, several diagnostic approaches have been developed,

9 
 
with individual clinics or researcher often adopting their own diagnostic criteria. Examples 
include the Duke Misophonia Interview (Guetta et al., 2022), the Oxford King’s Structured 
Clinical Interview for Misophonia (Vitoratou et al., 2023), the Amsterdam UMC Revised 
Diagnostic Criteria (Jager et al., 2020), and the diagnostic criteria proposed by Aazh et al. 
(2023).  
    In terms of assessment through questionnaires, several tools have been developed to assess 
misophonia, each capturing specific aspects of the condition. However, variations in the 
definition of misophonia have resulted in tools that do not measure the same constructs or 
dimensions (Swedo et al., 2022). Among these, The Amsterdam Misophonia Scale [A-MISO-
S; Schröder et al. (2013)] and the Misophonia Questionnaire [MQ; Wu et al. (2014)] are the 
most commonly used tools for assessing misophonia. The A-MISO-S was developed based on 
proposed diagnostic criteria, but its psychometric properties have not been reported in either 
the original or revised versions [AMISOS-R; (Jager et al., 2020)]. However, a study by Naylor 
et al. (2021) in the UK, involving 336 undergraduate medical students at the University of 
Nottingham, reported a unifactorial structure and good internal consistency for the AMISO-S 
scale. The Misophonia Questionnaire is a self-report measure designed to assess reactions to 
sounds and sound sensitivity severity. However, it has been criticised for being too broad, 
limiting its specificity to misophonia. Additionally, validation studies in affected populations 
remain incomplete, raising concerns about its suitability for accurately measuring misophonia 
(Siepsiak et al., 2020a).  
     Several psychometrically validated recent misophonia questionnaires have been developed 
to provide additional understanding of the assessment of misophonia. Multidimensional 
questionnaires, such as the Misophonia Response Scale [MRS; Dibb et al. (2021)], the Duke 
Misophonia Questionnaire [DMQ; (Rosenthal et al., 2021a)], the Selective Sound Sensitivity 
Syndrome Scale [S-Five; Vitoratou et al. (2021)], the Duke-Vanderbilt Misophonia Screening

10 
 
Questionnaire [DVMSQ; Williams et al. (2022)], the Berlin Misophonia Questionnaire 
Revised [BMQ; Remmert et al. (2022)], and the Sussex Misophonia Scale [SMS; (Rinaldi et 
al., 2022, Simner et al., 2024)], capture various emotional, cognitive, and behavioral aspects of 
misophonia, offering broader understanding of the condition. In contrast, unidimensional tools 
like the MisoQuest (Siepsiak et al., 2020a) and the Misophonia Impact Questionnaire [MIQ; 
(Aazh et al., 2023)] have unique focuses. MIQ focuses on the impact of misophonia on daily 
life, while the MisoQuest assesses symptom severity, with a particular focus on anger reactions, 
and is based on earlier diagnostic criteria by Schröder et al. (2013). Although the MisoQuest 
has limitations in capturing all misophonia symptoms, its concise format and comprehensive 
psychometric validation make it a valuable tool for screening purposes in both research and 
clinical settings.  
    While several diagnostic approaches and psychometrically validated questionnaires have 
been developed, they often focus on specific aspects of the condition due to complexity of this 
condition. This diversity in tools highlights the ongoing challenges in capturing the full 
complexity of misophonia and the need for standardised diagnostic criteria and comprehensive 
assessment methods. 
Introduction to Hyperacusis 
 Definitions and Key Characteristics  
    Hyperacusis is characterised by an increased sensitivity to everyday sounds, such as 
household or environmental noises, perceived as excessively loud or painful, leading to 
significant distress and interference with daily life, including social, occupational, and 
recreational activities (Aazh et al., 2016, Aazh et al., 2024b). A recent definition of hyperacusis, 
based on a Delphi survey and clinical consensus, includes reduced tolerance for sounds that 
are generally perceived as normal by most people or were previously perceived as normal by 
the individual prior to the onset of hyperacusis (Adams et al., 2021).

11 
 
     There are four main subtypes of hyperacusis based on its features, as suggested by Tyler et 
al. (2014): loudness, annoyance, fear, and pain hyperacusis. Loudness hyperacusis occurs when 
ordinary sounds at moderate levels, such as a restaurant noise, dog barking, sirens are perceived 
as overly loud, causing discomfort in routine situations. Annoyance hyperacusis involves a 
strong negative emotional reaction to sounds, even if they are not perceived as loud, some argue 
that this subtype may overlap with or describe misophonia instead (Enzler et al., 2021). Fear 
hyperacusis is characterised by anxiety or fear in response to certain sounds, potentially 
overlapping with phonophobia, highlighting the need to distinguish hyperacusis from both 
misophonia and phonophobia by focusing on general discomfort versus reactions to specific 
sounds. Pain hyperacusis involves physical pain, such as stabbing sensations, in response to 
sounds below the typical pain threshold and may occur with sudden and loud noises or even 
loud speech. Although this classification may help in diagnosis and treatment, the subtypes are 
not mutually exclusive, and individuals may experience features of more than one category. 
The latest definition consensus on hyperacusis by Adams et al. (2021) highlighted that 
annoyance and fear were common features of the condition, but pain was reported less 
frequently.  
     Demographic studies have further showed the complicated nature of hyperacusis. 
Associations with higher age, female gender, and higher education levels with hyperacusis are 
reported within the general population (Paulin et al., 2016). For instance, Jacquemin et al. 
(2022) found that women are more likely to report hyperacusis, aligning with broader 
tendencies in sound intolerance prevalence among females. However, a systematic review by 
Musumano et al. (2023) found no statistically significant gender differences in hyperacusis 
severity or prevalence. Based on data from 604 patients, the review concluded that males and 
females exhibit similar levels of hyperacusis, despite some studies reporting slightly higher 
prevalence among men. These findings highlight the importance of considering biological,

12 
 
psychological, and methodological factors to gain a clearer understanding of the perception, 
prevalence, and impact of hyperacusis.  
Aetiology and Prevalence 
     Hyperacusis is most commonly caused by exposure to high levels of sound pressure but can 
also result from a variety of other factors, with the underlying cause often remaining unknown. 
It may develop spontaneously or after exposure to a sudden loud noise, such as fireworks (Assis 
et al., 2024). According to Singh and Seidman (2019), hyperacusis can arise from infectious 
diseases (e.g., Lyme disease, neurosyphilis), vascular abnormalities (e.g., aneurysms, Chiari 
malformation), central nervous system disorders (e.g., PTSD, autism), and endocrine issues 
(e.g., Addison’s disease, hyperthyroidism). Disruption of the stapedial reflex, often following 
traumatic brain injury (TBI), as well as medication withdrawal (e.g., benzodiazepines) or 
nutrient deficiencies (e.g., magnesium or pyridoxine), may also contribute. Additionally, 
hyperacusis is frequently associated with conditions such as tinnitus, head injury, Ménière’s 
disease, Bell’s palsy, migraines, Williams syndrome, and autism spectrum disorder (Aazh et 
al., 2018).     
     The prevalence of hyperacusis varies widely across different populations and studies, 
ranging from 0.2% to 17.2% in the general population and from 4.7% to 95% among 
individuals with conditions such as Williams Syndrome, tinnitus, and autism (Ren et al., 2021).  
In children and adolescents, Rosing et al. (2016) reported prevalence rates between 3.2% and 
17.1%. This substantial variation in prevalence highlights the need for standardised diagnostic 
criteria and consistent assessment methods to ensure reliable estimates and comparisons across 
studies. 
Underlying Mechanisms  
     Hyperacusis arises from changes in the brain’s auditory processing, resulting in an increased 
sensitivity to everyday sounds. One widely accepted explanation is the Central Gain Model,

13 
 
which suggests that reduced auditory input—such as from hearing loss—causes the brain to 
amplify sound signals as a compensatory mechanism. However, this overcompensation can 
lead to normal sounds being perceived as uncomfortably loud (Auerbach et al., 2019).  
     Functional imaging studies support this theory, revealing heightened activity in the auditory 
cortex, thalamus, and inferior colliculus among individuals with hyperacusis. These findings 
point to hyperactivity within the central auditory system (Zeng, 2020). Koops and van Dijk 
(2021) further demonstrated that hyperacusis is associated with increased sound-evoked 
activity in both subcortical and cortical auditory regions. Interestingly, this heightened activity 
was not restricted to frequencies affected by hearing loss but extended to unaffected 
frequencies. On the subcortical level, increased activity was observed in the medial geniculate 
body (MGB), inferior colliculus (IC), and superior olivary complex (SOC), while cortical 
activation was heightened in the primary, secondary, and association auditory cortices. These 
findings emphasise that overactivity in the auditory pathway is a key feature of hyperacusis. 
     Hyperacusis may also involve non-auditory regions of the brain such as orbitofrontal cortex 
(OFC), anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), and supplementary motor area (SMA), which are 
associated with attention, emotional responses, and motor reactions to sound (Gu et al., 2010). 
Interestingly, hyperacusis shares similarities with neuropathic pain conditions, such as 
allodynia, where normal stimuli elicit exaggerated responses. This suggests that hyperacusis 
affects, not only auditory, but also broader sensory and emotional networks (de Klaver et al., 
2007). Wertz et al. (2024) recently also showed hyperacusis is associated with distinct brain 
activity, including increased activation in the left temporoparietal and dorsolateral prefrontal 
cortices. This heightened activation may reflect increased attention to sound intensity across 
all frequencies, highlighting the unique neural mechanisms of hyperacusis and its distinction 
from tinnitus alone.

14 
 
     Furthermore, structural brain differences have been consistently associated with 
hyperacusis. For instance, gray matter alterations have been observed in individuals with 
hyperacusis, even when these changes are influenced by hearing loss (Makani et al., 2022). 
However, hyperacusis can also occur in individuals with clinically normal hearing thresholds. 
In such cases, hidden hearing loss—potentially arising from various underlying aetiology—is 
believed to play a contributory role (Zeng, 2020). Notably, a recent study by Makani et al. 
(2024) showed that hyperacusis is correlated with smaller Supplementary Motor Area (SMA) 
gray matter volumes, regardless of hearing loss. Therefore, hyperacusis appears to result from 
a combination of overactivity in the auditory pathways, structural changes in brain regions 
involved in motor and emotional responses, and heightened connectivity between sensory and 
non-sensory areas. These findings underline the complexity of hyperacusis and the importance 
of further research to improve its diagnosis and treatment. 
Comorbid Conditions 
     Hyperacusis often coexists with various somatic conditions. For example, children with 
autism spectrum disorder (ASD) commonly exhibit a hyperacusis prevalence of 18%, whereas 
no cases were identified among age-matched non-autistic peers (Rosenhall et al., 1999). 
Similarly, a meta-analysis by Williams et al. (2021) found that the current prevalence of 
hyperacusis in individuals with ASD was 41.42% based on questionnaires and 27.30% using 
objective measures, with a lifetime prevalence of 60.58%. In Williams syndrome, a 
multisystem disorder characterised by mental retardation and heightened anxiety, hyperacusis 
is highly prevalent, with rates reaching up to 95% (Klein et al., 1990).  
     The co-occurrence of tinnitus and hyperacusis has been widely documented. Among 
individuals attending tinnitus clinics with tinnitus as their primary complaint, approximately 
40% also experience hyperacusis (Jastreboff and Jastreboff, 2000). Conversely, in those 
presenting with hyperacusis as their primary complaint, the prevalence of tinnitus has been

15 
 
reported to be as high as 86% (Anari et al., 1999). Additionally, a Swedish study by Cederroth 
et al. (2020) involving 3645 participants found that hyperacusis was significantly associated 
with tinnitus, with odds ratios increasing with tinnitus severity. The occurrence of hyperacusis 
in individuals with severe tinnitus was as high as 80%, underscoring the strong relationship 
between the two conditions. Additionally, hyperacusis can co-occur with other sound tolerance 
conditions such as phonophobia and noise sensitivity, which often share overlapping 
characteristics (Henry et al., 2022).  
     Hyperacusis is also strongly associated with some psychiatric conditions. Jüris et al. (2013) 
reported that 56% of individuals with hyperacusis had at least one psychiatric disorder, with 
anxiety disorders being particularly prevalent (47%). Additionally, personality traits associated 
with neuroticism were significantly over-represented among this population. Sacchetto et al. 
(2022) reported that individuals with hyperacusis exhibit significant psychological distress, 
characterised by elevated levels of anxiety, depression, and somatic attention, which were 
correlated with their hyperacusis severity. 
Diagnostic Criteria and Measuring Approaches  
    The diagnosis of hyperacusis does not rely on a single definitive test but rather involves a 
combination of self-report questionnaires and clinical interviews to collect detailed information 
about sound sensitivities, medical history, and other relevant factors. Although diagnosing 
hyperacusis can be challenging, it typically includes assessing Uncomfortable Loudness Levels 
(ULLs) through pure-tone audiometry and utilising questionnaires to evaluate the severity of 
the condition (Coey and De Jesus, 2024). To improve diagnostic accuracy, researchers have 
proposed specific criteria, such as cut-off values of ULLmin ≤ 77 dB HL and a Hyperacusis 
Questionnaire (HQ) score ≥ 22 (Aazh and Moore, 2017). Furthermore, a novel approach using 
psychoacoustic ratings of natural sounds has interestingly demonstrated comparable accuracy 
to existing diagnostic methods (Enzler et al., 2021). Despite these advancements, the

16 
 
prevalence of hyperacusis diagnoses in clinical settings remains significantly lower than 
reported in the literature, likely due to the lack of standardised diagnostic protocols (Theodoroff 
et al., 2024).  
     There are several self-report hyperacusis questionnaires designed to assess hyperacusis for 
different purposes. Among these, the Hyperacusis Questionnaire (HQ), developed by Khalfa 
et al. (2002), is the most commonly used. However, an independent validation study by 
Fackrell et al. (2015) found that the HQ does not provide a valid overall measure of 
hypersensitivity, particularly when applied to individuals with tinnitus. 
     The Multiple-Activity Scale for Hyperacusis (MASH) evaluates discomfort across 14 
activities or environments (e.g., concerts, shopping centres) (Dauman and Bouscau-Faure, 
2005), however its psychometric measurements have not been fully established (Kula et al., 
2023). Another instrument, the Hyperacusis Handicap Questionnaire (HHQ), was designed to 
assess hyperacusis in individuals in tinnitus. However, its development process and evidence 
for validity are limited, having been on a clinical sample of 77 patients (Prabhu and Nagaraj, 
2020). Another hyperacusis questionnaire, the Inventory of Hyperacusis Symptoms (IHS), was 
developed by Greenberg and Carlos (2018) to measure hyperacusis for both research and 
clinical use. The initial validation was conducted using an online general population reporting 
sound sensitivity, rather than a clinical sample. Subsequent clinical validation by Aazh et al. 
(2021a) indicated that the IHS demonstrates good internal consistency and reasonably high 
convergent validity, as shown by correlations with HQ scores and ULLs (uncomfortable 
loudness levels). However, IHS scores may also reflect the influence of comorbid conditions 
such as tinnitus, anxiety, and depression, which could impact its validity.  
      Two recent questionnaires, the Hyperacusis Impact Questionnaire [HIQ; (Aazh et al., 
2024a)] and the Sound Sensitivity Symptoms Questionnaire [SSSQ; (Aazh et al., 2024a)] were 
specifically designed for clinical use. The HIQ assesses the impact of hyperacusis on daily life,

17 
 
while the SSSQ evaluates the type and severity of sound intolerance symptoms, aligning with 
Tyler’s categories of hyperacusis, but both tools are designed to use in clinical and research 
context. The latest valid and reliable tool, Hyperacusis Assessment Questionnaire, was 
developed by Raj-Koziak et al. (2023) to measure the hyperacusis sensitivity regarding 
loudness, fear and pain. Together, these tools represent a range of approaches for measuring 
hyperacusis, with ongoing efforts to refine their diagnostic and psychometric robustness. 
Interim Summary  
     Misophonia and hyperacusis are complex and often overlapping conditions, characterised 
by heightened sensitivities to specific sounds, but they might differ in their triggers, responses, 
and underlying mechanisms (Henry et al., 2022). Misophonia is defined as a condition 
involving heightened emotional, physiological, and behavioural responses to specific auditory 
or visual triggers, often human-generated, such as chewing or pen-clicking (Swedo et al., 
2022). These triggers cause significant distress and functional impairment, with symptoms 
typically beginning in childhood or adolescence (Ferrer-Torres and Giménez-Llort, 2022). The 
condition is associated with difficulties in emotional regulation and neural hyperactivity, 
particularly involving the anterior insular cortex (AIC) and salience networks (Kumar et al., 
2021). Misophonia frequently coexists with psychiatric conditions, including obsessive-
compulsive disorder (OCD), anxiety, and depression, and often overlaps with conditions such 
as hyperacusis (Jastreboff and Jastreboff, 2015). However, its diagnostic criteria remain argued 
due to uncertainty in its aetiology, and variations in measurement tools complicate accurate 
assessment. Recent psychometrically validated questionnaires, such as S-Five (Vitoratou et al., 
2021), Duke Misophonia Questionnaire (Rosenthal et al., 2021), Berlin Misophonia 
Questionnaire (Remmert et al., 2022), which aim to capture the multidimensional nature of this 
condition and improve diagnostic reliability, but there is no gold standard measure due to its 
complex mechanisms.

18 
 
    Hyperacusis, by comparison, refers to an increased sensitivity to everyday sounds, such as 
household or environmental noises, perceived as excessively loud or painful, resulting in 
significant distress and disruption to social, occupational, and recreational activities (Aazh et 
al., 2016, Aazh et al., 2022b). Its varied presentations can be classified into subtypes, including 
loudness, annoyance, fear, and pain hyperacusis (Tyler et al., 2014). While the exact causes are 
not fully understood, hyperacusis is thought to involve overactivity in the central auditory 
system and structural brain changes in areas linked to emotional and motor responses (Zeng, 
2020). Comorbidities, such as tinnitus and psychiatric conditions, are common, complicating 
its clinical presentation and management (Jastreboff and Jastreboff, 2015, Cederroth et al., 
2020). Diagnostic criteria for hyperacusis are not well-established; however, measures such as 
the Uncomfortable Loudness Levels (ULLs) assessment tool, and tools like the Hyperacusis 
Questionnaire [HQ; (Khalfa et al., 2002)] are commonly used. Researchers have suggested 
specific criteria for identifying hyperacusis, including cut-off values of ULLmin ≤ 77 dB HL 
and a Hyperacusis Questionnaire (HQ) score ≥ 22 (Aazh and Moore, 2017). Additionally, 
newer psychometrically validated instruments, such as the Hyperacusis Impact Questionnaire 
[HIQ; (Aazh et al., 2024a)] and Sound Sensitivity Symptoms Questionnaire [SSSQ; (Aazh et 
al., 2024a)], [Hyperacusis Assessment Questionnaire; Raj-Koziak et al. (2023)] have been 
developed to assess various dimensions of hyperacusis severity and its impact. 
    Various questionnaires have been developed to assess hyperacusis and misophonia, aiming 
to capture their severity, impact, and associated symptoms. However, the quality and 
psychometric robustness of these tools vary, with some lacking rigorous validation. To ensure 
reliable and valid assessments, it is essential to evaluate these questionnaires using standardised 
criteria. Among the frameworks designed for this purpose, the COSMIN (Mokkink et al., 2018) 
is recognised as the gold standard for assessing the methodological quality of health 
measurement instruments.

19 
 
COSMIN and Psychometric Properties  
     The COSMIN —COnsensus-based Standards for the selection of health Measurement 
INstruments—was developed in the Netherlands in 2006 with the aim of setting standards for 
the methodological quality of studies evaluating the measurement properties of health status 
instruments. These standards have been continually updated and refined to reflect 
advancements in the field and to ensure their ongoing relevance to health measurement 
research. COSMIN identifies three key domains for evaluation: reliability, validity, and 
responsiveness (Mokkink et al., 2018). The validity domain comprises face and content 
validity, criterion validity (both concurrent and predictive), and construct validity. Construct 
validity includes studies employing classical hypothesis testing as well as those examining the 
dimensional structure of an instrument (also referred to as structural validity). Additionally, 
COSMIN highlights the importance of evaluating studies involving cross-cultural adaptation 
to different sociolinguistic contexts. 
 
Figure 1:  Measurement Properties of Outcome Measurement Instruments. Reprinted from 
the COSMIN website (https://www.cosmin.nl), © COSMIN, (Mokkink et al., 2010).

20 
 
Overall Summary 
     This chapter has provided an overview for understanding the conditions of misophonia and 
hyperacusis, emphasizing their distinct characteristics, diagnostic challenges, and the broader 
implications for assessment and management. Despite their overlapping symptoms, these 
conditions differ in their mechanisms, triggers, and impacts. This review highlighted the 
substantial gaps in the current understanding and measurement of these conditions. Existing 
assessment tools such as the Misophonia Questionnaire (MQ) and Hyperacusis Questionnaire 
(HQ), were evaluated for their psychometric properties, revealing inconsistencies in reliability 
and validity.  
    This chapter also explored the underlying mechanisms and comorbidities of misophonia and 
hyperacusis, linking them to psychological, neurological, and auditory processes. The 
prevalence and impact of these conditions are discussed, with a focus on their implications for 
daily functioning and quality of life. By setting the stage for the subsequent chapters, this 
chapter establishes the methodological context of this thesis, highlighting its aim to address 
critical gaps in the assessment and understanding of misophonia and hyperacusis. 
Scope of Thesis 
     The scope of this thesis is to address gaps in the understanding and assessment of 
misophonia and hyperacusis. By focusing on the validation of psychometrically robust tools 
and exploring the broader psychological and health dimensions of these conditions, this thesis 
aims to contribute to both research and clinical practice.     
Aims of the Thesis 
1. To systematically review the psychometric properties of existing misophonia and 
hyperacusis questionnaires, identifying gaps in their methodological quality using 
COSMIN standards.

21 
 
2. To validate the English version of MisoQuest, establishing its reliability, validity, and 
structural properties, and exploring its relationships with related audiological and 
psychological factors. 
3. To investigate the broader psychological and health impacts of misophonia, focusing 
on its associations with fatigue, stress, and sleep quality, and assessing the mediating 
roles of stress and sleep in these relationships. 
4. To validate the 4C Misophonia and Hyperacusis Management Questionnaires, ensuring 
their clinical applicability and utility in evaluating patients' confidence in symptom 
management within CBT frameworks. 
Structure of the Thesis 
To address these aims, the thesis is organised as follows: 
 Chapter 2  systematically reviews the psychometric properties of existing misophonia 
and hyperacusis questionnaires, including Hyperacusis Questionnaire (HQ), Inventory 
of Hyperacusis Symptoms (IHS), questionnaire on hypersensitivity to sound (GUF), 
Hyperacusis Handicap Questionnaire (HHQ), Short Hyperacusis Questionnaire, 
Amsterdam Misophonia Scale (A-MISO-S), MisoQuest, and Misophonia 
Questionnaire (MQ). The review evaluates these instruments against COSMIN 
standards, highlighting gaps in their psychometric properties.  
 Chapter 3  focuses on the psychometric validation of the English version of MisoQuest, 
a 14-item tool initially validated in Polish. The chapter evaluates its reliability, validity, 
and factor structure, as well as its relationships with audiological (hyperacusis) and 
psychological (fatigue, stress and sleep) variables. 
 Chapter 4  presents a cross-sectional study investigating the relationship between 
misophonia severity, fatigue, stress, and sleep quality. This chapter examines whether

22 
 
stress and sleep mediate the relationship between misophonia and fatigue, highlighting 
the broader psychological and health impacts of misophonia. 
 Chapter 5  reports on the validation of the 4C Misophonia and Hyperacusis 
Management Questionnaires. These tools assess patients’ confidence in managing 
symptoms without reliance on avoidance behaviours, with their psychometric 
properties evaluated for reliability, structural validity, and clinical relevance, 
particularly within CBT frameworks. 
Chapter 6 , the concluding chapter, summarises the key findings of this thesis and 
provides a critical discussion of its methodological and clinical implications. These 
considerations are framed within the context of understanding misophonia and 
hyperacusis, addressing their measurement and management challenges. The chapter 
outlines potential directions for future research, focusing on psychometric tools and 
exploring the broader psychological and health impacts of these conditions. 
Collectively, this chapter aims to contribute to an understanding of misophonia and 
hyperacusis, advancing both research and clinical frameworks in the field

23 
 
 
CHAPTER TWO 
Study 1.  Hyperacusis and Misophonia: A Systematic Review of 
Psychometric Measures 
2.1 Overview 
     This chapter systematically reviews the psychometric instruments used to measure 
hyperacusis and misophonia. While several instruments have been developed, their 
methodological quality has not been systematically evaluated in previous research. The 
primary aim of this chapter was to identify and critically assess studies examining the 
psychometric properties of these instruments, with particular reference to their adherence to 
the COSMIN standards. 
     A systematic search of five electronic databases identified 14 studies meeting the inclusion 
criteria, encompassing eight instruments—five for hyperacusis and three for misophonia. The 
methodological quality of the studies varied, ranging from very good to inadequate, and none 
fully met the COSMIN standards. 
     This chapter examines the findings in relation to their implications for research and clinical 
practice, highlighting significant gaps in the current literature. It emphasises the need for 
further research to enhance the psychometric rigour of these instruments and provides a 
foundation for the chapters that follow. 
    This systematic review has since been published in the Journal of the American Academy 
of Audiology (Kula et al., 2023).

24 
 
2.2 Research Paper  
 
Hyperacusis and Misophonia: A Systematic Review of Psychometric 
Measures  
 
Fatma B. Kula,1 Mark Cropley,1 Hashir Aazh2,3,4 
1 Department of Psychology, The University of Surrey, Guildford, United Kingdom 
2Audiology Department, Royal Surrey NHS Foundation Trust, Guildford, UK 
3Department of Communication Sciences & Disorders, Florida Atlantic University, Boca 
Raton, USA 
 4 Department of Faculty of Engineering and Physical Sciences, The University of Surrey, 
Guildford, UK 
 
Address for correspondence: Fatma B. Kula, Department of Psychology, Faculty of Health 
and Medical Sciences, The University of Surrey, Guildford, GU2 7XH, United Kingdom.  
Email: f.kula@surrey.ac.uk   
 
 
Acknowledgements 
The first author would like to thank the Ministry of National Education of the Republic of 
Turkey for supporting her graduate education.

25 
 
Abstract 
Background:  Hyperacusis can be defined as an intolerance of certain everyday sounds, which 
are perceived as too loud or uncomfortable and which cause significant distress and impairment 
in the individual's day-to-day activities. Misophonia is defined as a high magnitude of 
emotional and behavioural reaction to certain sounds produced by human beings, such as eating 
sounds and breathing sounds. Several psychometric instruments have been developed to assess 
symptoms and the impact of hyperacusis and misophonia; however, to the author's knowledge, 
no study has evaluated and compared the methodological quality of the studies on psychometric 
properties of the existing instruments.  
Purpose:  This article systematically reviews the research studies assessing the psychometric 
properties of the instruments used for hyperacusis and misophonia and assess the quality and 
appropriateness of the methodologies used. 
Research Design:  Systematic review.   
Data Collection and Analysis: A systematic literature search was performed using five 
electronic literature databases (PubMed, Scopus, PsycINFO, Google Scholar and Web of 
Science). Studies were included if they were written in English and reported information about 
the psychometric properties of instruments measuring hyperacusis or misophonia symptoms or 
their impact. The quality of the studies and that of the psychometric instruments were evaluated 
using the consensus-based standards for the selection of health measurement instruments 
(COSMIN) tool. 
Results: The title and abstracts of 916 articles were screened and 39 articles were selected for 
full-text evaluation, with 14 articles meeting the inclusion criteria. From these 14 articles, eight 
different instruments (5 for hyperacusis and 3 for misophonia) were identified and reviewed

26 
 
comprising: (1) Hyperacusis Questionnaire (HQ), (2) Inventory of Hyperacusis Symptoms 
(IHS), (3) questionnaire on hypersensitivity to sound (GUF), (4) Hyperacusis Handicap 
Questionnaire (HHQ), (5) Short Hyperacusis Questionnaire, (6) Amsterdam Misophonia Scale 
(A-MISO-S), (7) MisoQuest, and (8) the Misophonia Questionnaire (MQ).  
Conclusion: None of the papers reviewed reported all the information required to meet the 
COSMIN standards. The studies' methodological quality varied between 'very good' and 
'inadequate' depending on their grade on the COSMIN tool. There is a need for further research 
on the psychometric properties of the instruments included in this review.  
 
Key Words: Hyperacusis, misophonia, psychometric instruments and properties

27 
 
     Hyperacusis can be defined as an intolerance of certain everyday sounds, which are 
perceived as too loud or uncomfortable and which cause significant distress and impairment in 
the individual's day-to-day activities (Aazh et al., 2022a). Other definitions of hyperacusis are 
largely in agreement with this definition, with some differences in details (Adams et al., 2020, 
Aazh et al., 2016). Tyler et al. (2014) described four categories of hyperacusis comprising (1) 
loudness hyperacusis, (2) fear hyperacusis, (3) pain hyperacusis, and (4) annoyance 
hyperacusis. There is some overlap between annoyance hyperacusis and misophonia. A recent 
consensus study described that misophonia is characterized by the experience of unpleasant or 
distressing emotions when exposed to certain sounds generated by another individual, 
especially (but not exclusively) those produced by the human body (Swedo et al., 2022). In 
misophonia, the specific pattern or meaning of the sound to the individual as opposed to its 
loudness seem to be the key contributing factor to the individual's reaction. Individuals with 
misophonia often experience suffering, distress or cannot tolerate sounds associated with oral 
functions (e.g., chewing, eating), nasal sounds (e.g., breathing and sniffing), as well as non-
oral/nasal sounds (e.g., pen clicking, keyboard typing, clock ticking) (Swedo et al., 2022). 
     Prevalence estimates range from 2% to 15.2% for hyperacusis (Andersson et al., 2002, Smit 
et al., 2021) and 6% to 49.1% for misophonia (Zhou et al., 2017, Naylor et al., 2021, Wu et al., 
2014). It is likely that the discrepancy in prevalence reports is related the differences in study 
populations and the way that hyperacusis and misophonia were assessed and diagnosed.  
    Several psychometric instruments have been developed and applied in research and clinical 
practice to evaluate hyperacusis and/or misophonia. The methodologies used to design and 
evaluate the psychometric properties of these instruments (e.g., validity, reliability, sensitivity 
to change) are very diverse. The two important psychometric properties are reliability and 
validity which are essential for choosing suitable instruments for research or clinical purposes 
(Sürücü and Maslakci, 2020). Reliability comprises measures of internal consistency (degree

28 
 
of interrelatedness among the items), test-retest reliability (consistency of scores obtained at 
different times), inter-rater reliability (consistency of scores obtained by different raters), and 
measurement error the systematic and random error of a patient`s score that is not attributed to 
true changes in the construct to be measured (Gillespie, 2015). Validity is defined as the extent 
to which an instrument measures what it claims to measure (Altheide and Johnson, 1994) and 
comprises (1) content validity (the degree to which the questions on the instrument represent 
the construct that it seeks to measure (Creswell, 2002), (2) construct validity (the extent to 
which the instrument validly measures the construct it purports to measure), (3) structural 
validity (the degree to which the scores of the instrument is an adequate reflection of the 
dimensionality of the construct to be measured), (4) hypotheses testing (the degree to which 
scores on the instrument are consistent with hypothesized relationship with other instruments), 
(5) cross-cultural validity (the degree to which items on a translated or adapted measure 
correspond to the performance of the original items), and (6) criterion validity (the degree to 
which scores correspond with a gold standard measure).  
     Studies assessing the psychometric properties of hyperacusis and misophonia instruments 
have used inconsistent methods.  For example, participants in some studies were recruited from 
hospital patient referrals (Aazh et al., 2021, Bläsing et al., 2010, Fioretti et al., 2015) while 
others from the general population or university students (Khalfa et al., 2002, Naylor et al., 
2021). Some of these instruments are validated in languages other than English and the English 
versions although published, have not been validated (Siepsiak et al., 2020). In addition, among 
the published papers there are some discrepancies regarding reporting of the important 
psychometric properties of the instruments they evaluated or developed. As the result of these 
discrepancies, it may not be clear to many audiologists whether the psychometric properties of 
the existing hyperacusis and misophonia questionnaires meet the standards required for them 
to be used effectively in research and/or clinical practice.

29 
 
     To develop a greater understanding of the reliability and validity of the existing hyperacusis 
and misophonia instruments, a systematic review of the literature can be extremely informative. 
Systematic reviews provide a summary of the strengths and weaknesses of the existing 
questionnaires, appraise the methodological quality of published studies, and discuss the 
differences between them (Green, 2005); the results of which, can guide clinical practice and 
research.  
    Consensus-based standards for the selection of health measurement instruments (COSMIN) 
were developed to provide a comprehensive methodological tool for assessing the 
methodological quality of patient-reported outcome measures (Prinsen et al., 2018). COSMIN 
is an initiative of an international multidisciplinary team of researchers with a background in 
epidemiology, psychometric, medicine, qualitative research, and health care, who have 
expertise in the development and evolution of outcome measurement instruments. They 
developed the COSMIN risk of bias checklist that can be used in systematic reviews to assess 
the methodological quality of the studies included to the review (Mokkink et al., 2010, Terwee 
et al., 2012).  
      The present study aimed to systematically review the psychometric properties of the 
existing hyperacusis and misophonia questionnaires, summarise their strengths and 
weaknesses, and appraise the methodological quality of published studies against the criteria 
set by COSMIN tool (Prinsen et al., 2018, Terwee et al., 2012).  
Methods 
     This systematic review was conducted in compliance with the Preferred Reporting Items 
for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis (PRISMA) guideline (Moher et al., 2010) and it 
was registered with the PROSPERO database (https://www.crd.york.ac.uk/prospero; 
registration number: CRD42021235539).

30 
 
Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
     The following inclusion criteria for articles were applied: 1) published in English, 2) 
published in a peer-reviewed journal, 3) detailed the development or evaluated the 
measurement properties of instruments measuring hyperacusis or misophonia symptoms or 
their impact. 
     Articles were excluded if they: 1) were not indexed in a recognised database, 2) did not 
report at least one psychometric property as defined by the COSMIN checklist (information 
relating to the psychometric properties are presented in Appendix 1), iii) were a review, 
personal/expert opinions and manuals, guidelines, or reported animal studies and any 
unpublished and incomplete studies.  
Search Strategy 
An initial search was conducted on 29th January 2021. A systematic search was performed in 
the following electronic databases: PubMed, Scopus, Web of Science, PsycINFO and Google 
Scholar. We entered a specific search term strategy in each search engine (see Table 1), 
searching in articles topics, titles, abstracts, and keywords. The database search was conducted 
without setting any limits in terms of the publication date of the studies. If possible, filters were 
applied to find related articles in the English language only and with humans only. The 
reference lists of any relevant articles were checked throughout the process to ensure that any 
related studies were not missed. Searches were last updated on 29th April 2021. Prior to 
submitting the final revision of this article on 17th June 2022, a quick search was conducted to 
double check if any new studies have emerged with regard to the questionnaires reviewed in 
this article which did not show any new relevant studies.

31 
 
 
Table 1. Search term strategies applied in databases 
 
 Construct Instrument  Psychometric Properties  
Search 
Terms  Hyperacus* OR Misophon* 
OR “Reduc* sound 
intolerance” OR “Noise 
Sensitivity” OR “Sound 
Intolerance” OR “Sensory 
intolerance” OR “Sound 
Sensitivity” OR “Selective 
Sound Sensitivity Syndrome” 
OR “Soft Sound Sensitivity 
Syndrome” OR “aversive 
sounds” OR “trigger sounds” 
OR “decreased sound 
tolerance”  Assess* OR 
measur* OR 
Questionnaire OR 
instrument* OR 
self-report OR 
inventory OR 
instrument OR 
Checklist Psychometr* OR Valid* 
OR “Reliab* OR 
Sensitiv* “internal 
consistency” OR “Factor 
Analysis” 
 
Selection Criteria 
     After the removal of duplicates articles, one reviewer (FK) screened titles and abstracts to 
identify eligible articles. The reference list of any relevant articles was also reviewed by the 
first author. Then, two reviewers (FK and HA) screened the full text of the articles 
independently. The decision regarding the inclusion/exclusion of studies was made as a result 
of two reviewers' judgment about the selection of the articles and to verify inter-rater reliability 
of the full text screening, we calculated the Kohen's kappa value which was 0.65 indicating  
substantial agreement between the two reviewers (Viera and Garrett, 2005). Any disagreements 
were resolved by the third reviewer (MC). 
Data Extraction  
Psychometric properties including content validity, structural validity, internal consistency, 
reliability, hypothesis testing for construct validity, cross-cultural validity, measurement error, 
criterion validity and responsiveness were extracted from studies in line with recommendations 
specified in the COSMIN guidelines (Mokkink et al., 2010). Other extracted information was 
country of origin, number of samples, gender, study population, and instrument-related factors

32 
 
such as construct measured, number of items, range of total score, and response options. All 
data were extracted by the first author in May 2021.   
Evaluation of methodological quality  
     Two reviewers independently applied the COSMIN checklist for all included studies 
according to the recommended guidelines. Discrepancies of opinions were resolved by 
consensus between the two reviewers or, if the agreement was not achieved, disagreements 
were discussed and resolved through consultation with the third reviewer. No one graded any 
of their own papers.    
     The methodological quality of studies and their psychometric properties were assessed 
using the COSMIN checklist (Prinsen et al., 2018) as shown in Appendix 1. Based on this 
assessment we reported whether the above mentioned nine domains were assessed or 
adequately reported by various studies on psychometric properties of the hyperacusis and 
misophonia questionnaires.   
Evaluation of Psychometric Properties of the Included Instruments  
     Each measurement property was rated by applying a four-point COSMIN risk of bias scale 
(4= 'very good', 3= 'adequate', 2= 'doubtful', 1= 'inadequate'). Consistent with COSMIN 
instructions, the overall quality rating for each measurement property was determined by taking 
the 'worst score counts' method (i.e., the lowest rating of any of the items in a given category) 
(Terwee et al., 2012). For the next step, the result of individual studies on measurement 
properties was also evaluated against COSMIN 2018 updated criteria for good measurement 
properties (Appendix 1). The assessment resulted in rating for each questionnaire: sufficient 
(+), insufficient (–), or indeterminate (?). We used this information to create a table that 
demonstrates whether the key nine psychometric properties were reported for each 
questionnaire and if they meet the COSMIN criteria.

33 
 
      Inter-rater between the two reviewers was 82.0% (Kappa: 0.73) for the risk of bias ratings, 
and 84.5% (Kappa= 0.82) for the measurement properties, indicating substantial agreement 
between the two reviewers (Viera and Garrett, 2005).     
Results 
Study Selection  
     A total of 1040 articles were identified through the initial search (Figure 1), and ten 
additional articles were identified through a review of citations. After removing duplicates, 916 
articles were screened based on their title and abstract, and 39 articles were selected for full-
text assessment. As a result of this full-text evaluation, 25 of the 39 articles were removed 
because they focused on the different constructs or did not report any psychometric property 
defined by the COSMIN checklist. In addition, one of the articles was not included this study 
because it was published in a predatory journal (Rice et al., 2021). Fourteen articles were 
included in this review, and from these 14 articles, eight different hyperacusis and misophonia 
instruments were evaluated (Aazh et al., 2021, Bläsing et al., 2010, Erinc and Derinsu, 2020, 
Fackrell et al., 2015, Fioretti et al., 2015, Greenberg and Carlos, 2018, Khalfa et al., 2002, 
Meeus et al., 2010, Naylor et al., 2021, Oishi et al., 2017, Prabhu and Nagaraj, 2020b, Siepsiak 
et al., 2020, Tortorella et al., 2017, Wu et al., 2014). See the PRISMA flow diagram in Figure 
1.

34 
 
 
Study and Participant's Characteristics 
     Table 2 summarizes the characteristics of the included studies. The eligible studies were 
published from 2002 to 2020. Approximately 20% of the studies were conducted in the UK 
(Aazh et al., 2021, Fackrell et al., 2015, Naylor et al., 2021), 13% in the USA (Greenberg and 
Carlos, 2018, Wu et al., 2014), and Italy (Fioretti et al., 2015, Tortorella et al., 2017). The rest 
of the studies were conducted in India (Prabhu and Nagaraj, 2020), Belgium (Meeus et al., 
2010), Germany (Bläsing et al., 2010), Japan (Oishi et al., 2017), Turkey (Erinc and Derinsu, 
2020), Poland (Siepsiak et al., 2020) and France (Khalfa et al., 2002). The most used 
questionnaire reported was the Hyperacusis Questionnaire developed by Khalfa in 2002

35 
 
(Khalfa et al., 2002). All questionnaires were developed to assess or diagnose hyperacusis or 
misophonia.   
     Table 2 also shows the participants' characteristics of the studies included to this review. 
Sample sizes for these studies ranged between 46 and 705 individuals from the general 
population and/or clinical population. Most studies included clinical populations (n=9), and 
two studies reported student populations, with the remainder utilising individuals from the 
general population (n=3).  
Psychometric Instruments for Hyperacusis and Misophonia  
Table 3 provides a summary of the description of the questionnaires including five hyperacusis 
and three misophonia instruments. All measures utilised the Likert type scales using 3 to 5 
points scale. In addition, the structure of the included instruments varies greatly; five measures 
have three factor-structure (Bläsing et al., 2010, Khalfa et al., 2002, Prabhu and Nagaraj, 2020, 
Tortorella et al., 2017, Wu et al., 2014), two measures have one factor-structure (Naylor et al., 
2021, Siepsiak et al., 2020), and the other measure has a five factor-structure (Greenberg and 
Carlos, 2018).

36 
 
Table 2. Summary of study characteristics 
# Author and 
Year Sample 
(N) Study Population Sample Age 
Range (years) or 
overall rates  Gender Country The measure of Hyperacusis or 
Misophonia  
 
1 Aazh et al, 
2021 
 100 Clinical population- 
patients attended a 
tinnitus and 
hyperacusis clinic     21 to 81 48 Female 
52 Male UK Inventory of Hyperacusis 
Symptoms 
2 Blasing et al, 
2010 
 91 Clinical population-
patients suffered 
from tinnitus    15 to 76 36 Females 
55 Males Germany GÜF: hypersensitivity to sound 
3 Erinc and 
Derinsu, 
2020 529 General population 
    18 to 73  320 Female 
209 Male  Turkey Hyperacusis Questionnaire 
4 Fackrell et 
al, 2015 264 Clinical population- 
data collected from 
tinnitus studies 
    24 to 85 158 Male  
106 Female   UK  Hyperacusis Questionnaire 
5 
 Fioretti et al, 
2015 117 Clinical Population-
Patients with 
tinnitus complaints 
     14 to 88 53 Female 
64 Male  Italy Hyperacusis Questionnaire 
6 Greenberg 
and Carlos, 
2018 
 469 Patients attending 
an online support 
group or social 
media sites       34.8  40% Male  
58% Female  
2% not 
disclosed   USA Inventory of Hyperacusis 
Symptoms 
7 Khalfa et al, 
2002 
 201 General population 
   17 to 72 132 Female 
69 Male France Hyperacusis Questionnaire

37 
 
8 Meeus et al, 
2010 
 46 Clinical Population 
 
   21 to 81  14 Female 
32 Male Belgium  Hyperacusis Questionnaire 
9 Oishi et al, 
2017 215  
 
 
 Clinical population Group A: 59.2 
 
 
Group B: 63.4 
 GroupA:52.7% 
Female 
 
GroupB:46.6% 
Female  Japan Hyperacusis Questionnaire 
10 Naylor et al, 
2020 
 
 
 336 University medical 
students     18 to24  73%Female  
 
 
 UK  The Amsterdam Misophonia 
Scale  
11 Prabhu and 
Nagaraj, 
2020 
 77 Clinical Population 
(Participants with 
tinnitus complaints) 
      20 to55 36 Female 
41 Male India Hyperacusis Handicap 
Questionnaire 
12 Siepsiak et 
al, 2020  705 Clinical Population  
 (Mixed group for 
misophonia and 
other health 
conditions patients) 
      18 to 68  86.2% and 80% 
Female for each 
phase  Poland  MisoQuest 
13 Tortorella et 
al, 2017 117 Clinical Population 
(Participants with a 
primary complaint 
of tinnitus) 
       23 to 82  49 Female 
68 Male  Italy The Short Hyperacusis 
Questionnaire 
14 Wu, 2014 
 483 
 Undergraduate 
university students 
       18 to 54 404 Female 
79 Male 
  USA 
 
 Misophonia Questionnaire

38 
 
 
Table 3. Description of questionnaires 
# Measure Construct Measured  Structure Number 
of items Response Options Total Range 
 
1 Hyperacusis 
Questionnaire 
(HQ) Hyperacusis Three factors 14 4-Point Likert Scale (0= no, 3= 
yes, a lot) 
 0-42 
2 Inventory of 
Hyperacusis  
Symptoms  Hyperacusis Five-factor structures 25 4- Point Likert scale  25-100 
3 GÜF: 
(questionnaire on 
hypersensitivity to 
sound) Hyperacusis Three factors 15 4- Point Likert Scale  0-45 
4 Amsterdam 
Misophonia Scale  Misophonia One Factor 6 5-Point Likert scale 0-24 
5 Hyperacusis 
Handicap 
Questionnaire Hyperacusis Three factors 21 3-Point Likert Scale 0-84 
6 MisoQuest  Misophonia  One Factor 14 5- Point Likert Scale  14-70 
7 Misophonia 
Questionnaire Misophonia Three factors 
 17 4- Point Likert Scale  0-68(for the first 
two sections) 
8 Short Hyperacusis 
Questionnaire  Hyperacusis Three factors 6 4- Point Likert Scale 0-24

39 
 
The Methodological Quality of the Included Studies  
     Table 4 summarises methodological quality ratings for the 14 studies included to the review. 
All the studies reported more than one psychometric property. In addition, all studies reported 
internal consistency. Most studies described hypotheses testing for construct validity (11/14) 
and structural validity (8/14). Only a small number of studies included psychometric data on 
cross-cultural validity (2 studies), reliability (1 study), and measurement error (1 study). No 
information was retrieved on responsiveness and criterion validity in any study.  
Psychometric Properties of the Included Instruments  
Table 5 presents ratings for each psychometric instrument. The psychometric properties 
extracted from the studies were evaluated against the criteria for good psychometric properties 
on the COSMIN. None of the instruments could be fully evaluated over all nine psychometric 
properties as the necessary data was not always reported.

40 
 
Table 4. Methodological quality ratings of each study based on COSMIN.  
# 
 Instrument  Study Structural 
Validity Internal 
consistency  Cross‐
cultural 
validity\ 
measurement  
invariance Reliability  Measurement 
error Criterion 
validity Hypotheses 
testing for 
construct 
validity Responsiveness  
1 HQ 
 Khalfa et 
al., 2002 V     V N N N N A N 
2 HQ Erinc and 
Derinsu, 
2020 V V D N N N A N 
3 HQ Oishi et 
al., 2017 N V N N N N D N 
4 HQ Fioretti et 
al., 2015 N V D N N N N N 
5 HQ Meeus et 
al., 2010 I V N N N N D N 
6 HQ Fackrell 
et al., 
2015  V V N N N N V N 
7 IHS Greenberg 
and 
Carlos, 
2018 N V N N N N V N 
8 IHS Aazh et 
al., 2021 N V N N N N A N 
9 HHQ Prabhu 
and 
Nagaraj, 
2020 N V N N N N D N

41 
 
10 SHQ Tortorella 
et al., 
2017  N V N N N N D N 
11 GUF Blasing et 
al., 2010 D V N N N N A N 
12 MQ Wu et al., 
2014 D V N N N N N N 
 
 
13 MisoQuest  
 Siepsiak 
et al., 
2020  A V N D D N A N 
14 A-MISO-S Naylor et 
al., 2020 
 A V N N N N N N 
COSMIN rating: V: Very Good; A: Adequate; D: Doubtful; I: Inadequate; N: Not reported by the study authors

42 
 
Table 5. Ratings for each psychometric property quality per instrument based on COSMIN.  
 
 Structural 
validity Internal 
consistency  Cross-
cultural 
validity Measurement 
invariance  Reliability  Measurement 
error Criterion 
validity Hypothesis 
testing for 
construct 
validity  Responsiveness  
HQ 
          
Khalfa et 
al., 2002 - - NR NR ? NR NR NR NR 
Erinc and 
Derinsu, 
2020 ? + + NR NR NR NR + NR 
Oishi et al., 
2017 NR + ? NR NR NR NR NR NR 
Fioretti et 
al., 2015  NR + ? NR NR NR NR NR NR 
Meeus et 
al., 2010 - ? ? NR NR NR NR + NR 
Fackrell et 
al., 2015 + + NR NR NR NR NR ? NR 
HIS 
          
Greenberg 
and Carlos, 
2018 NR + NR NR NR NR NR + NR 
Aazh et al., 
2021 
 NR + NR NR NR NR NR + NR 
MQ

43 
 
Wu et al., 
2014 
 ? ? NR NR NR NR NR ? NR 
MisoQuest 
          
Siepsiak et 
al., 2020 
 + + NR NR + ? NR + NR 
 
HHQ 
          
Prabhu and 
Nagaraj, 
2020 
 NR + NR NR NR NR NR NR NR 
A-MISO-S 
          
Naylor et 
al., 2020 
 - + NR NR NR NR NR NR NR 
GUF  
          
Blasing et 
al., 2010  
 ? + NR NR NR NR NR + NR 
Short-HQ 
          
Tortorella 
et al., 2017 
 NR - NR NR NR NR NR NR NR 
Note. COSMIN Rating: (+) ‘sufficient’, (-) ‘insufficient’, (?) ‘indeterminate’, NR= not reported by the study author

44 
 
Discussion  
     The purpose of this systematic review was to evaluate the quality of psychometric properties 
of the current hyperacusis and misophonia instruments (until April 2021) using the COSMIN 
guidelines. The COSMIN checklist is a well-known tool and has been developed in conjunction 
with other existing guidelines for systematic reviews, such as the Cochrane Handbook for 
systematic reviews of intervention (Johnston et al., 2019), the PRISMA statement (Shamseer 
et al., 2015) and the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Emulation 
(GRADE) principles. 
     To our knowledge, this is the first systematic review to evaluate the measurement properties 
of instruments designed to measure hyperacusis or misophonia across a range of healthcare 
contexts and settings. This review identified eight measures (five for hyperacusis and three for 
misophonia) and 14 studies on the psychometric properties of these instruments. In general, 
the methodological quality of the included studies in this review varied between “very good” 
and “inadequate” across all psychometric properties based on the COSMIN tool. None of the 
identified instruments has reported all nine psychometric properties recommended by 
COSMIN.    
The Methodological Quality of the Included Studies and Psychometric Properties of the 
Instruments  
     According to the COSMIN guideline (2018), content validity is considered an important 
measurement property of an instrument. However, none of the included articles reported using 
adequate methods to assess content validity. One explanation is that the constructs of 
hyperacusis and misophonia are not fully understood. Therefore, it was not possible to rate this 
following the COSMIN recommendation; however, all the questions within the various

45 
 
questionnaires appeared to have good content validity. Good content validity refers to base on 
our own assessment of the questionnaires, not on the COSMIN criteria. When reviewing the 
items in the questionnaires, appeared that they were all the items were measuring the construct 
they purport to and had good content validity from our perspective. In addition, the 
questionnaires have been designed by clinicians and/or researchers working with patients who 
experience hyperacusis and/or misophonia, so they were in a good position to create relevant 
items.  
     In terms of structural validity, six studies did not report any psychometric data. The rest of 
the studies methodological quality for structural validity varies between “very good” and 
“inadequate” according to COSMIN risk of bias checklist assessment. This mainly was due to 
studies only reporting exploratory factor analysis (EFA) without confirmative factor analysis 
(CFA). To test the factor structure, CFA or item response theory (IRT) analysis are preferred 
according to the COSMIN checklist (Mokkink et al., 2018).  
     None of the instruments reported on all three psychometric properties within the domain of 
reliability (reliability, internal consistency, and measurement error). Only one measurement 
instrument (MisoQuest) reported reliability with measuring interclass correlation coefficient 
(ICC), while all instruments reported internal consistency with receiving a very good score for 
study quality. Although measurement error is clinically important because as more error is 
introduced into the score, the lower reliability will be, only one article that tested MisoQuest 
reported it.   
     None of the studies reported information on criterion validity. As there is no universally 
accepted gold standard to measure hyperacusis and misophonia, this feature of criterion validity 
could not be reported in this review. In addition, cross-cultural validity was reported in two 
studies (Erinc and Derinsu, 2020, Fioretti et al., 2015) with doubtful ratings. However, five

46 
 
studies (Khalfa et al., 2002, Bläsing et al., 2010, Greenberg and Carlos, 2018, Siepsiak et al., 
2020, Wu et al., 2014) included in this review did not conduct cross-cultural validity because 
the measures were developed and validated in the original language.  
     Hypotheses testing for construct validity was reported in 11 studies (78.6%) with ratings of 
either very good, adequate, or doubtful. Only four studies (Aazh et al., 2021, Bläsing et al., 
2010, Greenberg and Carlos, 2018, Meeus et al., 2010), reported both convergent and 
discriminant validity according to COSMIN risk of bias assessment. Except for these four 
studies, the remaining studies had limited evidence for construct validity.   
     Table 5 gives information about the results of each study on the different measurement 
properties, and it was rated as sufficient (+), insufficient (-), or indeterminate (?) following 
COSMIN criteria for good measurement properties. There is insufficient evidence within the 
included papers to making a judgment on their overall quality. Therefore, we chose not to 
summarize the results and thus not to grade the total level of evidence per psychometric 
instruments.  
     There are some other hyperacusis questionnaires used in clinics and research, but these were 
not reviewed as their relevant publications did not provide the psychometric properties required 
by COSMIN. One questionnaire, for example, is the Multiple-Activity-Scale for Hyperacusis 
(MASH), by Dauman and Bouscau-Faure (2005). The development procedure and metrics 
were not reported in this paper, so it was not possible to review its psychometric properties.  
    Several newly developed hyperacusis and misophonia questionnaires were not included in 
this review as the results of their psychometric properties were not published in a peer-review 
journal at the time our literature search (Aazh et al., 2022, Rosenthal et al., 2021, Dibb et al., 
2021). Therefore, it was not possible to evaluate them with the COSMIN checklist in this 
review. Future reviews should assess the questionnaires which were published from April 
2021.

47 
 
     In this systematic review, the populations within included studies varied, with both clinical 
and non-clinical samples. Clinicians desiring to select measures for clinical use should consider 
how generalizable the results are to the intended population, taking into account the populations 
from which the data in these studies were generated. For example, IHS (Greenberg and Carlos, 
2018) appears to be internally consistent in both clinical and non-clinical populations. The 
MisoQuest (Siepsiak et al., 2020) is internally consistent for the clinical population.  
Hyperacusis Questionnaire originally developed by Khalfa et al. (2002) was internally 
consistent for just general population and Fackrell et al. (2015) investigated the validity and 
reliability of the HQ in a population who had tinnitus. They found the HQ to have high internal 
consistency (Cronbach`s alpha= 0.88) but confirmatory factor analysis revealed that the 
proposed three-factor, and an alternative one-factor structure were poor. Therefore, HQ does 
not seem to work well within a tinnitus population. Future studies should endeavour to use 
clinical population of patients with hyperacusis or misophonia when developing 
questionnaires.  
Implications for Future Research  
     Given the recent measures being adapted for use in other countries and languages, we 
believe that there is a need for appropriate and more testing for cross-cultural validity. Studies 
with different cultural groups should perform factor analyses for multiple groups and complete 
measurement invariance or DIF (differential item functioning) to give information on whether 
the measures are equivalent when used in different cultures/languages. For example, 
MisoQuest was developed in Polish, and validation has only been performed in a Polish 
population. Therefore, for future directions, validation and cross-cultural evaluation of 
MisoQuest are needed for other countries and different languages.  
    Regarding structural validity, future studies should perform factor analyses using CFA 
(confirmatory factor analysis) or IRT (item response theory) for seven instruments (HQ, IHS,

48 
 
Hyperacusis Handicap Questionnaire [HHQ], short HQ [SHQ], questionnaire on 
hypersensitivity to sound [GUF], Misophonia Questionnaire [MQ], Amsterdam Misophonia 
Scale [A-MISO-S]). 
     To gain a comprehensive picture of reliability, all elements of reliability should be assessed. 
Internal consistency has been assessed for all instruments, but future studies should assess test-
retest, interrater, and intra-rater reliability for HQ, IHS, SHQ, GUF, MQ, MisoQuest, A-MISO-
S and HHQ. Measurement error also need to be assessed for all eight instruments.   
    We also believe that future studies measuring content validity should state more explicitly 
how they evaluated content validity and follow COSMIN criteria when developing and 
reporting a new measure. This may include exploring the relevance, comprehensiveness, and 
comprehensibility of the measure among a sufficient sample of participants and professionals, 
which could lead to more credible evidence of its content validity.  
     All the available questionnaires regarding hyperacusis and misophonia are designed for 
adults and therefore may not be appropriate for use in children and adolescents. Therefore, 
future studies are needed for the development of new questionnaires in these specific groups.  
     Responsiveness is defined as the ability of the psychometric instrument to detect change 
over time in the construct measured (Mokkink et al., 2018). This review showed that 
responsiveness to change has not formally been tested for hyperacusis and misophonia 
questionnaires. However, HQ and A-MISO-S have been used in several interventional studies 
and appear to be sensitive to change (Nolan et al., 2020, Aazh et al., 2020, Aazh et al., 2019, 
Aazh and Moore, 2018b, Aazh and Moore, 2018a, Schroder et al., 2017, Juris et al., 2014, 
Beukes et al., 2018) (scores have changed following treatment). This provides some evidence 
for responsiveness. More systematic studies are needed to further explore responsiveness to

49 
 
change and the cut off for meaningful or clinically significant change in hyperacusis and 
misophonia questionnaires.  
Conclusion  
     This study systematically reviewed publications that evaluated the psychometric properties 
of eight hyperacusis and misophonia instruments using COSMIN guidelines (i.e., HQ, IHS, 
HHQ, SHQ, GUF, MQ, A-MISO-S and MisoQuest). Evidence concerning psychometric 
properties was limited and no single measure of hyperacusis and/or misophonia was found to 
meet all nine methodological quality standards according to the COSMIN guideline. There is 
a need for further research on the psychometric properties of the instruments included in this 
review. 
Conflict of Interest 
No conflict of interest has been declared by the authors.

50 
 
REFERENCES  
AAZH, H., BRYANT, C. & MOORE, B. C. J. 2020. Patients’ perspectives about the 
acceptability and effectiveness of audiologist-delivered cognitive behavioral therapy 
for tinnitus and/or hyperacusis rehabilitation. American Journal of Audiology,  28, 
973-985. 
AAZH, H., DANESH, A. A. & MOORE, B. C. J. 2021. Internal Consistency and Convergent 
Validity of the Inventory of Hyperacusis Symptoms. Ear Hear,  42, 917-926. 
AAZH, H., HAYES, C., MOORE, B. C. J., DANESH, A. A. & VITORATOU, S. 2022. 
Psychometric Evaluation of the Hyperacusis Impact Questionnaire (HIQ) and Sound 
Sensitivity Symptoms Questionnaire (SSSQ) Using a Clinical Population of Adult 
Patients with Tinnitus Alone or Combined with Hyperacusis. Journal of American 
Academy of Audiology,  [Online ahead of print]. 
AAZH, H., LANDGREBE, M., DANESH, A. & MOORE, B. C. J. 2019. Cognitive 
behavioral therapy for alleviating the distress caused by tinnitus, hyperacusis and 
misophonia: Current perspectives. Psychology Research and Behavior Management 
23, 991-1002. 
AAZH, H. & MOORE, B. C. J. 2018a. Effectiveness of audiologist-delivered cognitive 
behavioral therapy for tinnitus and hyperacusis rehabilitation: outcomes for patients 
treated in routine practice   American Journal of Audiology,  27, 547-558. 
AAZH, H. & MOORE, B. C. J. 2018b. Proportion and characteristics of patients who were 
offered, enrolled in and completed audiologist-delivered cognitive behavioural 
therapy for tinnitus and hyperacusis rehabilitation in a specialist UK clinic. 
International Journal of Audiology,  57, 415-425. 
AAZH, H., MOORE, B. C. J., LAMMAING, K. & CROPLEY, M. 2016. Tinnitus and 
hyperacusis therapy in a UK National Health Service audiology department: Patients'

51 
 
evaluations of the effectiveness of treatments. International Journal of Audiology,  55, 
514-522. 
ADAMS, B., SEREDA, M., CASEY, A., BYROM, P., STOCKDALE, D. & HOARE, D. J. 
2020. A Delphi survey to determine a definition and description of hyperacusis by 
clinician consensus. Int J Audiol , 1-7. 
ALTHEIDE, D. L. & JOHNSON, J. M. 1994. Criteria for assessing interpretive validity in 
qualitative research. Handbook of qualitative research.  Thousand Oaks, CA, US: 
Sage Publications, Inc. 
ANDERSSON, G., LINDVALL, N., HURSTI, T., CARLBRING, P. & ANDERSSON, G. 
2002. Hypersensitivity to sound (hyperacusis): a prevalence study conducted via the 
internet and post: Hipersensibilidad al sonido (hiperacusia): un estudio de prevalencia 
realizado por internet y por correo. International journal of audiology,  41, 545-554. 
BEUKES, E. W., ANDERSSON, G., ALLEN, P. M., MANCHAIAH, V. & BAGULEY, D. 
M. 2018a. Effectiveness of Guided Internet-Based Cognitive Behavioral Therapy vs 
Face-to-Face Clinical Care for Treatment of Tinnitus: A Randomized Clinical Trial. 
JAMA Otolaryngology Head & Neck Surgery 144, 1126-1133. 
BEUKES, E. W., BAGULEY, D. M., ALLEN, P. M., MANCHAIAH, V. & ANDERSSON, 
G. 2018b. Audiologist-Guided Internet-Based Cognitive Behavior Therapy for Adults 
With Tinnitus in the United Kingdom: A Randomized Controlled Trial. Ear and 
Hearing, 39, 423-433. 
BLÄSING, L., GOEBEL, G., FLÖTZINGER, U., BERTHOLD, A. & KRÖNER-HERWIG, 
B. 2010. Hypersensitivity to sound in tinnitus patients: an analysis of a construct 
based on questionnaire and audiological data. Int J Audiol,  49, 518-26. 
CRESWELL, J. W. 2002. Educational research: Planning, conducting, and evaluating 
quantitative , Prentice Hall Upper Saddle River, NJ.

52 
 
DAUMAN, R. & BOUSCAU-FAURE, F. 2005. Assessment and amelioration of hyperacusis 
in tinnitus patients. Acta Otolaryngol,  125, 503-9. 
DIBB, B., GOLDING, S. E. & DOZIER, T. H. 2021. The development and validation of the 
Misophonia response scale. J Psychosom Res,  149, 110587. 
ERINC, M. & DERINSU, U. 2020. Turkish Adaptation of Khalfa Hyperacusis 
Questionnaire. Medeni Med J,  35, 142-150. 
FACKRELL, K., FEARNLEY, C., HOARE, D. J. & SEREDA, M. 2015. Hyperacusis 
Questionnaire as a Tool for Measuring Hypersensitivity to Sound in a Tinnitus 
Research Population. Biomed Res Int,  2015, 290425. 
FIORETTI, A., TORTORELLA, F., MASEDU, F., VALENTI, M., FUSETTI, M. & 
PAVACI, S. 2015. Validity of the Italian version of Khalfa's questionnaire on 
hyperacusis. Acta Otorhinolaryngol Ital,  35, 110-5. 
GILLESPIE, D. F. P. B. E. O. U. P. 2015. Key concepts in measures. 
GREEN, S. 2005. Systematic reviews and meta-analysis. Singapore Med J,  46, 270-3; quiz 
274. 
GREENBERG, B. & CARLOS, M. 2018. Psychometric Properties and Factor Structure of a 
New Scale to Measure Hyperacusis: Introducing the Inventory of Hyperacusis 
Symptoms. Ear Hear,  39, 1025-1034. 
JOHNSTON, B. C., PATRICK, D. L., DEVJI, T., MAXWELL, L. J., BINGHAM III, C. O., 
BEATON, D. E., BOERS, M., BRIEL, M., BUSSE, J. W., CARRASCO-LABRA, A., 
CHRISTENSEN, R., DA COSTA, B. R., EL DIB, R., LYDDIATT, A., OSTELO, R. 
W., SHEA, B., SINGH, J., TERWEE, C. B., WILLIAMSON, P. R., GAGNIER, J. J., 
TUGWELL, P. & GUYATT, G. H. 2019. Patient-reported outcomes. Cochrane 
Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions.

53 
 
JURIS, L., ANDERSSON, G., LARSEN, H. C. & EKSELIUS, L. 2014. Cognitive behaviour 
therapy for hyperacusis: A randomized controlled trial. Behaviour Research and 
Therapy, 54c, 30-37. 
KHALFA, S., DUBAL, S., VEUILLET, E., PEREZ-DIAZ, F., JOUVENT, R. & COLLET, 
L. 2002b. Psychometric normalization of a hyperacusis questionnaire. Journal for 
Oto-rhino-laryngology and its Related Specialties,  64, 436-42. 
MEEUS, O. M., SPAEPEN, M., RIDDER, D. D. & HEYNING, P. H. 2010. Correlation 
between hyperacusis measurements in daily ENT practice. Int J Audiol,  49, 7-13. 
MOHER, D., LIBERATI, A., TETZLAFF, J., ALTMAN, D. G. & GROUP, P. 2010. 
Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses: the PRISMA 
statement. Int J Surg,  8, 336-41. 
MOKKINK, L. B., DE VET, H. C. W., PRINSEN, C. A. C., PATRICK, D. L., ALONSO, J., 
BOUTER, L. M. & TERWEE, C. B. 2018. COSMIN Risk of Bias checklist for 
systematic reviews of Patient-Reported Outcome Measures. Qual Life Res,  27, 1171-
1179. 
MOKKINK, L. B., TERWEE, C. B., PATRICK, D. L., ALONSO, J., STRATFORD, P. W., 
KNOL, D. L., BOUTER, L. M. & DE VET, H. C. 2010. The COSMIN checklist for 
assessing the methodological quality of studies on measurement properties of health 
status measurement instruments: an international Delphi study. Qual Life Res,  19, 
539-49. 
NAYLOR, J., CAIMINO, C., SCUTT, P., HOARE, D. J. & BAGULEY, D. M. 2021. The 
Prevalence and Severity of Misophonia in a UK Undergraduate Medical Student 
Population and Validation of the Amsterdam Misophonia Scale. Psychiatr Q,  92, 609-
619.

54 
 
NOLAN, D. R., GUPTA, R., HUBER, C. G. & SCHNEEBERGER, A. R. 2020. An Effective 
Treatment for Tinnitus and Hyperacusis Based on Cognitive Behavioral Therapy in an 
Inpatient Setting: A 10-Year Retrospective Outcome Analysis. Front Psychiatry,  11, 
25. 
OISHI, N., YAMADA, H., KANZAKI, S., KURITA, A., TAKIGUCHI, Y., YUGE, I., 
ASAMA, Y., MASUDA, M. & OGAWA, K. 2017. Assessment of hyperacusis with a 
newly produced Japanese version of the Khalfa hyperacusis questionnaire. Acta 
Otolaryngol,  137, 957-961. 
PRABHU, P. & NAGARAJ, M. K. 2020. Development and validation of Hyperacusis 
Handicap Questionnaire in individuals with tinnitus associated with hyperacusis. J 
Otol, 15, 124-128. 
PRINSEN, C. A. C., MOKKINK, L. B., BOUTER, L. M., ALONSO, J., PATRICK, D. L., 
DE VET, H. C. W. & TERWEE, C. B. 2018. COSMIN guideline for systematic 
reviews of patient-reported outcome measures. Qual Life Res,  27, 1147-1157. 
RICE, D. B., SKIDMORE, B. & COBEY, K. D. 2021. Dealing with predatory journal 
articles captured in systematic reviews. Syst Rev, 10, 175. 
ROSENTHAL, M. Z., ANAND, D., CASSIELLO-ROBBINS, C., WILLIAMS, Z. J., 
GUETTA, R. E., TRUMBULL, J. & KELLEY, L. D. 2021. Development and Initial 
Validation of the Duke Misophonia Questionnaire. Frontiers in Psychology,  12. 
SCHRODER, A. E., VULINK, N. C., VAN LOON, A. J. & DENYS, D. A. 2017. Cognitive 
behavioral therapy is effective in misophonia: An open trial. J Affect Disord,  217, 
289-294. 
SHAMSEER, L., MOHER, D., CLARKE, M., GHERSI, D., LIBERATI, A., PETTICREW, 
M., SHEKELLE, P. & STEWART, L. A. 2015. Preferred reporting items for

55 
 
systematic review and meta-analysis protocols (PRISMA-P) 2015: elaboration and 
explanation. BMJ : British Medical Journal,  349, g7647. 
SIEPSIAK, M., ŚLIWERSKI, A. & ŁUKASZ DRAGAN, W. 2020. Development and 
Psychometric Properties of MisoQuest-A New Self-Report Questionnaire for 
Misophonia. Int J Environ Res Public Health,  17. 
SMIT, A. L., STEGEMAN, I., EIKELBOOM, R. H., BAGULEY, D. M., BENNETT, R. J., 
TEGG‐QUINN, S., BUCKS, R. S., STOKROOS, R. J., HUNTER, M. & ATLAS, M. 
D. 2021. Prevalence of Hyperacusis and Its Relation to Health: The Busselton Healthy 
Ageing Study. The Laryngoscope . 
SÜRÜCÜ, L. & MASLAKCI, A. 2020. Validity and reliability in quantitative research. 
Business & Management Studies: An International Journal,  8, 2694-2726. 
SWEDO, S., BAGULEY, D. M., DENYS, D., DIXON, L. J., ERFANIAN, M., FIORETTI, 
A., JASTREBOFF, P. J., KUMAR, S., ROSENTHAL, M. Z., ROUW, R., 
SCHILLER, D., SIMNER, J., STORCH, E. A., TAYLOR, S., VANDER WERFF, K. 
R. & RAVER, S. M. 2022. A Consensus Definition of Misophonia: Using a Delphi 
Process to Reach Expert Agreement. Front Neurosci  16, 2021.04.05.21254951. 
TERWEE, C. B., MOKKINK, L. B., KNOL, D. L., OSTELO, R. W., BOUTER, L. M. & DE 
VET, H. C. 2012. Rating the methodological quality in systematic reviews of studies 
on measurement properties: a scoring system for the COSMIN checklist. Qual Life 
Res, 21, 651-7. 
TORTORELLA, F., PAVACI, S., FIORETTI, A. B., MASEDU, F., LAURIELLO, M. & 
EIBENSTEIN, A. 2017. The short hyperacusis questionnaire: A tool for the 
identification and measurement of hyperacusis in the Italian tinnitus population. 
Audiol Res,  7, 182.

56 
 
TYLER, R. S., PIENKOWSKI, M., ROJAS RONCANCIO, E., JUN, H. J., BROZOSKI, T., 
DAUMAN, N., COELHO, C. B., ANDERSSON, G., KEINER, A. J., CACACE, A., 
MARTIN, N. & MOORE, B. C. 2014. A review of hyperacusis and future directions: 
part I. definitions and manifestations. American Journal of Audiology,  23, 402-419. 
VIERA, A. J. & GARRETT, J. M. 2005. Understanding interobserver agreement: the kappa 
statistic. Fam Med,  37, 360-3. 
WU, M., LEWIN, A. B., MURPHY, T. K. & STORCH, E. A. 2014. Misophonia: incidence, 
phenomenology, and clinical correlates in an undergraduate student sample. J Clin 
Psychol, 70, 994-1007. 
ZHOU, X., WU, M. S. & STORCH, E. A. 2017. Misophonia symptoms among Chinese 
university students: Incidence, associated impairment, and clinical correlates. Journal 
of Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders,  14, 7-12.

57 
 
CHAPTER THREE 
Study 2. Evaluation of the Psychometric Properties of the English 
MisoQuest and Its Relationship with Audiological and Psychological 
Factors 
 
3.1 Overview  
 
     As outlined in the systematic review, existing psychometric instruments for hyperacusis and 
misophonia have been evaluated inconsistently, leaving gaps in their methodological quality. 
The review highlighted that no studies had specifically assessed the English version of 
MisoQuest, a 14-item questionnaire originally developed and validated in Polish. To address 
this gap, the aim of this chapter was to evaluate the validity and reliability of the English version 
of MisoQuest for use in English-speaking populations. 
     This chapter particularly focuses on examining the psychometric properties of the English 
MisoQuest, including its internal consistency, measurement error, and test-retest reliability. 
Confirmatory Factor Analysis (CFA) was performed to assess the factor structure, while 
convergent and discriminant validity were evaluated by correlating MisoQuest with related and 
unrelated constructs. A large sample of adult participants provided a robust dataset, and follow-
up interviews were conducted to further support the findings. 
     The results demonstrated strong internal consistency and high test-retest reliability, 
supporting the reliability of the English MisoQuest. CFA confirmed the multidimensional 
structure, with an adequate model fit. Convergent validity was evidenced by moderate to strong 
correlations with other misophonia measures, while weak correlations with non-misophonia 
measures supported discriminant validity. However, moderate correlations with hyperacusis

58 
 
and fatigue measures were unexpected and are discussed in relation to potential construct 
overlap. 
      This chapter discusses the implications of these findings, highlighting the strengths of the 
English MisoQuest while addressing its limitations. By establishing its psychometric 
properties, this chapter contributes to the overall aim of the thesis to improve the measurement 
and understanding of misophonia in English-speaking populations.

59 
 
3.2 Research Paper  
  
Evaluation of the Psychometric Properties of the English MisoQuest and 
Its Relationship with Audiological and Psychological Factors 
 
Fatma Betul Kula1 & 2, Mark Cropley1, Hashir Aazh2 
 
1Department of Psychology, University of Surrey, Guildford, UK. 
2Hashir International Specialist Clinics & Research Institute for Misophonia, Tinnitus and 
Hyperacusis, London and Guildford, UK.

60 
 
Abstract  
Objective:  The primary aim was to establish the validity and reliability of the English version 
of MisoQuest, a 14-item misophonia questionnaire initially validated in the Polish language.  
Design: Reliability was examined through internal consistency, measurement error, and test-
retest reliability. Validity was assessed using confirmatory factor analysis (CFA), with 
convergent and discriminant validity evaluated by correlating MisoQuest with other relevant 
measures. Participants completed the MisoQuest at two-time points and participated in follow-
up interviews. 
Study Sample:  A total of 451 adult participants, with an average age of 36.4 years (SD = 12.8), 
were included in the study. 
Results: The internal consistency of the English MisoQuest was very good (α and ω = 0.93) 
and the test-retest reliability was high (ICC = 0.89). While CFA indicated an adequate model 
fit, it did not fully support a one-factor structure, as some items shared variance even when 
controlled for the latent variable. Convergent validity was evidenced by moderate to strong 
correlations with established misophonia questionnaires. Weak correlations with non-
misophonia measures indicated discriminant validity. Unexpectedly, moderate correlations 
were found between MisoQuest and Hyperacusis Impact Questionnaire (r = 0.34; p < 0.01) and 
Three-dimensional Fatigue Inventory ( r = 0.31; p < 0.01). 
Conclusion:  The study found that the English version of MisoQuest is a reliable and valid tool 
for measuring misophonia within the English-speaking adult population.

61 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
     Misophonia is characterised by profound emotional, physiological and behavioral reactions 
towards specific sounds or visual stimuli, as defined by Swedo et al. (2022). Common triggers 
for misophonia involve sounds produced by others, particularly those linked to oral functions 
(e.g., chewing, eating), nasal sounds (e.g., breathing and sniffing) and repetitive sounds such 
as tapping or clicking. When individuals with misophonia are exposed to the trigger sounds, 
they often experience emotional reactions (e.g., anger and irritation), bodily sensations (e.g., 
increased heart rate and tense muscles), and behavioral responses (e.g., avoidance and 
aggressive behaviors, asking people to stop making the noise) (Jager et al., 2020, Dibb et al., 
2021, Edelstein et al., 2013). The prevalence of clinical misophonia (i.e., people for whom 
symptoms of misophonia cause a significant burden) has been reported in 18.4% of a 
representative sample of the UK adult population (Vitoratou et al., 2023). However, in the US, 
a recent study by Dixon et al. (2024) found that 4.6% of the adult population experience clinical 
levels of misophonia.  
     Research indicates that misophonia is frequently associated with conditions such as 
obsessive-compulsive disorder and trauma-related disorders (Wu et al., 2014, Schröder et al., 
2013). Approximately 28% of individuals diagnosed with misophonia also exhibit one or more 
psychiatric disorders (Jager et al., 2020). Misophonia co-occurs with a diverse range of anxiety 
disorders, with nearly 57% of sampled participants meeting the criteria for at least one anxiety-
related disorder (Rosenthal et al., 2022). It is estimated that 12% of misophonia patients also 
experience tinnitus, with 4% of them also presenting hyperacusis (Rouw and Erfanian, 2018). 
Some studies have suggested that individuals with misophonia also report hearing loss (Enzler 
et al., 2021b, Siepsiak et al., 2022, Aazh et al., 2022). Dibb and Golding (2022) reported that 
individuals with misophonia have difficulties in emotional well-being and social functioning.

62 
 
They reported that compared to quality of life, individuals with misophonia showed increased 
levels of fatigue as measured by the Misophonia Response scale (Dibb and Golding, 2022).   
     A valid and reliable measurement tool is essential for accurately assessing misophonia 
severity and ensuring consistent results across studies, which enhances the credibility and 
comparability of research. The MisoQuest questionnaire, consisting of 14 items, was initially 
validated in a Polish sample (Siepsiak et al., 2022). However, a recent systematic review by 
Kula et al. (2023) emphasized the need for further evaluation of MisoQuest’s psychometric 
properties, especially within an English-speaking population, using the COSMIN framework 
(Mokkink et al., 2018).  
     This study aims to validate the English version of the MisoQuest by evaluating its structural 
validity, reliability, measurement error, and convergent and discriminant validity according to 
COSMIN standards (Mokkink et al., 2018). Our data collection involved a three-stage 
approach. Initially, participants engaged in an online survey, completing the measurements at 
two separate points two weeks apart. A subsample of participants who completed both stages 
of the survey were invited to the third stage, which was an interview to complete the same 
survey, using identical measures, but this time administered by the researcher. More details are 
provided in the methods section. 
    Based on existing research, we hypothesised the following for the validation of the English 
MisoQuest. While Siepsiak et al. (2020) performed a confirmatory analysis using Graded 
Response Model to confirm the factor structure of the MisoQuest, they did not use 
Confirmatory Factor Analysis (CFA). Although measurement error was addressed in the 
original study, our study focuses on analysing the standard error of measurement. Furthermore, 
both convergent and discriminant validity are examined, aspects not fully explored in the initial 
validation. We expected the English version to demonstrate internal consistency (Cronbach’s 
α and McDonald’s ω > 0.70), strong test-retest reliability similarly reliability levels as reported

63 
 
in the original scale's development, and low measurement error. For convergent validity, we 
anticipated moderate to strong correlations between the English MisoQuest and other 
misophonia-related measures (e.g., AMISO-R, MIQ, SS4), and for discriminant validity, weak 
correlations with constructs unrelated to misophonia, such as hearing loss, hyperacusis, mental 
health, sleep and stress.  
2. MATERIALS AND METHODS  
2.1 Ethics approval and consent to participate. 
    Ethics approval for the study was obtained from the University of Surrey Research Integrity 
and Governance Office (Reference: FHMS-21 22 083 EGA).  All participants provided online 
consent after being informed about the study's objectives, procedures, and their right to 
withdraw at any time. 
2.2 Participants      
    The sample size was determined based on a 25:1 participant-to-item ratio for the MisoQuest 
questionnaire, resulting in a minimum target of 350 participants (Hair et al., 2019). Although 
some scholars recommend a minimum ratio of 5:1 (Comrey and Lee, 2013), a larger sample 
size can improve factor stability and result generalizability. For test-retest reliability, a 
minimum of 100 participants were required to minimize statistical error and improve reliability 
estimates (COSMIN guidelines; Mokkink et al. (2018).  
    The survey link was distributed via university email lists, social media (Instagram, X), and 
the Hashir International Specialist Clinics’ online newsletter. Additionally, it was shared within 
Facebook support groups and through nonprofit organizations (e.g., SoQuiet). From 475 initial 
respondents, only those who passed an attention check and met standard response time criteria 
were included in the analysis, yielding a final sample of 451. This quality control process aligns 
with recommendations to exclude careless responses (Arias et al., 2020, Chandler et al., 2020), 
and we additionally exclude outliers with response times more than three standard deviations

64 
 
from the mean (Leys et al., 2013). Initially, 475 individuals were recruited for the study. After 
applying the attention check and processing time criteria, a final sample of 451 respondents 
was included in the analysis. In the study's second phase for test-retest reliability, 154 
participants took part. 
     The inclusion criteria for participants included being at least 18 years old and having a good 
understanding of English (self-reported). Exclusion criteria were if they had a significant 
cognitive impairment or severe visual impairment (this was communicated with them in the 
study invitation and information sheet). 
2.3. The translation process  
      According to our agreement with the developer of MisoQuest, we used the English version 
of MisoQuest that was translated from the original Polish version and published as a 
supplement to their original paper (Siepsiak et al., 2022). For this translation, two Polish 
researchers translated the questionnaire from Polish to English. Following this, a third person, 
a native speaker familiar with misophonia, corrected the translation for linguistic accuracy. 
They also approved that there was a back-translation of MisoQuest during the process.  
2.4 Procedures  
    The study, conducted between May and July 2023, invited participants to complete an online 
survey on sound sensitivity, hosted on Qualtrics (Provo, USA, https://www.qualtrics.com). 
After consenting and receiving study information, participants provided demographic details 
(age, gender, education, ethnicity, religion, employment and completed questionnaires 
assessing misophonia, hyperacusis, tinnitus, mental health, hearing, stress, sleep, and fatigue 
(see Section 2.5 for details). Supplementary  Figure 1 illustrates the stages of participant 
involvement. Although follow-up interviews were planned after the test-retest phase, only 14 
participants agreed to participate.   
2.4.1 Test-Retest Reliability

65 
 
     To assess test-retest reliability, participants completed the survey twice over a two-week 
interval, as recommended by Franzen et al. (1987). A total of 154 participants engaged in this 
phase, providing data on the stability of responses over time.    
2.4.2 Assessing the effect of administration mode (self-administered vs interview-based)   
     Following the test-retest phase, participants were invited to an optional online interview to 
compare self-administered responses with those gathered in a researcher-administered setting. 
Fourteen participants took part in this third phase, which occurred immediately following the 
second phase. This allowed for a comparison between self-administration and researcher-
administration of MisoQuest.     
2.4.3 Screening Questions for tinnitus and hearing 
      Participants completed screening questions for tinnitus.  Those with tinnitus were asked to 
complete the Tinnitus Impact Questionnaire [TIQ; Aazh et al. (2022a]. All participants 
answered a hearing status question, and those indicating hearing loss completed the Hearing 
Handicap Inventory [HHI; Cassarly et al. (2020)].  
2.5 Measures 
     The primary measure in this study was MisoQuest. Additional measures were administered 
to evaluate MisoQuest’s convergent and discriminant validity: 
     MisoQuest  (Siepsiak et al., 2020a): This 14-item questionnaire uses a five-point Likert 
scale (1 = "strongly disagree" to 5 = "strongly agree") to evaluate sensitivity to bothersome 
sounds. Originally developed in Polish, it demonstrated a Cronbach’s α of 0.96 and ICC of 
0.84 in reliability tests. The authors of MisoQuest (Siepsiak et al., 2020a) acknowledged that 
they translated the questionnaire into English, and we employed this English version in our 
study. A cut-off value of 61 has been established to identify individuals who may be 
experiencing misophonia by Siepsiak et al. (2020b).

66 
 
     The Amsterdam Misophonia Scale- Revised (Jager et al., 2021): A 10-item scale with a 
0-4 rating for misophonia severity, where scores of 0-10 indicate subclinical, 11-20 mild, 21-
30 moderate, and 31-40 severe symptoms. The English version of AMISO-R demonstrated a 
Cronbach’s α of 0.81 (Naylor et al., 2021) and was included to assess the convergent validity 
of MisoQuest.  
   Misophonia Impact Questionnaire  (Aazh et al., 2023): An 8-item scale measuring the 
impact of misophonia, with items 0-3 (0 = 0-1 day, 1 = 2-6 days, 2 = 7-10 days, 3 = 11-14 
days), with a total score range of 0-24. Scores ≥ 12 indicate significant impact (Erfanian and 
Aazh, 2023). The MIQ demonstrated strong reliability, with a Cronbach’s α of 0.94 (Aazh et 
al., 2023). This measure was used to assess convergent validity. 
     Sound Sensitivity Symptoms Questionnaire (Aazh et al., 2024a): 5 items explore several 
sound sensitivity symptoms, including loudness hyperacusis, pain or discomfort hyperacusis, 
annoyance hyperacusis/misophonia, and fear hyperacusis, over two weeks. For each item, a 
score of 0, 1, 2, or 3 is assigned to the response categories of 0 to 1 day, 2 to 6 days, 7 to 10 
days, and 11 to 14 days, respectively. A score of five or more indicates a clinically significant 
sound intolerance problem. In a clinical sample, the SSSQ demonstrated a reliability coefficient 
of Cronbach’s α = 0.87 (Aazh et al., 2024a). SS4 (item 4 in SSSQ) specifically evaluates the 
severity of misophonia symptoms by assessing how often participants felt angry or anxious 
when exposed to specific sounds associated with eating noises, lip smacking, sniffling, 
breathing, clicking sounds, and tapping over the past two weeks. Consequently, we employed 
SS4 to measure convergent validity. The sum of items 1, 2, 3, and 5 quantifies hyperacusis 
symptoms, and this part was used to assess discriminant validity. 
     Hyperacusis Impact Questionnaire (Aazh et al., 2024a): An 8-item tool assessing the 
hyperacusis impact with items scored 0-3 based on frequency (0 = 0-1 day, 1 = 2-6 days, 2 = 
7-10 days, 3 = 11-14 days), giving a total score range of 0-24. Scores of 12 or higher indicate

67 
 
a clinically significant impact. The HIQ showed high reliability, with a Cronbach’s α of 0.93 
(Aazh et al., 2024a). This instrument was applied to assess discriminant validity. 
     Tinnitus Impact Questionnaire  (Aazh et al., 2022b): A 7-item measure assessing tinnitus 
impact daily activities, mood, and sleep. Each item is rated 0-3 to indicate frequency (0 = 0-1 
day, 1 = 2-6 days, 2 = 7-10 days, 3 = 11-14 days), yielding a total score range of 0-21. Internal 
consistency is high, with Cronbach’s α = 0.89 (Aazh et al., 2022b). Scores below 5 indicate no 
impact, 5-6 mild impact, 7-8 moderate impact, and 9 or higher severe impact. TIQ was used to 
assess discriminant validity.  
     Screening for Anxiety & Depression in Tinnitus (Aazh et al., 2024a): The SAD-T 
contains four items that match those for the physical health questionnaire (PHQ-4; Kroenke et 
al., 2009). Two items relate to the experience of anxiety, and two relate to the experience of 
depression. Each item is scored 0-3, corresponding to 0-1 day, 2-6 days, 7-10 days, and 11-14 
days. The total score ranges from 0 to 12, with scores of 4 or more indicating symptoms of 
anxiety and/or depression. The SAD-T has high reliability (Cronbach’s α = 0.91; Aazh et al. 
(2023b) and was used to assess discriminant validity. 
     Hearing Handicap Inventory (Cassarly et al., 2020):  A 10-item measure assessing the 
social and emotional impact of hearing loss. Responses are scored as “yes” (4), “sometimes” 
(2), or “no” (0), with total scores ranging from 0 to 40. Score ranges: 0-8 (no handicap), 10-24 
(mild-moderate), 26-40 (severe). Higher scores indicate greater perceived handicap. The HHI 
shows high internal consistency (Cronbach’s α = 0.95; Cassarly et al. (2020) and was used to 
assess discriminant validity. 
    A single-item measure of stress symptoms (Elo et al., 2003): A one-item questionnaire 
assesses the stress symptoms.  The scores range from 1-5. Higher scores showed greater stress 
levels. The single-item measure has been found valid in terms of content and criterion validity

68 
 
by Elo et al. (2003). We used this questionnaire to examine the discriminant validity because 
it assesses stress symptoms.  
    Single Item Sleep Quality Scale (Snyder et al., 2018): One item measure that evaluates 
sleep quality. The scores “0”: Terrible, “1-3”: Poor, “4-6”: Fair, “7-9 “: Good, “10”: Excellent. 
The test-retest reliability of this measure was found to be 0.74 in stable patients with depression 
and 0.62 in insomnia patients during a 4-week period, and it demonstrated good convergent 
and discriminant validity. We used this item to assess the discriminant validity due to its focus 
on measuring sleep quality.  
     Three-Dimensional Fatigue Inventory  (Frone and Tidwell, 2015): The 3D-WFI is an 18-
item tool assessing fatigue across three dimensions: physical, mental, and emotional (six items 
each). Responses are on a five-point Likert scale (1 = every day to 5 = never). Internal 
consistency for each dimension is high, with reliability estimates exceeding 0.90 (Frone et al., 
2018). The 3D-WFI was used to assess the discriminant validity of the English version of 
MisoQuest. 
2.6 Data Analysis 
     Descriptive statistics and normality tests, including the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, were 
calculated for all administered measures. Normality was assessed visually through histograms 
and quantitatively to ensure data met parametric assumptions. All analyses, except CFA, were 
conducted in IBM SPSS version 28.0. The structural validity of the English MisoQuest was 
assessed by CFA using IBM SPSS Amos version 28, following initial analysis in AMOS, a re-
assessment was conducted in R using “lavaan” package with the Weighted Least Squares Mean 
and Variance adjusted (WLSMV) estimator to account for the ordinal nature of the data. Model 
fit was evaluated using Root Means Square of Approximation (RMSEA), Standardized Root 
Mean Square Residual (SRMR), Tucker Lewis Index (TLI), Comparative Fit Index (CFI), 
Goodness of fit indexes (GFI), CMIN (Chi-square/ df). Following Schermelleh-Engel et al.

69 
 
(2003), a good model fit was defined by SRMR ≤ 0.05; RMSEA ≤ 0.05, TLI ≥ 0.97, CFI ≥ 
0.97, GFI ≥ 0.95 and χ²/df ≤ 2.  
     Reliability analyses included internal consistency (Cronbach’s α and McDonald’s ω), test-
retest reliability, and measurement error. Internal consistency was considered acceptable with 
α or ω values > 0.7 (Hayes and Coutts, 2020). Cronbach’s α and McDonald’s ω have a value 
between 0 and 1, where a value greater than 0.7 is considered acceptable (Raykov and 
Marcoulides, 2011). Confidence intervals (CIs) for Cronbach’s α were determined using bias-
corrected and accelerated (BCA) bootstrap with 1,000 bootstrap samples. To provide a 
comprehensive understanding of MisoQuest’s reliability, we also reported model-based 
measurement error, such as item reliability within the measurement model, which offers 
additional information beyond what is provided by Cronbach’s α and McDonald’s ω. 
     Test-retest reliability over a two-week interval was assessed by intra-class correlation 
coefficient (ICC), using a two-way mixed model with absolute agreement, with ICC > 0.75 
indicating good reliability (Fapta and Ms, 2015). Measurement error was further analysed using 
the standard error of measurement (SEM), the minimal detectable change (MDC 95), and Bland-
Altman analyses. The SEM assesses the variability within subjects when measuring them 
repeatedly as a group (Haley and Fragala-Pinkham, 2006). The MDC 95 represents the smallest 
detectable change exceeding measurement error, indicating a significant change with 95% 
confidence (Schuck and Zwingmann, 2003). Bland-Altman analyses were used to identify 
systematic bias between repeated measurements. The Bland-Altman plot shows agreement 
between two test occasions and highlights potential outliers. If the 95% confidence interval 
(CI) of the mean difference includes zero, it suggests no significant systematic bias. The 95% 
limit of agreement (LOA) was used to examine natural variation, with narrower LOA 
indicating greater stability (Bland and Altman, 1986).

70 
 
     Convergent validity of the English MisoQuest was assessed by Pearson correlation 
coefficients between MisoQuest scores and other misophonia measures (AMISOS-R, MIQ, 
SS4). Discriminate validity was examined by correlating MisoQuest scores with measures 
unrelated to misophonia (HIQ, SSSQ excluding item 4, SAD-T, TIQ, sleep and stress 
measures, 3D-WFI, HHI). Correlation strength was categorised as strong (>0.5), moderate 
(0.30–0.49), or weak (0.10–0.29) (Cohen, 1992). Moderate to strong positive correlations 
supported convergent validity, while weak correlations supported discriminant validity.  
    Finally, a paired t-test was used to compare MisoQuest scores between self- and researcher-
administered conditions in the third stage, assessing the effect of administration mode. 
3. RESULTS 
3.1. Participants’ Characteristics and Descriptive Statistics  
     Demographic data of the 451 respondents who completed the survey are provided in the 
Supplementary Table 1. Most participants identified as female (N= 272, 60.3%), white (N=346, 
76.7), married (N=243, 53.9%), employed full-time (N=235, 52.1%), not having any religion 
(N=184, 40.8%), having a bachelor’s degree (N=165, 36.6%). The average age of the sample 
was 36.46 years ( SD = 12.81).  
     Participants were recruited from the general population, student groups, and support 
communities for hyperacusis, misophonia, and tinnitus. For detailed descriptive statistics and 
findings for each questionnaire and item in the English version of the MisoQuest, please refer 
to Tables 2 and 3.

71 
 
Table 1: Descriptive Statistics and Reliability of Administered Questionnaires 
 
Notes: HIQ, Hyperacusis Impact Questionnaire; MIQ, Misophonia Impact Questionnaire; TIQ, 
Note. Tinnitus Impact Questionnaire; SAD-T, Screening for Anxiety and Depression in 
Tinnitus; SSSQ, Sound Sensitivity Symptoms Questionnaire; AMISO-R, The Amsterdam 
Misophonia Scale- Revised; HHI, Hearing Handicap Inventory; Stress: A single item measure 
of stress symptoms; Sleep, Single Item Sleep Quality Scale; 3D-WFI, Three- Dimensional 
Fatigue Inventory; N = Number of participants; K-S: Kolmogorov Smirnov.  
 
 
 Questionn
aires N Mean 
(SD) Min Max Skewness Kurtosis K-S 
Statistics K-S 
p-
value Reliability 
(95% CI) 
MisoQues
t 451 48.90 
(12.30) 14 70 -0.40 -0.03 0.07 .08 0.93 (0.92-
0.94) 
HIQ 451 9.60 
(6.12) 0 24 0.37 0.11 0.09 .20 0.90 (0.89-
0.91) 
MIQ 451 9.30 
(6.82) 0 24 0.39 -0.67 0.11 .05 0.93 (0.92-
0.94) 
TIQ 173 7.73 
(6.03) 0 21 0.44 -0.79 0.12 < .05 0.92 (0.91-
0.94) 
SAD-T 451 4.85 
(3.38) 0 12 0.48 -0.61 0.12 < .05 0.87 (0.85-
0.89) 
SSSQ 451 6.60 
(4.26) 0 18 0.46 -0.31 0.14 0.06 0.80 (0.77-
0.83) 
AMISO-
R 451 18.81 
(9.20) 0 40 -0.15 -0.52 0.14 < .05 0.92 (0.91-
0.93) 
HHI 87 21.17 
(9.40) 0 40 -0.24 -0.39 0.09 0.20 0.84 (0.78-
0.88) 
Stress 451 3.60 
(1.09) 1 5 -0.67 -0.48 0.15 < .01 Not 
applicable 
Sleep 451 5.45 
(2.10) 0 10 -0.47 -0.73 0.32 < .01 Not 
applicable 
3D-WFI 451 66.25 
(15.27) 18 90 -0.48 -0.13     0.09 .20 0.95 (0.95-
0.96)

72 
 
Table 2: Descriptive Statistics, Factor Loadings and Item Reliability for MisoQuest items 
Item Mean 
(SD) Min Max Skewness  Kurtosis Factor 
Loadings 
(λ) R² (Item 
Reliability)  
MisoQuest 
Item 1 3.72 
(1.10) 1 5 -.63 -.33 0.76 0.58 
MisoQuest 
Item 2 3.78 
(1.08) 1 5 -.72 -.15 0.69 0.48 
MisoQuest 
Item 3 3.41 
(1.17) 1 5 -.42 -.78 0.71 0.51 
MisoQuest 
Item 4 3.52 
(1.19) 1 5 -.42 -.79 0.73 0.53 
MisoQuest 
Item 5 3.55 
(1.19) 1 5 -.46 -.80 0.72 0.53 
MisoQuest 
Item 6 3.25 
(1.21) 1 5 -.23 -.93 0.62 0.38 
MisoQuest 
Item 7 3.50 
(1.22) 1 5 -.53 -.48 0.72 0.50 
MisoQuest 
Item 8 3.24 
(1.22) 1 5 -.31 -.95 0.64 0.41 
MisoQuest 
Item 9 3.42 
(1.23) 1 5 -.31 -.97 0.68 0.47 
MisoQuest 
Item 10 3.74 
(1.16) 1 5 -.70 -.38 0.76 0.58 
MisoQuest 
Item 11 3.59 
(1.22) 1 5 -.56 -.71 0.74 0.55 
MisoQuest 
Item 12 3.62 
(1.26) 1 5 -.56 -.82 0.75 0.57 
MisoQuest 
Item 13 3.11 
(1.28) 1 5 -.01 -1.15 0.66 0.47 
MisoQuest 
Item 14 3.44 
(1.19) 1 5 -.47 -.75 0.72 0.53 
Note.  N (number of participants) = 451

73 
 
       The study included 451 participants across various groups: 'General' (205), 'Student' (109), 
'SoQuiet (misophonia charity)' (61), and 'Other Support Groups' (76, including social media, 
tinnitus patients, and a tinnitus charity).     
3.2. Prevalence of Misophonia, Tinnitus, Hyperacusis, Hearing Loss, Sleep Disturbance, and 
Mental Health Symptoms among all respondents 
    Approximately 21.7% of respondents (98/451) were identified as having misophonia based 
on the MisoQuest, with a higher prevalence in females (60/98). A Chi-Square test showed a 
significant difference in misophonia prevalence between females and males (χ² (1) = 16.52, p 
< .001). Among those with misophonia, 32.1% reported tinnitus, and 16.7% reported hearing 
loss. Misophonia prevalence also varied by employment status: 10% among students, 18% 
among employed individuals, and 5% among retired individuals, with a significant association 
found (χ² (2) = 19.48, p < .005). Regarding tinnitus, 39% of participants reported experiencing 
it, with varying levels of impact (9.3% mild, 12.1% moderate, 42.2% severe). Hyperacusis had 
a clinically significant impact on 35.5% of participants, while 20% reported hearing loss, with 
44% experiencing bilateral loss. Sleep disturbance varied, with 18% reporting poor sleep and 
34.1% reporting good sleep quality. This sleep-specific questionnaire is separate from the 
tinnitus measure and assesses sleep quality in general, regardless of tinnitus. Additionally, 61% 
of participants showed possible symptoms of anxiety and/or depression based on SAD-T.    
Misophonia prevalence varied by the questionnaire used: 21.7% with MisoQuest, 36.6% with 
MIQ, and 80% with AMISOS-R, which also categorised symptoms as 34.1% mild, 35.5% 
moderate, and 10.2% severe to extreme.   
3.3. Structural Validity  
     The initial CFA model, based on Siepsiak et al. (2020a), was tested on the present dataset 
to confirm the one-factor structure of 14 items. Although this structure was supported, model 
fit was poor:  χ² = 295.73, χ²/df = 3.84 (above the recommended threshold of 2), RMSEA =

74 
 
0.07 (exceeding the 0.05 limit), CFI = 0.94, and TLI = 0.93 (both below the 0.97 cut-off), 
though SRMR was acceptable at 0.04. Modification indices were then used to address 
misspecifications, resulting in improved fit indices: χ² = 180.53, df = 72, χ²/df = 2.50, RMSEA 
= 0.05, SRMR = 0.03, CFI = 0.97, and TLI = 0.96 (Please see Supplementary Figure 2). In a 
subsequent analysis, the model fit was reassessed using the WLSMV estimator to better align 
with the ordinal nature of the data, yielding slightly better fit indices compared to the modified 
model: χ²/df = 2.41, SRMR = 0.04, RMSEA = 0.05, CFI = 0.97, TLI = 0.97.  
3.4. Reliability and Measurement Error 
     Cronbach’s α and McDonald’s ω for the English version of the MisoQuest were both robust, 
each with a value of 0.93 in this sample. Factor loadings for each item were analyzed to assess 
their relationship with the underlying latent construct. These loadings, along with the 
corresponding item reliability (R²) values, are presented in Table 5. The factor loadings, 
ranging from 0.62 to 0.76, are considered moderate to very good, indicating that the items 
effectively represent the intended construct. The R² values, which range from 0.38 to 0.58, 
suggest moderate to good reliability, confirming that a significant portion of the variance in 
each item is explained by the latent factor, thus supporting the overall reliability and validity 
of the MisoQuest scale. 
     The ICC analysis showed good test-retest reliability for the English MisoQuest (ICC= 0.89, 
95% CI [0.85, 0.92]) using a two-way mixed effects model for absolute agreement. The SEM 
was 3.19, indicating the standard deviation of an observed score around the true score, and the 
MDC95 was 8.81, reflecting the minimum detectable change. Bland-Altman analysis revealed 
no significant systematic bias, with the mean difference close to zero. Eight outliers fell outside 
the 95% limits of agreement (LOA), which were narrow, indicating minimal variability and 
high stability of the MisoQuest scores. This narrow range suggests small, consistent differences 
between repeated measures, supporting the instrument's reliability (Please see Supplementary

75 
 
Figure 3) . The assumption of normality for the mean differences in the Bland-Altman analysis 
was also met, validating the results.      
3.5. Convergent Validity  
      The convergent validity of the English version of MisoQuest was evaluated by calculating 
Pearson correlation coefficients between the AMISOS-R, MIQ and SS4. The convergent 
validity of the English MisoQuest was supported by strong positive correlations with the 
AMISOS-R (r = 0.65, t (449) = 18.11, p < 0.01), and moderate positive correlations with the 
MIQ (r = 0.66, t (449) = 11.29, p < 0.01) and SS4 (r = 0.659, t (449) = 10.84, p < 0.01). 
3.6. Discriminant Validity 
Table 3: Discriminant validity: correlations coefficients 
 
 HIQ 
 SS1235 SAD-T 
 TIQ 
 Sleep 
Quality Stress 
 HHI 
  3D-WFI 
 
 
MisoQuest 
 
 r = 0.34 
p < 0.01 
N = 451 r = 0.25 
p < 0.01 
N = 451 r = 0.23 
p < 0.01 
N = 451 r = -0.11 
p= 0.931 
N = 176 r = -0.14 
p = 0.04 
N = 451  r = 0.25  
p < 0.01 
N = 451 r = -0.06 
p = 0.57 
N = 94 r = 0.31 
 p < 0.01 
N = 451 
Note. HIQ, Hyperacusis Impact Questionnaire; SS1235, items 1,2,3, and 5 on Sound Sensitivity 
Symptoms Questionnaire; SAD-T, stress and depression; TIQ, Tinnitus Impact Questionnaire; 
HHI, Hearing Handicap Inventory; HHI, Hearing Handicap Inventory. The number of 
participants is indicated by N.  
 
    Table 3 reveals a weak positive correlation between the English version of MisoQuest and 
SS1235, SAD-T, stress and sleep quality measures and very weak, non-significant negative 
correlations with TIQ and HHI, supporting the discriminant validity of the English version of 
MisoQuest. Contrary to our expectations, there were positive moderate correlations between 
MisoQuest and HIQ and 3D-WFI.  
3.7. Mode of administration of the MisoQuest Results  
     The participant-administered and researcher-administered MisoQuest were compared using 
a paired t-test. The mean score for participant-administered was 53.31 ( SD = 11.16), and for

76 
 
researcher-administrated was 53.88 ( SD = 13.0). The paired t-test analysis indicated no 
statistically significant difference between the two methods, as the mean difference was -2.43 
(95% CI [-5.3, 0.49]), t (12) = -1.7, p = 0.97. The effect size, Cohen's d, was estimated at -0.44, 
with a 95% confidence interval ranging from -0.95 to 0.08. In addition, a correlation analysis 
revealed a strong positive correlation between the scores of participant-administered and 
researcher-administered MisoQuest, with a correlation coefficient of 0.91 ( p<0.01). This 
suggests a high degree of agreement between the two methods of delivery. These results 
indicate that when participants completed the questionnaire alone, it did not significantly 
impact the scores, and the two methods demonstrated a strong correlation.  
4. DISCUSSION     
     The study aimed to assess the psychometric properties of the English MisoQuest following 
COSMIN guidelines (Mokkink et al., 2018) for translated questionnaire. CFA initially 
indicated a one-factor structure consistent with the model proposed by Siepsiak et al. (2020a). 
However, the initial model fit was poor, so modifications were made to improve model fit. 
These changes addressed shared variance among items with similar emotional and behavioural 
responses to trigger sounds, improved the overall model fit. Nonetheless, since these 
adjustments were data-driven rather than theory-based, they might suggest potential 
multidimensionality within the measure. Subsequent reassessment using the WLSMV 
estimator, which accounts for the ordinal nature of the data, yielded improved yet still adequate 
fit compared to the modified ML model, with persistent evidence of multidimensionality. 
These findings highlight that further adjustments may be needed in future studies to better align 
the model with theoretical support.  
     The internal consistency of the English version of MisoQuest with Cronbach's α and 
McDonald's ω of 0.93, closely aligns with the original scale developer's reported Cronbach's α 
of 0.96 by Siepsiak et al. (2020a), highlighting the robustness of the questionnaire's reliability

77 
 
across different sample characteristics. Our study found a test-retest reliability ICC value of 
0.89 for the English version of MisoQuest, slightly higher than the original developer's reported 
value of 0.84, indicating strong consistency in responses over a two-week period.        
     While Siepsiak et al. (2020a) addressed measurement error in the original Polish version of 
MisoQuest, and Raymond and Butler (2024) have previously examined convergent and 
discriminant validity in the English version, our study provides a comprehensive psychometric 
analysis following COSMIN standards. This approach offers a robust evaluation of the English 
MisoQuest, supporting its suitability for clinical and research applications. 
      Our examination of convergent validity showed moderate to strong correlations between 
MisoQuest scores and those from AMISOS-R, MIQ, and SS4, indicating that these instruments 
assess related constructs. However, discrepancies were observed in the proportion of 
participants diagnosed with misophonia across these tools, which relates to diagnostic or 
differential validity rather than convergent validity. Specifically, AMISOS-R identified a 
higher prevalence than both MisoQuest and MIQ, likely due to differences in design and 
conceptual frameworks. Each tool approaches misophonia measurement uniquely: AMISOS-
R focuses on experiences triggered in the past three days, MisoQuest has no specified 
timeframe, and MIQ assesses the impact of misophonia on patients' lives over a two-week 
period. Therefore, these differences reflect the diverse approaches used in each questionnaire. 
Future studies should explore whether a distinction between misophonia as a trait or a disorder 
can be made using MisoQuest and AMISOS-R and how these might be related to the impact 
of misophonia on the patient’s life measured via MIQ.   
     The English version of MisoQuest demonstrates reasonably good discriminant validity, as 
evidenced by its weak correlations with tinnitus impact, hearing loss, sleep, stress, depression, 
and anxiety. However, there was a moderate correlation between MisoQuest and HIQ that 
assesses hyperacusis. This means that MisoQuest may be influenced by hyperacusis symptoms.

78 
 
Hyperacusis is different to misophonia and is characterized by the perception of certain 
everyday sounds, such as domestic noise or noise in public places, as too loud or painful (Aazh 
et al., 2014). One explanation is that HIQ may be influenced by misophonia in addition to 
hyperacusis. However, this is unlikely as Aazh et al. (2024d) reported that the mean of HIQ 
score among patients with misophonia was 8.8 (SD=8.2) compared with 18.5 (SD=6.9) among 
patients with hyperacusis. This indicates that HIQ is reasonably specific in differentiating the 
impact of hyperacusis from misophonia. Another explanation for the moderate relationship 
observed between MisoQuest and HIQ is a possible overlap between misophonia and one form 
of hyperacusis (i.e., annoyance hyperacusis). According to Tyler et al. (2014) hyperacusis has 
four subtypes: loudness hyperacusis, pain hyperacusis, annoyance hyperacusis, and fear 
hyperacusis. Previous studies also suggest possible relationship or comorbidity between 
hyperacusis and misophonia (Aazh et al., 2022a, Aazh et al., 2023).  
     The English version of MisoQuest indicated a moderated correlation with fatigue measure 
(3D-WFI). This result is consistent with findings from Dibb and Golding (2022), who also 
reported a moderate correlation between misophonia and fatigue. There is a need for future 
studies to further explore the relationships between misophonia, hyperacusis and fatigue.    
     No significant correlation was found between hearing loss and misophonia, consistent with 
previous studies (Aazh et al., 2022a, Siepsiak et al., 2022). In terms of mental health, we 
observed a weak correlation between misophonia and anxiety-depression, differing from the 
moderate correlation reported by Wu et al. (2014), likely due to sample differences, as their 
study focused on students while ours involved a more diverse population. Similarly, we found 
a weak correlation between misophonia and stress, which contrasts with the moderate 
correlation reported by McKay et al. (2018). This discrepancy may be due to differences in 
participant demographics and the use of different questionnaires, as their study focused on U.S. 
participants and used the Misophonia Questionnaire (Wu et al., 2014) and Depression Anxiety

79 
 
Stress Scale (Lovibond and Lovibond, 1995). These findings underscore the need for future 
studies to further investigate the relationship between misophonia and mental health and stress, 
particularly using validated tools such as MisoQuest. 
     Additionally, we found a weak but significant negative correlation between MisoQuest 
scores and sleep quality, indicating that higher misophonia symptoms are associated with 
poorer sleep. Although no prior studies have explored this relationship, research on hyperacusis 
has shown a connection between sound sensitivity and sleep problems, with 30% of 
participants reporting sleep issues  (Fioretti et al., 2013). Further research should explore the 
impact of misophonia on sleep quality to expand our understanding of this relationship.  
     Some limitations should be considered when interpreting the outcomes of this study. First, 
female and male participant numbers in our study were unequal. This imbalance, however, is 
consistent findings from other online misophonia studies (Dibb et al., 2021), which also 
observed a higher proportion of female participants. In addition, Siepsiak et al. (2020a) who 
investigated the invariance based on gender, found that women demonstrated higher 
misophonia symptoms compared to men. However, it is important to note that in studies with 
representative samples of the population, there is no clear evidence that females score higher 
than males. Therefore, conclusions from convenience samples like ours should not be 
generalised to the whole population.  
     Single-item measures offer simplicity but also come with limitations. While test-retest 
reliability can be evaluated, internal consistency cannot be measured, as there is only one item. 
This limitation is especially important in cross-sectional studies like ours, where 
comprehensive reliability assessment is critical. For single-item measures, certain reliability 
aspects remain uncertain, so the findings should be interpreted with caution. Furthermore, 
single-item measures may be effective for straightforward constructs (e.g. sleep quality), but

80 
 
as noted by Elo et al. (2003), may not fully capture more complex, multidimensional constructs 
such as stress.  
     Lastly, we did not measure responsiveness to change for MisoQuest, which refers to ability  
to detect changes over time in the construct (Mokkink et al., 2018). Therefore, further research 
is needed to measure changes in MisoQuest scores before and after any intervention.  
Conclusions  
    The English MisoQuest is a reliable and valid tool for assessing misophonia in English-
speaking populations for both research and clinical use. High reliability was indicated by 
Cronbach’s α and McDonald’s ω values of 0.93. CFA results showed a multidimensional factor 
structure, and the model demonstrated adequate fit. Test-retest reliability was strong, with an 
ICC of 0.89, factor loadings between 0.62 and 0.76, and item reliability (R²) values from 0.38 
to 0.58. Convergent validity was shown through moderate to strong correlations with related 
measures (AMISOS-R, MIQ), while discriminant validity was supported by weak correlations 
with distinct constructs (TIQ, HHI, sleep, stress, and SAD-T). One limitation is the moderate 
correlation with HIQ, a hyperacusis measure, suggesting a need for future studies to further 
explore the relationship between misophonia and hyperacusis and to refine psychometric tools 
for their differentiation.   
Acknowledgements: This project was part of the first author’s PhD thesis at University of 
Surrey which is funded by the Ministry of National Education of the Republic of Turkey for 
supporting her graduate education. HA was supported by an R&D fund from Hashir 
International Specialist Clinics & Research Institute for Misophonia, Tinnitus and Hyperacusis 
Ltd.  
 Financial disclosures/conflicts of interest:  None declared.

81 
 
REFERENCES 
AAZH, H., ERFANIAN, M., DANESH, A. A. & MOORE, B. C. 2022a. Audiological and 
other factors predicting the presence of misophonia symptoms among a clinical 
population seeking help for tinnitus and/or hyperacusis. Frontiers in neuroscience,  16, 
900065. 
AAZH, H., HAYES, C., ERFANIAN, M., MOORE, B. C. J. & VITORATOU, S. 2024a. 
Confirmatory factor analysis of the Hyperacusis Impact Questionnaire (HIQ), Sound 
Sensitivity Symptoms Questionnaire (SSSQ), and Screening for Anxiety and 
Depression in Tinnitus (SAD-T), including the preliminary analysis of the parent-
versions of the three scales for use in children.  Journal of American Academy of 
Audiology . 
AAZH, H., HAYES, C., MOORE, B. C., DANESH, A. A. & VITORATOU, S. 2022a. 
Psychometric evaluation of the Hyperacusis Impact Questionnaire (HIQ) and Sound 
Sensitivity Symptoms Questionnaire (SSSQ) using a clinical population of adult 
patients with tinnitus alone or combined with hyperacusis. Journal of the American 
Academy of Audiology,  33, 248-258. 
AAZH, H., HAYES, C., MOORE, B. C. J. & VITORATOU, S. 2022b. Psychometric 
evaluation of the tinnitus impact questionnaire using a clinical population of adult 
patients with tinnitus alone or combined with hyperacusis. International Journal of 
Audiology , 1-10. 
AAZH, H., MCFERRAN, D., SALVI, R., PRASHER, D., JASTREBOFF, M. & 
JASTREBOFF, P. 2014. Insights from the First International Conference on 
Hyperacusis: causes, evaluation, diagnosis and treatment. Noise & Health,  16, 123-6. 
AAZH, H., MOORE, B. C., SCAGLIONE, T. & REMMERT, N. 2023. Psychometric 
Evaluation of the Misophonia Impact Questionnaire (MIQ) Using a Clinical

82 
 
Population of Patients Seeking Help for Tinnitus, Hyperacusis and/or Misophonia. 
Journal of the American Academy of Audiology . 
AAZH, H., NAJJARI, A. & MOORE, B. C. J. 2024c. A Preliminary Analysis of the Clinical 
Effectiveness of Audiologist-Delivered Cognitive Behavioral Therapy Delivered via 
Video Calls for Rehabilitation of Misophonia, Hyperacusis, and Tinnitus. Am J 
Audiol, 1-16. 
ARIAS, V. B., GARRIDO, L., JENARO, C., MARTÍNEZ-MOLINA, A. & ARIAS, B. 2020. 
A little garbage in, lots of garbage out: Assessing the impact of careless responding in 
personality survey data. Behavior Research Methods,  52, 2489-2505. 
BLAND, J. M. & ALTMAN, D. G. 1986. Statistical methods for assessing agreement 
between two methods of clinical measurement. Lancet, 1, 307-10. 
CASSARLY, C., MATTHEWS, L. J., SIMPSON, A. N. & DUBNO, J. R. 2020. The revised 
hearing handicap inventory and screening tool based on psychometric reevaluation of 
the hearing handicap inventories for the elderly and adults. Ear and hearing,  41, 95. 
CHANDLER, J., SISSO, I. & SHAPIRO, D. 2020. Participant carelessness and fraud: 
Consequences for clinical research and potential solutions. Journal of Abnormal 
Psychology,  129, 49. 
COHEN, J. 1992. Statistical power analysis. Current directions in psychological science,  1, 
98-101. 
COMREY, A. L. & LEE, H. B. 2013. A first course in factor analysis , Psychology press. 
DIBB, B., GOLDING, S. & DOZIER, T. 2021. The development and validation of the 
Misophonia response scale. Journal of psychosomatic research,  149, 110587. 
DIBB, B. & GOLDING, S. E. 2022. A longitudinal investigation of quality of life and 
negative emotions in misophonia. Frontiers in neuroscience,  16, 900474.

83 
 
DIXON, L. J., SCHADEGG, M. J., CLARK, H. L., SEVIER, C. J. & WITCRAFT, S. M. 
2024. Prevalence, phenomenology, and impact of misophonia in a nationally 
representative sample of US adults. Journal of psychopathology and clinical science . 
EDELSTEIN, M., BRANG, D., ROUW, R. & RAMACHANDRAN, V. S. 2013. 
Misophonia: physiological investigations and case descriptions. Frontiers in Human 
Neuroscience,  7, 296. 
ELO, A. L., LEPPÄNEN, A. & JAHKOLA, A. 2003. Validity of a single-item measure of 
stress symptoms. Scand J Work Environ Health,  29, 444-51. 
ENZLER, F., LORIOT, C., FOURNIER, P. & NOREÑA, A. J. 2021. A psychoacoustic test 
for misophonia assessment. Scientific Reports,  11, 11044. 
ERFANIAN, M. & AAZH, H. Comparing tinnitus and misophonia patients profiles: 
Audiological characterictics and their impact [Conference presentation].  Misophonia 
Convention 2023 Albuquerque, New Mexio, USA. 
FAPTA, L. G. P. D. P. & MS, M. P. W. D. Foundations of Clinical Research: Applications to 
Practice. 2015. 
FIORETTI, A. B., FUSETTI, M. & EIBENSTEIN, A. 2013. Association between sleep 
disorders, hyperacusis and tinnitus: evaluation with tinnitus questionnaires. Noise and 
Health, 15, 91-95. 
FRANZEN, M. D., TISHELMAN, A. C., SHARP, B. H. & FRIEDMAN, A. G. 1987. An 
investigation of the test-retest reliability of the stroop colorword test across two 
intervals. Archives of clinical neuropsychology,  2, 265-272. 
FRONE, M. R., REIS, D. & OTTENSTEIN, C. 2018. A German version of the Three‐
Dimensional Work Fatigue Inventory (3 D‐WFI): Factor structure, internal 
consistency, and correlates. Stress and Health,  34, 674-680.

84 
 
FRONE, M. R. & TIDWELL, M.-C. O. 2015. The meaning and measurement of work 
fatigue: Development and evaluation of the Three-Dimensional Work Fatigue 
Inventory (3D-WFI). Journal of occupational health psychology,  20, 273. 
HAIR, J. F., LDS GABRIEL, M., SILVA, D. D. & BRAGA, S. 2019. Development and 
validation of attitudes measurement scales: fundamental and practical aspects. RAUSP 
Management Journal,  54, 490-507. 
HALEY, S. M. & FRAGALA-PINKHAM, M. A. 2006. Interpreting change scores of tests 
and measures used in physical therapy. Phys Ther,  86, 735-43. 
HAYES, A. F. & COUTTS, J. J. 2020. Use omega rather than Cronbach’s alpha for 
estimating reliability. But…. Communication Methods and Measures,  14, 1-24. 
JAGER, I., DE KONING, P., BOST, T., DENYS, D. & VULINK, N. 2020. Misophonia: 
Phenomenology, comorbidity and demographics in a large sample. PloS one,  15, 
e0231390. 
JAGER, I. J., VULINK, N. C., BERGFELD, I. O., VAN LOON, A. J. & DENYS, D. A. 
2021. Cognitive behavioral therapy for misophonia: A randomized clinical trial. 
Depression and anxiety,  38, 708-718. 
KROENKE, K., SPITZER, R. L., WILLIAMS, J. B. & LOWE, B. 2009. An ultra-brief 
screening scale for anxiety and depression: the PHQ-4. Psychosomatics,  50, 613-21. 
KULA, F. B., CROPLEY, M. & AAZH, H. 2023. Hyperacusis and Misophonia: a systematic 
review of psychometric measures. Journal of the American Academy of Audiology . 
LEYS, C., LEY, C., KLEIN, O., BERNARD, P. & LICATA, L. 2013. Detecting outliers: Do 
not use standard deviation around the mean, use absolute deviation around the 
median. Journal of experimental social psychology,  49, 764-766.

85 
 
LOVIBOND, P. F. & LOVIBOND, S. H. 1995. The structure of negative emotional states: 
Comparison of the Depression Anxiety Stress Scales (DASS) with the Beck 
Depression and Anxiety Inventories. Behaviour research and therapy,  33, 335-343. 
MCKAY, D., KIM, S.-K., MANCUSI, L., STORCH, E. A. & SPANKOVICH, C. 2018. 
Profile analysis of psychological symptoms associated with misophonia: a community 
sample. Behavior therapy,  49, 286-294. 
MOKKINK, L. B., DE VET, H. C., PRINSEN, C. A., PATRICK, D. L., ALONSO, J., 
BOUTER, L. M. & TERWEE, C. B. 2018. COSMIN risk of bias checklist for 
systematic reviews of patient-reported outcome measures. Quality of Life Research,  
27, 1171-1179. 
NAYLOR, J., CAIMINO, C., SCUTT, P., HOARE, D. J. & BAGULEY, D. M. 2021. The 
prevalence and severity of misophonia in a UK undergraduate medical student 
population and validation of the Amsterdam misophonia scale. Psychiatric Quarterly,  
92, 609-619. 
RAYKOV, T. & MARCOULIDES, G. A. 2011. Introduction to psychometric theory , 
Routledge. 
RAYMOND, K. & BUTLER, B. 2024. Evidence of validity for the English-translated 
MisoQuest. Journal of Hearing Science,  14. 
ROSENTHAL, M. Z., MCMAHON, K., GREENLEAF, A. S., CASSIELLO-ROBBINS, C., 
GUETTA, R., TRUMBULL, J., ANAND, D., FRAZER-ABEL, E. S. & KELLEY, L. 
2022. Phenotyping misophonia: Psychiatric disorders and medical health correlates. 
Frontiers in psychology,  13, 941898. 
ROUW, R. & ERFANIAN, M. 2018. A large‐scale study of misophonia. Journal of clinical 
psychology,  74, 453-479.

86 
 
SCHERMELLEH-ENGEL, K., MOOSBRUGGER, H. & MÜLLER, H. 2003. Evaluating the 
fit of structural equation models: Tests of significance and descriptive goodness-of-fit 
measures. Methods of psychological research online,  8, 23-74. 
SCHRÖDER, A., VULINK, N. & DENYS, D. 2013. Misophonia: diagnostic criteria for a 
new psychiatric disorder. PloS one,  8, e54706. 
SCHUCK, P. & ZWINGMANN, C. 2003. The ‘smallest real difference’ as a measure of 
sensitivity to change: a critical analysis. International Journal of Rehabilitation 
Research,  26, 85-91. 
SIEPSIAK, M., ROSENTHAL, M., RAJ-KOZIAK, D. & DRAGAN, W. 2022. Psychiatric 
and audiologic features of misophonia: Use of a clinical control group with auditory 
over-responsivity. Journal of Psychosomatic Research,  156, 110777. 
SIEPSIAK, M., ŚLIWERSKI, A. & ŁUKASZ DRAGAN, W. 2020a. Development and 
psychometric properties of misoquest—A new self-report questionnaire for 
misophonia. International journal of environmental research and public health,  17, 
1797. 
SIEPSIAK, M., SOBCZAK, A. M., BOHATEREWICZ, B., CICHOCKI, Ł. & DRAGAN, 
W. Ł. 2020. Prevalence of misophonia and correlates of its symptoms among 
inpatients with depression. International journal of environmental research and 
public health,  17, 5464. 
SNYDER, E., CAI, B., DEMURO, C., MORRISON, M. F. & BALL, W. 2018. A New 
Single-Item Sleep Quality Scale: Results of Psychometric Evaluation in Patients With 
Chronic Primary Insomnia and Depression. J Clin Sleep Med,  14, 1849-1857. 
SWEDO, S., BAGULEY, D. M., DENYS, D., DIXON, L. J., ERFANIAN, M., FIORETTI, 
A., JASTREBOFF, P. J., KUMAR, S., ROSENTHAL, M. Z., ROUW, R., 
SCHILLER, D., SIMNER, J., STORCH, E. A., TALYLOR, S., WERFF, K. R. V. &

87 
 
RAVER, S. M. 2021. A Consensus Definition of Misophonia: Using a Delphi Process 
to Reach Expert Agreement. medRxiv, 2021.04.05.21254951. 
TYLER, R. S., PIENKOWSKI, M., RONCANCIO, E. R., JUN, H. J., BROZOSKI, T., 
DAUMAN, N., COELHO, C. B., ANDERSSON, G., KEINER, A. J. & CACACE, A. 
T. 2014. A review of hyperacusis and future directions: part I. Definitions and 
manifestations. American journal of audiology,  23, 402-419. 
VITORATOU, S., HAYES, C., UGLIK-MARUCHA, N., PEARSON, O., GRAHAM, T. & 
GREGORY, J. 2023. Misophonia in the UK: Prevalence and norms from the S-Five 
in a UK representative sample. Plos one, 18, e0282777. 
WU, M. S., LEWIN, A. B., MURPHY, T. K. & STORCH, E. A. 2014. Misophonia: 
incidence, phenomenology, and clinical correlates in an undergraduate student 
sample. Journal of clinical psychology,  70, 994-1007.

88 
 
CHAPTER FOUR 
 
Study 3. The Relationship Between Misophonia and Fatigue: The Role of 
Sleep Quality and Stress as Mediators  
 
4.1 Overview  
    As discussed in Chapter 1, the relationship between misophonia and fatigue has been 
examined in a study by Dibb and Golding (2022) found that individuals with misophonia 
reported lower energy and higher fatigue levels compared to those without misophonia. While 
this study highlighted an association between misophonia and fatigue, it did not account for 
potential mediating factors such as stress, sleep quality, hyperacusis, and anxiety/depression, 
which are known to influence fatigue. Building on this prior work and guided by clinical 
observations from my second supervisor, who noted frequent reports of fatigue among 
misophonia patients, this study sought to address these gaps. 
    This chapter uses the same sample as the previous chapter, where the fatigue measure was 
evaluated as part of the discriminant validity analysis of the MisoQuest. A positive moderate 
correlation between misophonia and fatigue was identified, which prompted further 
investigation. This chapter explores the relationship in depth, focusing on the mediating roles 
of stress and sleep quality. Separating the chapters allows for a clearer and more detailed 
examination of these mediating factors and their potential contributions to the experience of 
fatigue in individuals with misophonia.

89 
 
4.2 Research Paper  
 
The Relationship Between Misophonia and Fatigue: The Role of Sleep 
Quality and Stress as Mediators 
 
Fatma Betul Kula1 & 2, Mark Cropley1, Hashir Aazh2 
  
1Department of Psychology, University of Surrey, Guildford, UK. 
2Hashir International Specialist Clinics & Research Institute for Misophonia, Tinnitus and 
Hyperacusis, London, UK.  
 
*Correspondence 
Corresponding Author: Fatma Betul Kula  
f.kula@surrey.ac.uk   
 
Keywords: Misophonia, Fatigue, Sleep quality, Stress, Hyperacusis, Anxiety, Depression

90 
 
Abstract  
Objective : This study aims to explore whether stress and sleep quality mediate the relationship 
between misophonia, characterised by intense emotional, cognitive and behavioural responses 
to specific sounds, and fatigue.   
Design: A cross-sectional study using correlation, regression and mediation analyses was 
conducted to examine the mediators of fatigue in individuals with misophonia. 
Study Sample:  Data were collected from 451 participants (60.3% women, 37.5% men; M age 
= 34.61, SD = 11.61) via the Qualtrics platform. Participants completed assessments for 
misophonia (MisoQuest), fatigue (3D-WFI), hyperacusis (HIQ), sleep quality (SQS), stress, 
and anxiety/depression (SAD-T). 
Results: Correlation analysis showed a positive relationship between misophonia severity and 
fatigue (r = 0.32, p < 0.01). Further, multiple regression analysis indicated that misophonia, 
sleep quality, and stress were significant predictors of fatigue, while hyperacusis, anxiety, and 
depression were not. Mediation analysis also revealed that stress and sleep quality partially 
mediated the relationship between misophonia and fatigue ( p < 0.01 for both). 
Conclusions:  The severity of misophonia is correlated with fatigue, with stress and sleep 
quality identified as partial mediators. These findings suggest that addressing stress and 
improving sleep may reduce fatigue in those with misophonia. Future studies should explore 
interventions targeting these mediating factors.

91 
 
1. Introduction      
      Fatigue is a complex and subjective sensation characterized by persistent feeling of 
exhaustion, lack of energy, or weakness that can occur during or after usual activities (Cornuz 
et al., 2006). Unlike tiredness, which is a common and short-lived experience that often 
disappears after rest, fatigue is not relieved by rest and can significantly impact physical, 
cognitive, and emotional functioning, making it difficult to perform daily tasks (Galland-
Decker et al., 2019, Dittner et al., 2004, Ream and Richardson, 1996). Due to its chronic nature 
and significant impact on well-being, fatigue is an important concern in clinical practice and 
research. 
     Misophonia is a condition where individuals are abnormally sensitive to stimuli or specific 
types of sounds, known as triggers, such as chewing, breathing, or tapping (Swedo et al., 2022). 
These sounds can provoke intense emotional and behavioural reactions, including anger, 
anxiety and a strong desire to escape from these trigger sounds (Schröder et al., 2013). A 
longitudinal study by Dibb and Golding (2022) investigated the relationship between 
misophonia as measured using the Misophonia Response Scale (MRS) (Dibb et al., 2021) and 
fatigue as measured via the quality-of-life domain of the SF-36 (Framework, 1992). The study 
reported that individuals with self-reported misophonia (n=491) had significantly lower scores 
in the energy/fatigue domain of the SF-36 compared to those without misophonia (n=503), and 
this relationship remained consistent over time. However, their study did not account for 
possible confounding factors such as hyperacusis, stress, sleep, and anxiety/depression, which 
could have influenced the observed relationship between misophonia and fatigue.   
     Hyperacusis often overlaps with misophonia, complicating the experiences of those affected 
(Danesh and Aazh, 2020). Individuals with hyperacusis may find normal environmental sounds 
unbearably loud or even painful, significantly impacting their quality of life (Aazh et al., 2018). 
The relationship between misophonia and hyperacusis is complex and not fully understood,

92 
 
though some research suggests a significant overlap (Jager et al., 2020). For instance, Aazh et 
al. (2022a) found that 23% of the 257 tinnitus and/ or hyperacusis patients reported misophonia 
symptoms. Furthermore, the likelihood of experiencing misophonia increased with the severity 
of hyperacusis. Brennan et al. (2024) revealed significant strong correlations between 
misophonia, as measured by the Misophonia Questionnaire (Wu et al., 2014), and hyperacusis, 
as measured by the Hyperacusis Questionnaire (Khalfa et al., 2002), among undergraduate and 
graduate students. Fatigue is a common symptom reported by patients with hyperacusis and 
items related to fatigue are included to most hyperacusis questionnaires (Greenberg and Carlos, 
2018, Aazh et al., 2024a). Paulin et al. (2016) found that hyperacusis is comorbid with 
conditions such as exhaustion and chronic fatigue syndrome, suggesting that hyperacusis may 
contribute to both physical and mental exhaustion in those affected. Given the relationship 
between hyperacusis and misophonia, the connection between misophonia and fatigue reported 
by Dibb and Golding (2022) could have been influenced by hyperacusis. Since they did not 
assess hyperacusis, it remains unclear whether hyperacusis might have confounded their 
results.  
       Although studies assessing sleep disturbances among patients with misophonia are limited, 
poor sleep quality is a well-established contributor to fatigue (Lavidor et al., 2003). Some case 
studies suggest that people with misophonia often experience insomnia or poor sleep quality 
(Gowda and Avidan, 2023), but the specific relationship between sleep disturbances and 
misophonia, particularly whether these disturbances contribute to experience of fatigue in this 
population, has not been examined.  
     Stress can also play a key role in the relationship between misophonia and fatigue, as stress 
is a known contributor to both emotional distress and fatigue (Kop and Kupper, 2016).  People 
with misophonia often experience high levels of stress when exposed to trigger sounds, which 
increases their emotional and physical reactions (Rouw and Erfanian, 2018). Recent research

93 
 
shows that perceived stress is a strong predictor of misophonia severity, especially when 
associated with hyperarousal (Guetta et al., 2024). The stress and increased arousal may worsen 
the experience of fatigue (Kocalevent et al., 2011). In addition, stress can lead to the 
development or exacerbation of hyperacusis leading to further experience of exhaustion and 
fatigue (Hasson et al., 2013). Therefore, it is important to explore if stress impacts the 
relationship between misophonia and fatigue.  
     Research shows that anxiety and depression frequently co-occur with misophonia and are 
known to be associated with the experience of fatigue (Wu et al., 2014, Guetta et al., 2022, 
Roy-Byrne et al., 2002). However, whether anxiety and depression contribute to the observed 
relationship between misophonia, and fatigue reported by Dibb and Golding (2022) has not 
been explored.  
     To sum up, there is a need to explore whether stress, hyperacusis, sleep quality, anxiety and 
depression influence the relationship between misophonia and fatigue. The aims of this study 
were: (1) to examine the relationship between misophonia and fatigue; and (2) to assess 
whether this relationship remains significant when accounting for other factors, such as stress, 
sleep disturbances, hyperacusis, and anxiety depression.  
 
2.  Materials and Methods  
2.1. Participants  
     A total of 451 participants were recruited through academic institutions, social media 
platforms (Instagram, LinkedIn and X), and subscribers of Hashir International Institute in the 
UK. Additionally, the study link was shared in Facebook Support Groups and via email lists of 
nonprofit misophonia and hyperacusis organizations. To verify the adequacy of the sample 
size, the G* Power 3.1 software (G*Power, Düsseldorf, Germany) was used to calculate the 
minimum required participants. The calculation, based on a significance level of 0.05, a

94 
 
medium effect size of 0.15, and a statistical power of 0.95, indicated a need for at least 199 
valid responses (Faul et al., 2007). Ultimately, 451 responses were included in the data analysis, 
confirming that the sample size is more than sufficient for the study.   
     Participants were eligible for inclusion in the study if they were at least 18 years old and 
self-reported having a good understanding of English. Exclusion criteria included significant 
cognitive impairments or severe visual impairments, as communicated in the study invitation 
and information sheet. 
2.2. Ethical Considerations  
     The study received approval from the University of Surrey Research Integrity and 
Governance Office and was conducted in accordance with the principles of the Declaration of 
Helsinki. All participants received detailed information about the study's purpose and 
procedures, and online informed consent was obtained before they completed the 
questionnaire. Only those who explicitly agreed to participate were given the questionnaire. 
Participation in the study was entirely voluntary, and the data collected were used solely for 
research purposes. Participants were free to withdraw from the survey at any point. Completing 
the questionnaire took approximately 20 minutes. 
2.3. Procedure  
     This present study was conducted using the Qualtrics platform (Qualtrics, Provo, USA, 
https://www.qualtrics.com ). Once consent was obtained, participants shared demographic 
information, such as age, gender, education level, ethnicity, religion, and employment status. 
Following this, they completed a set of assessments, including MisoQuest, a Fatigue 
Questionnaire (3D-WFI), a Hyperacusis Impact Questionnaire (HIQ), Mental Health (SAD-T), 
one item assessing sleep quality and a stress measure. For a comprehensive understanding of 
these measures, please refer to Section 2.4.  
2.4. Measurements

95 
 
     Misophonia was assessed through the 14-item MisoQuest questionnaire (Siepsiak et al., 
2020a). Each item is rated on a scale from 1 (“strongly disagree”) to 5 (“strongly agree”) with 
the total score ranging from 0 to 70. The MisoQuest was developed and validated in Polish by 
Siepsiak et al. (2020a). It has been found to have good validity and reliability among English 
speakers by Kula et al. (2024).  
     Three-dimensional fatigue inventory [3D-WFI; Frone and Tidwell (2015)] was used to 
assess the participant`s level of fatigue. The 3D-WFI consists of 3 dimensions with 18 items 
that assess people's responses to emotional, mental, and physical fatigue aspects of their daily 
living. A 5-point Likert scale is used to assess each of the items with options ranging from 1 
(every day) to 5 (never). The possible total scores range from 18 to 90. The 3D-WFI has good 
internal consistency (Cronbach`s alpha coefficient was 0.94 for physical fatigue, .95 for mental 
fatigue, and .96 for emotional fatigue (Frone and Tidwell, 2015)).   
     Hyperacusis was assessed through the Hyperacusis Impact Questionnaire [HIQ; (Aazh et 
al., 2024a)] which consists of eight 4-point self-reported items designed to assess the impact 
of hyperacusis on individuals. Each item involves assigning a score of 0, 1, 2, or 3 based on 
response categories indicating 0 to 1 day, 2 to 6 days, 7 to 10 days, and 11 to 14 days, 
respectively. The cumulative score ranges from 0 to 24, with scores of twelve or more 
indicating a clinically significant impact of hyperacusis. The validity and reliability of the HIQ 
have been demonstrated in preceding studies (Aazh et al., 2024a).  
     Sleep quality was assessed by the one-item Sleep Quality Scale (Snyder et al., 2018a) for 
sleep where 0 indicated terrible sleep and 10 indicated excellent sleep quality. In terms of stress, 
a single-item measure of stress symptoms (Elo et al., 2003) was used to measure stress 
experience. The scores range from 1 to 5, where higher scores connect with increased levels of 
stress. Single-item measures are often used in the research for their simplicity and validity 
(Allen et al., 2022).

96 
 
    The Screening for Anxiety & Depression in Tinnitus/ Sound Intolerance [SAD-T; (Aazh et 
al., 2023)] is used to assess an individual`s mental health according to four items. Specifically, 
two questions focus on anxiety and the remaining two address experiences related to 
depression. Each item is evaluated on a 4-point scale ranging from 0 to 3. The number of item`s 
responses is summed to indicate the severity of anxiety and depression with scores of 4 or more 
indicating symptoms associated with anxiety and/or depression.     
2.5. Data Analysis 
    The data were anonymised before statistical analysis. All data analyses were conducted using 
IBM SPSS software, version 28.0. Descriptive statistics, means, SDs, 95% confidence analyses 
(CIs) and score range for all questionnaires were reported. For the statistical significance, the 
p-value was defined as p <0.05.  
     Assumptions for Statistical Tests: Before conducting analyses, assumptions for normality, 
homoscedasticity, and multicollinearity were checked. Normality was assessed using the 
Shapiro-Wilk test, and multicollinearity was evaluated through variance inflation factors (VIF). 
No significant violations were found. 
    The following analyses were conducted to explore the link between misophonia and fatigue, 
hyperacusis, sleep, stress, and mental health.   
1. Pearson correlation analysis:  This was used to examine the bivariate correlations 
between misophonia symptoms and fatigue, hyperacusis, sleep, stress, mental health, 
age and gender. Following Cohen (1992a), effect sizes were interpreted as follows: 
values around 0.10 indicating a small effect, around 0.30 indicating a moderate effect, 
and around 0.50 indicating a strong effect. While correlations help identify the strength 
and direction of relationships between variables, they do not provide the predictive 
power of these relationships or account for potential confounding variables (Dowdy et 
al., 2011). To address these limitations and explore whether certain factors can predict

97 
 
fatigue while controlling for other variables, a regression analysis was conducted as the 
next step. 
2. Multiple Linear Regression:  An enter method multiple-linear regression model 
(Tranmer and Elliot, 2008) was developed to predict fatigue with all variables, namely 
MisoQuest, HIQ, one-item sleep and stress measures and SAD-T. This model was 
adjusted for age and gender.  
3. Mediation analysis : This analysis was performed by using PROCESS function V4.2 
in SPSS V.28. The model 4 (model as a parameter in the PROCESS function) was used 
applying the 5000 bootstrapping method (Hayes, 2017). An effect was considered 
statistically significant if the bootstrap confidence interval did not include "0" (Preacher 
and Hayes, 2008). Fatigue total scores (3D-WFI) were entered as the dependent 
variable, while MisoQuest score was the independent variable. Stress and sleep total 
scores were included as the mediators with age and gender entered as covariates. 
Hyperacusis (HIQ) and anxiety/depression (SAD-T) were not included as mediators 
because the multiple linear regression analysis showed no significant relationship 
between these variables and fatigue. Additionally, stress and sleep were prioritized in 
the mediation model, as they are theoretically more relevant in explaining how 
misophonia relates to fatigue.      
3. Results 
3.1. General Characteristics of Subjects 
       The study sample primarily consisted of women (60.3%), followed by men (37.5%) and a 
small percentage identifying as non-binary (2.0%) or preferring not to disclose their gender 
(0.2%). Most participants identified as heterosexual (84.9%), with smaller groups identifying 
as bisexual (8.4%), homosexual (2.7%), or other sexual orientations (2.0%). In terms of 
education, the majority had at least a bachelor’s degree (36.6%), with a significant portion

98 
 
holding a master’s degree (25.7%) or higher. Ethnically, the largest group was White British 
(48.8%), with notable representations from White Other (20.8%). Over half of the participants 
were married or living with a partner (53.9%), while 26.8% were single. The majority were 
employed full-time (52.1%), and the average age of the participants was 34.61 years (SD = 
11.61).   
3.2. Misophonia, Hyperacusis, Sleep Quality, Stress and Mental Health  
Table 1. Means and Standard deviations of total scores on the Misophonia questionnaire 
(MisoQuest), Screening for anxiety and depression (SAD-T), Hyperacusis Impact 
Questionnaire (HIQ), Tinnitus Impact Questionnaire (TIQ), a single item sleep quality scale. 
A single-item measure of stress measure, Fatigue questionnaire (3D-WFI) among the 
participants  
Questionnaire N M         SD Possible Range 
MisoQuest 451 48.90  12.30 0-70 
SAD-T (Mental health) 451 4.85  3.38 0-12 
HIQ (Hyperacusis) 451 9.60  6.12 0-24 
Sleep quality scale 451 5.45  2.10 0-10 
Measure of stress symptoms  451 3.60 1.09 1-5 
3D-WFI (Fatigue) 451 66.26  15.27 18-90 
Note. The number of patients was indicated by N.  
 
       Table 1  shows the means and SDs of the total score of the self-report questionnaires 
completed by the study participants. Based on the score on MisoQuest, 21.7% of participants 
(98 out of 451) were classified as having misophonia. Based on the score on HIQ, 35.5% of 
participants (160 out of 451) were classified as being clinically impacted by hyperacusis. Based 
on the self-reported sleep quality, 0.4% of participants reported terrible sleep, 18% reported

99 
 
poor sleep, 45.9% reported fair sleep, 34.1% reported good sleep, and 1.6% reported excellent 
sleep quality. Furthermore, based on the score on the SAD-T, 61% of participants (275 out of 
451) exhibited possible symptoms of anxiety and/or depression. 
3.3 Correlation Between Variables  
Table 2. The correlation matrix presents the relationships between misophonia (as measured 
by the MisoQuest), hyperacusis (as measured by the Hyperacusis Impact Questionnaire, HIQ), 
anxiety/depression (as measured by the Screening for Anxiety and Depression in Tinnitus, 
SAD-T), fatigue (as measured by the 3D Fatigue Inventory, 3D-WFI), sleep quality (as 
measured by a one-item sleep measure), and stress (as measured by a one-item stress measure) 
 Misop
honia Hypera
cusis Anxiety-
depression Fatigue Sleep 
Quality Stress Age Gender 
Misophonia 1.00 .34** .23** .32** -.14** .25** .03 -.08 
Hyperacusis  .34** 1.00 .59** .19** -.13** .25** -.05 -.01 
Anxiety-
depression .23** .59** 1.00 .21** -.20** .37** -.13**  .01 
Fatigue .32** .19** .21** 1.00 -.43** .37** -.01 -.08 
Sleep 
Quality -.14** -.13** -.20** -.43** 1.00 -.41**  -.08 .09 
Stress .25** .25** .37** .37** -.41** 1.00 -.09* -.08 
Age .03 -0.05 -.13** -.01 -.08 -.09* 1.00 -.10* 
Gender -.08 -.01 .01 -.08 .09 -.08 -.10* 1.00 
Note. p < .05, p < .01. Correlations are significant at the .01 level (2-tailed) and .05 level (2-
tailed). N= 451

100 
 
   In Table 2, the correlation analysis revealed several key relationships. Fatigue showed a 
stronger positive association with misophonia compared to hyperacusis. On the other hand, 
hyperacusis demonstrated a stronger relationship with anxiety and depression than misophonia. 
Both misophonia and hyperacusis were negatively associated with sleep quality, indicating that 
more severe symptoms were linked to poorer sleep. Additionally, stress was positively 
associated with both misophonia and hyperacusis and showed a negative relationship with 
sleep quality. Fatigue was also negatively associated with sleep quality, indicating that higher 
levels of fatigue were linked to poorer sleep, and positively associated with stress. These 
findings show the relationship between misophonia severity and various factors such as fatigue, 
hyperacusis, mental health, sleep quality, and stress.  
3.4. Regression Analysis  
Table 3: The multiple regression results predicting fatigue, which was measured using the 3D 
Fatigue Inventory (3D-WFI). Misophonia was assessed via the MisoQuest, hyperacusis via the 
Hyperacusis Impact Questionnaire (HIQ), anxiety and depression via the Screening for Anxiety 
and Depression in Tinnitus (SAD-T), sleep quality via a one-item sleep measure, and stress via 
a one-item stress measure. 
Predictor B SE (B) β t p 
Misophonia 0.273 0.054 .221 5.019 < .001 
Hyperacusis 0.048 0.129 .019 0.374 .708 
Anxiety-depression 0.090 0.237 .020 0.380 .704 
Sleep Quality -2.394 0.325 -.331 -7.357 < .001 
Stress 2.258 0.669 .162 3.377 < .001 
Age 0.042 0.049 .035 0.847 .398 
Gender -0.531 1.147 -.019 -0.463 .643 
Note. R2= .284, Adjusted R2= .272, F (7,439) = 24.817, p < .001. (N=451)

101 
 
    The multiple regression analysis was conducted to examine the predictors of fatigue, with 
the results summarised in Table 3. The overall model was significant, F (7,439) = 24.817, p < 
.001, accounting for approximately 28.4% of the variance in the fatigue scores ( R2= .284, 
Adjusted R2= .272). Misophonia severity, sleep quality, and stress emerged as significant 
predictors of fatigue. Higher misophonia severity and stress levels were associated with 
increased fatigue, while better sleep quality predicted lower fatigue. In contrast, within the 
model, hyperacusis severity, anxiety/depression, age, and gender were not significant 
predictors, indicating these factors do not have a strong independent effect on fatigue.  
3.5. Mediation Analysis  
 In this parallel mediation model (as shown in Figure 1):  
 Path 1 (misophonia → fatigue):  The direct effect of misophonia on fatigue is 
represented by c’ = 0.28, p < 0.01. This indicates that after accounting for the mediators 
(stress and sleep), misophonia still has a significant direct impact on fatigue. 
 Path 2 (misophonia → stress → fatigue):  The indirect effect through stress was 
statistically significant, with a path coefficient of a1 = -0.02, p < 0.01 and b 1 = -2.40, p 
< 0.01. The indirect effect, calculated as a1 x b1 = 0.048, shows that  stress negatively 
mediates the relationship between misophonia and fatigue. 
 Path 3 (misophonia → sleep → fatigue):  The indirect effect through sleep was also 
statistically significant, with a path coefficient of a2 = 0.02, p < 0.01 and b 2 = 2.39, p 
< 0.01. The indirect effect  through sleep is  a2 x b2 = 0. 0478, indicating  that sleep quality 
positively mediates the relationship between misophonia and fatigue. 
     The total effect  of misophonia on fatigue (before accounting for the mediators) was c = 
0.38, p < 0.01. The fact that the direct effect remains significant even after including the 
mediators suggests that, while stress and sleep quality explain some of the variance, a 
substantial portion of the influence of misophonia on fatigue is direct and not accounted for by

102 
 
these mediators. Moreover, it is important to note that while sleep and stress partially mediate 
the relationship between fatigue and misophonia, their indirect effects (0.048 and 0.0478, 
respectively) are relatively weak compared to the direct effect. Therefore, misophonia appears 
to have a more direct contribution to fatigue compared to the mediated influence of sleep and 
stress.

103 
 
4. Discussion 
     This study investigated the relationship between misophonia and fatigue, considering the 
mediating effects of stress and sleep quality. The results indicate that misophonia is a strongly 
associated with fatigue, even when the effects of hyperacusis, anxiety, depression, sleep 
quality, and stress are taken into consideration. Although sleep quality and stress were found 
to partially mediate this relationship, misophonia continued to exhibit a strong and significant 
direct effect on fatigue.  
     Dibb and Golding (2022) similarly found that people with misophonia experience higher 
levels of fatigue. Our study extends these findings by showing that the link between misophonia 
and fatigue remains strong even after accounting for other factors like stress, sleep problems, 
and mental health conditions such as anxiety and depression.  
     Our results showed a positive, moderate relationship between misophonia as measured by 
MisoQuest (Kula et al., 2024) and hyperacusis, as measured by HIQ (Aazh et al., 2024a). This 
finding is consistent with previous studies, such as Jager et al. (2020) and Brennan et al. (2024), 
which also reported an association between these two conditions.  
      We found a positive moderate correlation between anxiety and depression symptoms in 
individuals with misophonia, which aligns with previous research (Wu et al., 2014, Aazh et al., 
2023, Siepsiak et al., 2020b). However, Quek et al. (2018) did not find a significant correlation 
between depression and misophonia in a sample of psychiatric patients, suggesting that the 
relationship may vary depending on the sample or methodology used. Interestingly, we 
observed a stronger correlation between hyperacusis (measured via the HIQ) and symptoms of 
anxiety/depression (as measured by SAD-T) compared to the correlation between misophonia 
(measured via MisoQuest) and these mental health symptoms. To our knowledge, no previous 
studies have directly compared the strength of these relationships. Additionally, a longitudinal 
study by Dibb and Golding (2022) found anger and disgust were the primary predictors of

104 
 
misophonic responses, while anxiety and depression were not significantly associated with 
misophonia over time. This supports our observation that hyperacusis may provoke greater 
anxiety and depression, whereas misophonia may be more strongly linked with emotions such 
as anger and disgust. These findings point to the need for further research to understand the  
complex relationship between misophonia, hyperacusis and mental health conditions.         
      The findings of this study have significant implications for clinical practice, particularly 
for healthcare providers working with patients who have misophonia. Given the strong 
association between misophonia and fatigue, it is crucial that clinicians assess not only the 
symptoms of misophonia but also related factors such as fatigue, sleep quality, and stress levels. 
Interventions that address these issues could be particularly beneficial. Future research should 
explore whether improving stress and sleep quality can reduce the experience of fatigue and 
symptoms of misophonia.     
     Research has demonstrated that Cognitive-behavioural therapy (CBT) is effective in 
reducing the effect of misophonia symptoms (Jager et al., 2021, Gregory and Foster, 2023, 
Aazh et al., 2024c). Including strategies to address sleep disturbances and stress within CBT 
could further enhance its effectiveness in improving fatigue associated with misophonia. By 
integrating these evidence-based treatments, clinicians can more comprehensively address both 
the direct and indirect contributors to fatigue in individuals with misophonia and improve 
patients’ overall quality of life. 
     In the regression analysis, which controls for other predictor variables within the model, age 
did not have an independent effect on fatigue. This contrasts with previous studies that 
generally suggest fatigue increases with age due to factors such as reduced physical function 
and chronic health issues. Research has shown that older adults often report higher fatigue 
levels related to mobility limitations and physical impairment (Matsumoto et al., 2024, Murphy 
and Niemiec, 2014). Other studies highlight that sleep disturbances, which become more

105 
 
common with age, contribute to higher fatigue levels in older populations (Åkerstedt et al., 
2018). The difference in our findings could be due to sample characteristics or indicate other 
lifestyle factors.  
4.2. Limitations and Future Directions  
     Although this study found some novel findings regarding the association between 
misophonia and fatigue, some caveats need to be considered. The cross-sectional design, which 
captures data at a single point in time, does not allow us to determine cause and effect. Future 
research should use longitudinal studies to better understand how misophonia, fatigue, sleep 
quality, and stress influence each other over time. Additionally, our sample was mostly female 
and from the UK, which may limit the generalizability of the findings to other populations. 
Future studies should include more diverse groups.  
     The generalizability of our findings may also be limited because the study did not focus on 
individuals with more severe misophonia symptoms or those with comorbid mental health 
conditions such as clinically diagnosed severe anxiety or depression. Future research should 
examine these subgroups to determine if the observed relationships remain consistent across 
different clinical populations.  
     4.5 Conclusion  
     This study demonstrated a relationship between misophonia and fatigue, with both factors 
influencing each other. The relationship was partially mediated by sleep quality and stress. 
While misophonia was moderately correlated with anxiety and depression, hyperacusis showed 
a strong correlation with these mental health factors, suggesting that hyperacusis may have a 
more direct link to anxiety and depression compared to misophonia. Despite demonstrating 
mediation, the direct link between misophonia and fatigue remained strong in both analyses.   
    Healthcare providers should consider these factors when supporting patients with 
misophonia, focusing on interventions that help manage not only the symptoms of misophonia

106 
 
but also related issues such as poor sleep, high stress, hyperacusis and anxiety, and depression. 
Future research is needed to explore additional factors that may contribute to fatigue in 
individuals with misophonia and to develop better targeted management strategies.    
Data Availability Statement 
The datasets generated for this study are available on request to the corresponding author. 
Conflict of Interest 
The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or 
financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest. 
Author Contributions 
FBK: Conceptualization, Methodology, Data collection and analysis, Writing – original draft, 
Review & editing. MC and HA: Conceptualization, Supervision, Review & editing. All authors 
contributed significantly to the work and approved the final manuscript for publication. 
Acknowledgements: This project was part of the first author’s PhD thesis at University of 
Surrey which is funded by the Ministry of National Education of the Republic of Turkey for 
supporting her graduate education. HA was supported by an R&D fund from Hashir 
International Specialist Clinics & Research Institute for Misophonia, Tinnitus and Hyperacusis 
Ltd.

107 
 
References 
 
AAZH, H., ERFANIAN, M., DANESH, A. A. & MOORE, B. C. 2022. Audiological and 
other factors predicting the presence of misophonia symptoms among a clinical 
population seeking help for tinnitus and/or hyperacusis. Frontiers in neuroscience,  16, 
900065. 
AAZH, H., HAYES, C., ERFANIAN, M., MOORE, B. C. & VITORATOU, S. 2024a. 
Confirmatory factor analysis of the Hyperacusis Impact Questionnaire, Sound 
Sensitivity Symptoms Questionnaire, and Screening for Anxiety and Depression in 
Tinnitus, including preliminary analyses of the parent versions for use with children. 
Journal of the American Academy of Audiology , 33(05), 248-258. 
AAZH, H., KNIPPER, M., DANESH, A. A., CAVANNA, A. E., ANDERSSON, L., 
PAULIN, J., SCHECKLMANN, M., HEINONEN-GUZEJEV, M. & MOORE, B. C. 
2018. Insights from the third international conference on hyperacusis: causes, 
evaluation, diagnosis, and treatment. Noise and Health,  20, 162-170. 
AAZH, H., MOORE, B. C., SCAGLIONE, T. & REMMERT, N. 2023. Psychometric 
Evaluation of the Misophonia Impact Questionnaire (MIQ) Using a Clinical 
Population of Patients Seeking Help for Tinnitus, Hyperacusis and/or Misophonia. 
Journal of the American Academy of Audiology . 
AAZH, H., NAJJARI, A. & MOORE, B. C. J. 2024c. A Preliminary Analysis of the Clinical 
Effectiveness of Audiologist-Delivered Cognitive Behavioral Therapy Delivered via 
Video Calls for Rehabilitation of Misophonia, Hyperacusis, and Tinnitus. Am J 
Audiol, 33, 559-574. 
ÅKERSTEDT, T., DISCACCIATI, A., MILEY-ÅKERSTEDT, A. & WESTERLUND, H. 
2018. Aging and the change in fatigue and sleep–a longitudinal study across 8 years 
in three age groups. Frontiers in psychology,  9, 234.

108 
 
ALLEN, M. S., ILIESCU, D. & GREIFF, S. 2022. Single item measures in psychological 
science. Hogrefe Publishing. 
BRENNAN, C. R., LINDBERG, R. R., KIM, G., CASTRO, A. A., KHAN, R. A., 
BERENBAUM, H. & HUSAIN, F. T. 2024. Misophonia and Hearing Comorbidities 
in a Collegiate Population. Ear Hear,  45, 390-399. 
COHEN, J. 1992. Quantitative methods in psychology: A power primer. Psychol. Bull.,  112, 
1155-1159. 
CORNUZ, J., GUESSOUS, I. & FAVRAT, B. 2006. Fatigue: a practical approach to 
diagnosis in primary care. Cmaj, 174, 765-767. 
DANESH, A. & AAZH, H. 2020. Misophonia: a neurologic, psychologic, and audiologic 
complex. The Hearing Journal,  73, 20-22. 
DIBB, B., GOLDING, S. & DOZIER, T. 2021. The development and validation of the 
Misophonia response scale. Journal of psychosomatic research,  149, 110587. 
DIBB, B. & GOLDING, S. E. 2022. A longitudinal investigation of quality of life and 
negative emotions in misophonia. Frontiers in neuroscience,  16, 900474. 
DITTNER, A. J., WESSELY, S. C. & BROWN, R. G. 2004. The assessment of fatigue: a 
practical guide for clinicians and researchers. Journal of psychosomatic research,  56, 
157-170. 
DOWDY, S., WEARDEN, S. & CHILKO, D. 2011. Statistics for research , John Wiley & 
Sons. 
ELO, A.-L., LEPPÄNEN, A. & JAHKOLA, A. 2003. Validity of a single-item measure of 
stress symptoms. Scandinavian journal of work, environment & health , 444-451. 
FAUL, F., ERDFELDER, E., LANG, A.-G. & BUCHNER, A. 2007. G* Power 3: A flexible 
statistical power analysis program for the social, behavioral, and biomedical sciences. 
Behavior research methods,  39, 175-191.

109 
 
FRAMEWORK, I. C. 1992. The MOS 36-item short-form health survey (SF-36). Med Care,  
30, 473-83. 
FRONE, M. R. & TIDWELL, M.-C. O. 2015. The meaning and measurement of work 
fatigue: Development and evaluation of the Three-Dimensional Work Fatigue 
Inventory (3D-WFI). Journal of occupational health psychology,  20, 273. 
GALLAND-DECKER, C., MARQUES-VIDAL, P. & VOLLENWEIDER, P. 2019. 
Prevalence and factors associated with fatigue in the Lausanne middle-aged 
population: a population-based, cross-sectional survey. BMJ open,  9, e027070. 
GOWDA, N. & AVIDAN, A. 2023. 0996 A New Insomnia Phenotype: Coronasomnia 
Misophonia Syndrome. Sleep, 46, A439-A439. 
GREENBERG, B. & CARLOS, M. 2018. Psychometric Properties and Factor Structure of a 
New Scale to Measure Hyperacusis: Introducing the Inventory of Hyperacusis 
Symptoms. Ear Hear,  39, 1025-1034. 
GREGORY, J. & FOSTER, C. 2023. Session-by-session change in misophonia: a descriptive 
case study using intensive CBT. The Cognitive Behaviour Therapist,  16, e18. 
GUETTA, R. E., CASSIELLO-ROBBINS, C., TRUMBULL, J., ANAND, D. & 
ROSENTHAL, M. Z. 2022. Examining emotional functioning in misophonia: The 
role of affective instability and difficulties with emotion regulation. PLoS One,  17, 
e0263230. 
GUETTA, R. E., SIEPSIAK, M., SHAN, Y., FRAZER-ABEL, E. & ROSENTHAL, M. Z. 
2024. Misophonia is related to stress but not directly with traumatic stress. Plos one, 
19, e0296218. 
HASSON, D., THEORELL, T., BERGQUIST, J. & CANLON, B. 2013. Acute stress induces 
hyperacusis in women with high levels of emotional exhaustion. PLoS One,  8, 
e52945.

110 
 
HAYES, A. F. 2017. Introduction to mediation, moderation, and conditional process 
analysis: A regression-based approach , Guilford publications. 
JAGER, I., DE KONING, P., BOST, T., DENYS, D. & VULINK, N. 2020. Misophonia: 
Phenomenology, comorbidity and demographics in a large sample. PloS one,  15, 
e0231390. 
JAGER, I. J., VULINK, N. C., BERGFELD, I. O., VAN LOON, A. J. & DENYS, D. A. 
2021. Cognitive behavioral therapy for misophonia: A randomized clinical trial. 
Depression and anxiety,  38, 708-718. 
KHALFA, S., DUBAL, S., VEUILLET, E., PEREZ-DIAZ, F., JOUVENT, R. & COLLET, 
L. 2002. Psychometric normalization of a hyperacusis questionnaire. Orl, 64, 436-
442. 
KOCALEVENT, R. D., HINZ, A., BRÄHLER, E. & KLAPP, B. F. 2011. Determinants of 
fatigue and stress. BMC research notes,  4, 1-5. 
KOP, W. & KUPPER, H. 2016. Fatigue and stress. Stress: Concepts, cognition, emotion, and 
behavior.  Elsevier. 
KULA, F. B., CROPLEY, M. & AAZH, H. 2024. Evaluating the Validity and Reliability of 
the English Version of the MisoQuest (a Misophonia Questionnaire) and Its 
Relationships with Measures of Hyperacusis, Tinnitus, Hearing Impairment, Sleep, 
Fatigue and Mental Health. International Journal of Audiology . 
LAVIDOR, M., WELLER, A. & BABKOFF, H. 2003. How sleep is related to fatigue. 
British journal of health psychology,  8, 95-105. 
MATSUMOTO, D., RAFFIN, J., LU, W.-H., GUYONNET, S., PILLARD, F., ROLLAND, 
Y., VELLAS, B. & DE SOUTO BARRETO, P. 2024. Self-Reported Fatigue and Its 
Cross-Sectional Associations with Physical Function throughout Adulthood: The 
INSPIRE-T Cohort. The Journal of Frailty & Aging , 1-8.

111 
 
MURPHY, S. & NIEMIEC, S. S. 2014. Aging, fatigue, and fatigability: implications for 
occupational and physical therapists. Current Geriatrics Reports,  3, 135-141. 
PAULIN, J., ANDERSSON, L. & NORDIN, S. 2016. Characteristics of hyperacusis in the 
general population. Noise Health,  18, 178-84. 
PREACHER, K. J. & HAYES, A. F. 2008. Asymptotic and resampling strategies for 
assessing and comparing indirect effects in multiple mediator models. Behav Res 
Methods, 40, 879-91. 
QUEK, T. C., HO, C. S., CHOO, C. C., NGUYEN, L. H., TRAN, B. X. & HO, R. C. 2018. 
Misophonia in Singaporean psychiatric patients: a cross-sectional study. International 
journal of environmental research and public health,  15, 1410. 
REAM, E. & RICHARDSON, A. 1996. Fatigue: a concept analysis. Int J Nurs Stud,  33, 519-
29. 
ROUW, R. & ERFANIAN, M. 2018. A large‐scale study of misophonia. Journal of clinical 
psychology,  74, 453-479. 
ROY-BYRNE, P., AFARI, N., ASHTON, S., FISCHER, M., GOLDBERG, J. & 
BUCHWALD, D. 2002. Chronic fatigue and anxiety/depression: a twin study. The 
British Journal of Psychiatry,  180, 29-34. 
SCHRÖDER, A., VULINK, N. & DENYS, D. 2013. Misophonia: diagnostic criteria for a 
new psychiatric disorder. PloS one,  8, e54706. 
SIEPSIAK, M., ŚLIWERSKI, A. & ŁUKASZ DRAGAN, W. 2020a. Development and 
psychometric properties of misoquest—A new self-report questionnaire for 
misophonia. International journal of environmental research and public health,  17, 
1797. 
SIEPSIAK, M., SOBCZAK, A. M., BOHATEREWICZ, B., CICHOCKI, Ł. & DRAGAN, 
W. Ł. 2020. Prevalence of misophonia and correlates of its symptoms among

112 
 
inpatients with depression. International journal of environmental research and 
public health,  17, 5464. 
SNYDER, E., CAI, B., DEMURO, C., MORRISON, M. F. & BALL, W. 2018. A new 
single-item sleep quality scale: results of psychometric evaluation in patients with 
chronic primary insomnia and depression. Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine,  14, 
1849-1857. 
SWEDO, S. E., BAGULEY, D. M., DENYS, D., DIXON, L. J., ERFANIAN, M., 
FIORETTI, A., JASTREBOFF, P. J., KUMAR, S., ROSENTHAL, M. Z. & ROUW, 
R. 2022. Consensus definition of misophonia: a delphi study. Frontiers in 
Neuroscience,  16, 841816. 
TRANMER, M. & ELLIOT, M. 2008. Multiple linear regression. The Cathie Marsh Centre 
for Census and Survey Research (CCSR),  5, 1-5. 
WU, M. S., LEWIN, A. B., MURPHY, T. K. & STORCH, E. A. 2014. Misophonia: 
incidence, phenomenology, and clinical correlates in an undergraduate student 
sample. Journal of clinical psychology,  70, 994-1007.

113 
 
CHAPTER FIVE  
Study 4: Evaluating the 4C Misophonia and Hyperacusis Management 
Questionnaires: Psychometric Validation in a Clinical Population 
 
5.1 Overview  
     This final empirical chapter builds on the systematic review in Chapter Two, which 
highlighted the need to validate psychometric tools in clinical populations for hyperacusis and 
misophonia. This chapter focuses on the evaluation of the 4C Hyperacusis and Misophonia 
Management Questionnaires, developed by my second supervisor and their team. These 
questionnaires were designed to assess patients' confidence in managing their symptoms 
without relying on avoidance behaviours, a crucial component of treatment planning, 
particularly in Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT). 
    The 4C questionnaires were validated using data collected from patients clinically diagnosed 
with hyperacusis and misophonia at my second supervisor’s clinic. This targeted validation 
ensures that the questionnaires are applicable to clinical practice and address a gap in existing 
instruments, which often examine symptom management strategies. By assessing patients’ 
confidence in handling their symptoms, the 4C questionnaires provide clinicians with valuable 
tools for creating personalised and effective interventions.

114 
 
5.2 Research Paper  
 
Evaluating the 4C Misophonia and Hyperacusis Management 
Questionnaires: Psychometric Validation in a Clinical Population  
 
Fatma Betul Kula1 & 2, Mark Cropley1, Hashir Aazh2 
 
1Department of Psychology, University of Surrey, Guildford, UK. 
2Hashir International Specialist Clinics & Research Institute for Misophonia, Tinnitus and 
Hyperacusis, London and Guildford, UK.  
 
 
*Correspondence 
Corresponding Author: Fatma Betul Kula  
f.kula@surrey.ac.uk   
 
Keywords: Hyperacusis, Misophonia, Validation, Questionnaire, CBT.

115 
 
 
Abstract 
 
Aim: To evaluate the psychometric properties of the 4C Hyperacusis and Misophonia 
Management Questionnaires, designed to assess patients' confidence in managing symptoms 
of hyperacusis and misophonia, respectively without reliance on Safety Seeking Behaviours 
(SSBs).  
Methods: Data were collected from a clinical sample of adult patients seeking help from a 
specialist audiology centre in the UK for distressing hyperacusis and/or misophonia, with 48 
completing the 4C Hyperacusis Management Questionnaire and 40 completing the 4C 
Misophonia Management Questionnaire. Confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) was used to 
examine structural validity, while convergent and discriminant validity were assessed through 
correlations with these measures: Hyperacusis Impact Questionnaire (HIQ), Misophonia 
Impact Questionnaire (MIQ), Tinnitus Impact Questionnaire (TIQ), and the Screening for 
Anxiety and Depression in Tinnitus/Sound Intolerance (SADT). Reliability was evaluated 
using Cronbach’s α and McDonald’s ω. 
Results: CFA indicated an acceptable model fit for the one-factor structure of the 4C 
Hyperacusis Management Questionnaire (χ²/df = 2.23, CFI = 0.97, TLI = 0.92, SRMR= 0.03, 
RMSEA = 0.16). For the 4C Misophonia Management Questionnaire, a two-factor structure 
provided a better acceptable model fit (χ²/df = 1.51, CFI = 0.99, TLI = 0.96, SRMR= 0.02, 
RMSEA = 0.11). Both questionnaires demonstrated high reliability, with Cronbach’s α values 
of 0.90 for the 4C Hyperacusis Questionnaire and 0.87 for the 4C Misophonia Questionnaire. 
Convergent validity was supported by significant negative correlations between the 4C 
Hyperacusis scores and HIQ (ρ = -0.41, p < .05) and between the 4C Misophonia scores and 
MIQ (ρ = -0.56, p < .05). Discriminant validity was indicated by low correlations with unrelated 
constructs, although the 4C Misophonia Questionnaire showed a higher correlation with

116 
 
anxiety and depression (ρ = -0.46, p < .05) compared to hyperacusis scores. Age and gender 
were not significantly correlated with either questionnaire. 
Conclusion:  4C Hyperacusis and Misophonia Management Questionnaires demonstrated good 
reliability and validity, supporting their use in assessing patient’s confidence in symptom 
management, particularly within the context of Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT).

117 
 
1. Introduction 
    Hyperacusis and misophonia are both classified as disorders of Decreased Sound Tolerance 
(DST) that negatively affects quality of life (Jastreboff and Jastreboff, 2015). Hyperacusis is 
characterised by an increased sensitivity to everyday sounds, such as household or 
environmental noises, perceived as excessively loud or painful, leading to significant distress 
and interference with daily life, including social, occupational, and recreational activities (Aazh 
et al., 2016, Aazh et al., 2024b). People with hyperacusis experience negative reactions to 
sounds based on their physical aspects, such as volume or frequency, often perceiving ordinary 
noises as intolerably loud (Salvi et al., 2022). Although there is no consensus on precise 
definitions, Tyler et al. (2014) proposed four types of hyperacusis are generally recognised in 
the literature: loudness hyperacusis, where every day sounds seem excessively loud; annoyance 
hyperacusis, which produces negative emotional reactions to sounds; fear hyperacusis, where 
sounds provoke avoidance behaviours due to fear; and pain hyperacusis, where sounds cause 
physical pain in the ears or surrounding areas like the face and neck. Prevalence estimates 
indicate that 15.2% of adults aged 45 to 70 experience symptoms of hyperacusis (Smit et al., 
2021a).  
     Misophonia involves intense negative emotional, behavioural, and physical reactions to 
specific sounds (such as chewing or tapping) or stimuli, and is characterised by a reduced 
tolerance to these sounds, which may include oral, nasal, non-oral/ nasal sounds from people, 
as well as sounds produced by objects or animals (Swedo et al., 2022). The prevalence of 
individuals in the UK for whom misophonia symptoms cause a significant burden in their lives 
has been estimated at 18% (Vitoratou et al., 2023).  
     Existing hyperacusis and misophonia questionnaires, such as the Duke Misophonia 
Questionnaire (Rosenthal et al., 2021), MisoQuest (Siepsiak et al., 2020a), and Hyperacusis 
Impact Questionnaire (Aazh et al., 2024a) often include items with language reflecting

118 
 
struggle, anger, and negativity. For example, the DMQ includes items such as “ I hate being 
like this,” and “I thought about physically hurting the person making the sound ,” illustrating 
both negativity and anger in response to trigger sounds. MisoQuest further emphasises anger 
and struggle with items like “ I start feeling anger the moment I see a thing/animal/person that 
might make an unpleasant sound ” and “I believe that my reactions to sounds are exaggerated, 
but I can’t get rid of them ”. Similarly, the HIQ has items such as “ Feeling anxious when 
hearing loud noises ” and “difficulty in carrying out certain day-to-day activities/ tasks in noisy 
places”, framing the condition as a source of continuous struggle. By contrast, the 4C 
Hyperacusis and Misophonia Management Questionnaires use language that promotes 
acceptance, ability, and confidence. Rather than focusing on challenges caused by symptoms, 
these questionnaires include items such as “ How confident are you that you can enjoy your life 
fully despite your hyperacusis or misophonia? ” and “How confident are you that you can do 
all of the above without using any avoidance behaviour? ” This constructive approach 
encourages individuals to focus on their strengths and their ability to manage their condition. 
     Patients with hyperacusis and misophonia often do not prioritise therapies like cognitive 
behavioural therapy (CBT) as their first option for managing their condition, despite evidence 
supporting its effectiveness by Jager et al. (2021). Instead, many initially prefer medical 
solutions, hoping for a definitive cure. When no medical solution is available, they frequently 
rely on avoidance and ritualistic behaviours to cope. These behaviours might include overusing 
ear protection, avoiding social situations, leading clear of specific environments or individuals, 
or instructing others to reduce noise. While these strategies may offer temporary relief, they 
can limit long-term adaptation. Shifting from these avoidance behaviours to engaging in 
therapy often requires a significant adjustment. A key obstacle is patients’ lack of confidence 
in their ability to replace these familiar coping mechanisms with new approaches. For instance, 
a person with misophonia may feel, “I cannot control my anger even with CBT; it is easier to

119 
 
avoid shared mealtimes,” while someone with hyperacusis may think, “Avoiding loud sounds 
helps me avoid pain, but I doubt CBT can provide the same relief.” Addressing this confidence 
gap is essential to help patients engage in therapy (Aazh, 2024). Therefore, tools that foster 
confidence and motivation are essential for facilitating this transition. Building on similar 
challenges identified in tinnitus management, the 4C Tinnitus Management Questionnaire was 
developed by Aazh et al. (2024d) to measure patients’ confidence in managing tinnitus within 
a CBT framework. Its psychometric evaluation demonstrated excellent reliability (Cronbach’s 
alpha = 0.91) and validity, establishing it as a robust tool to assess confidence. Following this 
approach, the 4C Hyperacusis and Misophonia Management Questionnaires were developed 
at the Hashir Research Institute for Misophonia, Tinnitus and Hyperacusis in the UK. These 
questionnaires aim to assess patients' confidence in managing their symptoms and to support 
audiologists and clinicians in treatment planning, particularly in the context of CBT. 
     The 4C Hyperacusis and Misophonia Management Questionnaires were designed with two 
main goals. Firstly, it uses language that encourages patients to focus on their ability to manage 
the challenges of sound sensitivity. This approach is based on principles from motivational 
interviewing and self-determination theory, which suggest that fostering a sense of autonomy 
and capability can increase motivation and engagement in therapy (Markland et al., 2005). For 
example, the 4C Hyperacusis Management Questionnaire includes items such as, “ How 
confident are you that you are able to carry out your day-to-day tasks despite your 
hyperacusis? ”, Similarly, the 4C Misophonia Management Questionnaires include items like 
“How confident are you that you are able to socialise and relax even when you hear the trigger 
noises?” By prompting patients to reflect on their confidence in coping with their symptoms, 
the 4C aims to strengthen their intrinsic motivation to participate in therapy and to explore 
ways to lead completing exists despite hyperacusis and misophonia. Secondly, the 4C 
differentiates between patients who are confident in managing their symptoms without relying

120 
 
on avoidance behaviours and those who may use avoidance as a coping strategy. For example, 
the 4C Hyperacusis Management Questionnaire includes items such as, “ How confident are 
you that you can do all of the above without using any avoidance behaviour (e.g., ear 
protection, avoiding certain situations)? ” Similarly, the 4C Misophonia Management 
Questionnaire includes items like, “ How confident are you that you can do all of the above 
without using any avoidance behaviour (e.g., use of background noise, ear protection, telling 
people to stop the noise, mimicry, or avoiding certain situations or individuals)? ”. This 
distinction is important for tailoring interventions that address specific coping methods and 
encourage more adaptive responses to sound triggers (Britton et al., 2011).  
     The aim of this study was to evaluate the psychometric properties of the 4C Hyperacusis 
and Misophonia Management Questionnaires by examining their construct validity, reliability, 
and structural validity, including both convergent and discriminant validity. 
2. Methods  
2.1.Ethical Approval  
     This study followed ethical guidelines to respect participant rights and maintain 
confidentiality. Ethical approval was granted by the University of Surrey Ethics Committee 
(Project ID: FHMS 21-22-147 EGA). The clinical data used in this research were collected 
from the Hashir International Specialist Clinics & Research Institute for Misophonia, Tinnitus 
and Hyperacusis. 
2.2.Study Design and Questionnaires  
Study Design 
     This study examined clinical records from 285 patients who attended the Hashir 
International Institute for Misophonia, Tinnitus, and Hyperacusis between 2021 and 2024. The 
goal was to evaluate the reliability and validity of the 4C Misophonia and Hyperacusis 
Questionnaires for adults.

121 
 
4C Hyperacusis and Misophonia Management Questionnaires   
     The 4C questionnaires measure how confident patients feel about managing their 
hyperacusis and misophonia symptoms. Each question in the 4C questionnaires is scored from 
0 to 10, where 0 means "Not confident at all" and 10 means "Very confident." Question 4 
specifically addresses patients’ confidence in managing symptoms without using avoidance 
behaviours (such as avoiding certain situations or using background noise), which reflects a 
higher level of coping. As avoidance behaviours are often linked to less adaptive management 
strategies, the inclusion and weighting of Question 4 highlight its importance in evaluating 
patients’ overall confidence. 
     To calculate the total score, the sum of Questions 1 to 3 is multiplied by the score for 
Question 4, and the result is divided by 3. This scoring method was designed to emphasize the 
value of managing symptoms without reliance on avoidance strategies, as higher scores on 
Question 4 indicate more adaptive and self-reliant coping. The total score ranges from 0 to 100, 
where 0 represents no confidence and 100 represents full confidence in managing symptoms 
actively. This approach aligns with the theoretical framework of self-determination theory, 
which suggests that autonomous and confident management is essential for long-term success 
(Deci and Ryan, 2013). Patients who rely heavily on avoidance strategies typically score lower, 
reflecting less confidence in managing symptoms effectively (See Tables 1 and 2 for detailed 
items of these questionnaires) 
Table 1: 4C Hyperacusis Management Questionnaire  
Instructions: Please complete based on your confidence level. Circle the number that best 
represents the confidence level on a scale of 0–10, where 0 means "Not confident at all" and 
10 means "Very confident." 
Adult Version: Patient Self-Assessment Rating Scale (0–10) 
1. How confident are you that you are able to carry out your day-
to-day tasks despite your hyperacusis? 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

122 
 
2. How confident are you that you can socialise and relax despite 
your hyperacusis? 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
3. How confident are you that you can enjoy your life fully despite 
your hyperacusis? 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
4. How confident are you that you can do all of the above without 
using any avoidance behaviour (e.g., ear protection, avoiding 
certain situations)? 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 
 
 
Table 2: 4C Misophonia Management Questionnaire 
Instructions: Please complete based on your confidence level. Circle the number that best 
represents the confidence level on a scale of 0–10, where 0 means "Not confident at all" and 
10 means "Very confident." 
 
Adult Version: Patient Self-Assessment Rating Scale (0–10) 
1. How confident are you that you are able to carry out your day-to-
day tasks even when you hear the trigger noises? 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10  
2. How confident are you that you are able to socialise and relax 
even when you hear the trigger noises? 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10  
3. How confident are you that you can enjoy your life fully despite 
your misophonia? 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10  
4. How confident are you that you can do all of the above without 
using any avoidance behaviour (e.g., use of background noise, ear 
protection, telling people to stop the noise, mimicry, or avoiding 
certain situations or individuals)? 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10  
 
Convergent and Discriminant Validity:  
    The following questionnaires, routinely administered during the initial assessment of 
patients at the Hashir International Institute, were used to validate the 4C questionnaires. 
1. Misophonia Impact Questionnaire [MIQ: Aazh et al. (2023)] 
    This questionnaire was used to assess the impact of misophonia on the patients. MIQ has 
eight items, and each item is rated on a scale from 0 to 3, corresponding to response options

123 
 
for frequency: 0 to 1 day, 2 to 6 days, 7 to 10 days, and 11 to 14 days, respectively. Total scores 
range from 0 to 24, with scores of 12 or higher indicating a clinically significant impact from 
misophonia (Erfanian and Aazh, 2023). The MIQ has demonstrated high reliability, with a 
Cronbach’s alpha of 0.94 (Aazh et al., 2023).  
2. Hyperacusis Impact Questionnaire [HIQ, (Aazh et al., 2024a)] 
    The HIQ consists of eight items that evaluate the impact of hyperacusis on patients. 
Responses for each item are scored as 0, 1, 2, or 3, corresponding to the frequency categories 
of 0 to 1 day, 2 to 6 days, 7 to 10 days, and 11 to 14 days, respectively. The total score can 
range from 0 to 24, with scores of 12 or higher indicating a clinically significant level of impact 
from hyperacusis and in a clinical sample, the HIQ demonstrated strong reliability, with a 
Cronbach’s alpha of 0.93 (Aazh et al., 2024a).  
3. Tinnitus Impact Questionnaire [TIQ, Aazh et al. (2022a)]  
     TIQ consists of seven items that designed to evaluate how tinnitus affects a patient's daily 
activities, mood, and sleep. Each item is rated on a scale from 0 to 3, representing the frequency 
of impact over a two-week period: 0–1 day, 2–6 days, 7–10 days, and 11–14 days, respectively. 
Total scores range from 0 to 21, with higher scores indicating greater impact. The TIQ has 
strong internal consistency, with a Cronbach’s α of 0.89 (Aazh et al., 2022b). For interpretation, 
scores below 5 indicate no impact, scores of 5–6 reflect mild impact, 7–8 suggest moderate 
impact, and scores above 9 indicate severe tinnitus impact. This questionnaire employed to 
assess discriminant validity of 4C misophonia management and hyperacusis management 
Questionnaires.  
4. The Screening for Anxiety and Depression in Tinnitus/ Sound Intolerance [SAD-T, (Aazh 
et al., 2024a)]  
    The SAD-T questionnaire includes four items assessing mental health: two items measure 
anxiety symptoms, and two address depression-related experiences. Each item is scored on a

124 
 
4-point scale from 0 to 3, based on frequency (0 to 1 day, 2 to 6 days, 7 to 10 days, and 11 to 
14 days). Scores are summed, with a total of 4 or more indicating symptoms of anxiety and/or 
depression (Aazh et al., 2024a).  
Diagnosis of Misophonia and Hyperacusis  
     Audiologists at the Hashir International Institute conducted clinical interviews to diagnose 
patients with misophonia and hyperacusis. For a misophonia diagnosis, patients had to show at 
least one of the first four characteristics listed in Table 3, along with all characteristics from 5 
to 9. A hyperacusis diagnosis required at least one of the first four characteristics listed in Table 
4, along with all characteristics from 5 to 9. 
Table 3: Misophonia Diagnostic Criteria 
 
1. Sound intolerance adversely affects day-to-day activities and tasks. 
2. Sound intolerance adversely affects mood. 
3. Sound intolerance adversely affects resting or relaxing.   
4. The person uses avoidance behaviours or rituals in order to cope with the sounds that 
bother them.  
5. The person’s main complaint is decreased tolerance to oral and nasal sounds (e.g., 
eating, chewing gum, lip smacking, mouth noises, breathing) or repetitive sounds, 
including repetitive tapping or rustling sounds made by humans or machines (e.g., 
finger tapping).  
6. The person perceives specific sounds as disgusting, offensive, or annoying. 
7. The person’s primary reaction to sounds is not aural pain or physical discomfort in 
their ears due to excessive loudness of the sounds.     
8. The person’s sound intolerance is not better explained by their general attitude toward 
noise and environmental noise pollution (e.g., noise from neighbours, nearby airports, 
traffic, workshops, plumbing, or air conditioning).       
9. The symptoms are not better explained by other underlying medical or psycho-social 
conditions.

125 
 
Note: Misophonia was diagnosed if the person showed at least one of the first four 
characteristics listed above in addition to characteristics 5-9 (i.e., (item 1 or 2 or 3 or 4) + 
item 5 + item 6 + item 7 + item 8 + item 9) 
 
Table 4: Hyperacusis Diagnostic Criteria 
 
1. Sound intolerance adversely affects day-to-day activities and tasks. 
2. Sound intolerance adversely affects mood.  
3. Sound intolerance adversely affects resting and relaxing.  
4. The person uses avoidance behaviors or rituals in order to cope with the sounds that 
bother them.  
5. The person perceives some sounds as too loud, uncomfortable, or painful. 
6. The person’s main complaint is not decreased tolerance to oral and nasal sounds (e.g., 
eating, chewing gum, lip smacking, mouth noises, breathing) or repetitive sounds, 
including repetitive tapping or rustling sounds made by humans or machines (e.g., 
finger tapping).  
7. The person’s sound intolerance is not better explained by their general attitude toward 
noise and environmental noise pollution (e.g., noise from neighbors, nearby airports, 
traffic, workshops, plumbing, or air conditioning).       
8. If the person uses hearing aids, their sound intolerance is experienced even when the 
hearing aids are not being used.  
9. The symptoms are not better explained by other underlying medical or psycho-social 
conditions. 
Note: Hyperacusis was diagnosed if a person showed at least one of the first four 
characteristics listed above in addition to characteristics 5-9 (i.e., (item 1 or 2 or 3 or 4) + 
item 5 + item 6 + item 7 + item 8 + item 9).  
 
2.4. Data Analysis 
     Before analysing the data, all records were anonymised. IBM SPSS (version 28.0) was used 
for all analyses except for confirmatory factor analysis (CFA), which was performed in R 
studio (version 2024.09.0) using the Lavaan package with the WLMSV (the weighted least 
square mean and variance) estimator for this specially designed for ordinal data (Rosseel,

126 
 
2012). Descriptive statistics were calculated for all questionnaires, including means, standard 
deviations, and ranges. The normality of each measure was assessed visually using histograms 
and with the Shapiro-Wilk test to confirm that the data met the necessary assumptions for 
parametric analyses. In all analyses, the significance threshold was set at α = 0.05 unless 
specified otherwise. Correlations were interpreted according to Cohen's (1988) guidelines: 
correlation values of (0.10), (0.30), and (0.50) were classified as weak, moderate, and strong, 
respectively (Cohen, 1992).  
     The non-parametric Mann-Whitney U test was conducted to compare total scores between 
male and female participants. This test was chosen due to the non-normal distribution of total 
scores of the included questionnaires.  Additionally, the correlation between age and total 4C 
Hyperacusis and Misophonia scores was evaluated using Spearman’s correlation coefficient 
(Spearman’s rho),  
Confirmatory Factor Analyses 
     CFA was conducted using the WLSMV estimator to assess the structure of the English 
versions of the 4C Hyperacusis and Misophonia Management Questionnaires. A one-factor 
model fit was hypothesised for each questionnaire, consistent with the structure of the 4C 
Tinnitus Management Questionnaire, which previously demonstrated a one-factor structure 
(Aazh et al., 2024b). Fit indices were used to check how well the data fit the hypothesised 
model. The Root Mean Square Error of Approximation (RMSEA) was used, where values of 
0.05 or less indicate a good fit and values between 0.05 and 0.08 are acceptable The 
Standardised Root Mean Square Residual (SRMR) was also used, with values of 0.05 or less 
indicating a good fit. Other indices included the Tucker Lewis Index (TLI) and Comparative 
Fit Index (CFI), both of which need to be 0.97 or higher to indicate good fit. The Goodness of 
Fit Index (GFI) was also included, with values of 0.95 or higher suggesting strong model fit. 
The Chi-square/df ratio (CMIN) was used as well, with a threshold of 2 or less indicating good

127 
 
fit. These fit criteria follow recommendations by Schermelleh-Engel et al. (2003), who advise 
that SRMR ≤ 0.05, RMSEA ≤ 0.05, TLI ≥ 0.97, CFI ≥ 0.97, GFI ≥ 0.95, and χ²/df ≤ 2 indicate 
a well model fit.  
Reliability  
     McDonald’s ω and Cronbach’s α were used to evaluate the overall reliability of the 4C 
Hyperacusis and Misophonia Management Questionnaires for the adult sample, with 95% 
confidence intervals calculated through bias-corrected and accelerated (BCA) bootstrapping 
based on 1,000 samples. Cronbach’s α greater than 0.7 are considered indicative of acceptable 
internal consistency (Taber, 2018).  
Convergent and Discriminant Validity 
    We assessed the convergent and discriminant validity of the 4C Hyperacusis and Misophonia 
Management Questionnaires by examining their associations with related and unrelated 
measures. For the 4C Hyperacusis Management Questionnaire, convergent validity was tested 
against the Hyperacusis Impact Questionnaire (HIQ), where moderate to high correlations were 
expected, indicating that both measures address hyperacusis-related aspects. Discriminant 
validity was assessed using the Screening for Anxiety and Depression in Tinnitus/Sound 
Sensitivity (SADT), the Tinnitus Impact Questionnaire (TIQ), and the Misophonia Impact 
Questionnaire (MIQ). Low correlations with these measures were expected, suggesting that the 
4C Hyperacusis Management Questionnaire does not overlap with unrelated areas. 
      For the 4C Misophonia Management Questionnaire, convergent validity was tested using 
the Misophonia Impact Questionnaire (MIQ), expecting moderate to high correlations as both 
questionnaires focus on misophonia. Discriminant validity was assessed using SADT, TIQ, 
and HIQ, with low correlations anticipated, showing that the 4C Misophonia Management 
Questionnaire is specific to misophonia and does not overlap strongly with other areas.

128 
 
     Spearman’s correlation coefficient (Spearman’s rho) was used to evaluate the convergent 
and discriminant validity of both the 4C Hyperacusis and Misophonia questionnaires, using the 
total scores of each questionnaire to assess structural validity.  
3. Results 
3.1.Sample Characteristics  
     A total of 285 patients' clinic records were included in the study; however, there were only 
40 completed 4C Misophonia Management Questionnaires from adults. This reduction 
occurred because the 4C Misophonia Management Questionnaire was administered 
exclusively to patients who reported clinically significant misophonia symptoms during their 
assessment, limiting the eligible sample size.  The average age of these 40 patients was 33.83 
years (SD = 14.06), with an age range from 17 to 68 years. The sample was composed of 60% 
female (n = 24) and 40% male (n = 16) participants. According to diagnostic criteria described 
in the methods section and Tables 1-2, 33 of the 40 patients (82.5%) were diagnosed with 
misophonia. Among those diagnosed, 11 patients (27.5%) had both hyperacusis and 
misophonia, 1 patient (2.5%) had both misophonia and noise sensitivity, and 1 patient (2.5%) 
had a combination of tinnitus, hyperacusis, misophonia, and noise sensitivity. 
      Out of a total of 285 patients, 48 adults completed the 4C Hyperacusis Management 
Questionnaire (this drop due to the questionnaire being administrated only patients reported 
hyperacusis symptoms). The average age of these patients was 40.92 years ( SD = 14.3), with 
54.2% male (n = 26) and 45.8% female (n = 22). Among them, 6 patients (12.5%) were 
diagnosed with only hyperacusis, while 22 patients (45.8%) had both tinnitus and hyperacusis 
symptoms. Additionally, 8 patients (16.7%) had both hyperacusis and misophonia, 1 patient 
(2.1%) presented with hyperacusis, misophonia, and noise sensitivity, 3 patients (6.3%) had 
tinnitus, hyperacusis, and noise sensitivity, and 1 patient (2.1%) exhibited a combination of 
tinnitus, hyperacusis, misophonia, and noise sensitivity.

129 
 
     The Mann-Whitney U test indicated no statistically significant difference between male and 
female participants on either the 4C Hyperacusis Management Questionnaire or the 4C 
Misophonia Management Questionnaire.  
     Additionally, Spearman’s correlation analysis found no significant relationship between age 
and total scores on either questionnaire. For the 4C Hyperacusis Management Questionnaire, 
age was not significantly correlated with total scores, ρ = .22, p = .127, and gender showed a 
weak, non-significant association with scores, ρ = -.27, p = .067. For the 4C Misophonia 
Questionnaire, there was no significant correlation between age and total scores, ρ = -.17, p = 
.285, or between gender and scores, ρ = -.12, p = .445. These findings suggest that age and 
gender do not significantly impact total scores for either the 4C Hyperacusis or the 4C 
Misophonia Questionnaire in this sample, although there is a small, non-significant pattern of 
higher scores in males.      
3.2.Psychometric Analyses  
     Table 5 presents the descriptive statistics for the items in the 4C Hyperacusis and 
Misophonia Management Questionnaires. The total scores for both questionnaires exhibit non-
normal distributions, confirmed through visual inspection (histograms and Q-Q plots) and 
statistical measures. Despite this, the factor loadings for individual items remain good. For the 
4C Hyperacusis items, factor loadings range from 0.75 to 0.94, while the 4C Misophonia items 
range from 0.62 to 0.92.  
 Table 5: Descriptive Statistics and Factor Loadings of the 4C Hyperacusis and Misophonia 
Management Questionnaires.  
Questionnaire  Item Mean (SD)  Min  Max Skewness  Kurtosis Factor 
Loading 
(λstd)- 
One 
Factor 
Model

130 
 
4C 
Hyperacusis 
Management 
Questionnaire  
 
 
 
 Item 1 5.00 (2.97) 0 10 -.19 -.87 0.75 
Item 2 3.82 (2.86) 0 10 .56 -.51 0.84 
Item 3 2.94 (2.90) 0 10 .68 -.67 0.94 
Item 4 2.59 (2.71) 0 9 .88 -.22 0.85 
Total 
(N=48) 7.93 (3.53) 0 81 1.65 1.90  
4C 
Misophonia 
Management 
Questionnaire  Item 1 3.49 (2.71) 0 10 .76 .01 0.62 
Item 2 2.90 (2.70) 0 10 .85 .04 0.92 
Item 3 3.53 (2.708)  0 10 .34 -.64 0.72 
Item 4 1.80 (2.05) 0 9 1.49 2.88 0.91 
Total 
(N=40) 9.44 (15.71)       
Note. N = Number of patients  
3.2.1. Confirmatory Factor Analysis 
     The results of the confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) for the 4C Hyperacusis Management 
Questionnaire , show an acceptable model fit with one factor structure based on the criteria by 
Schermelleh-Engel et al. (2003). The relative chi-square (χ²/df = 2.23) is slightly above the 
threshold of 2, indicating acceptable. The CFI (0.97) meets the recommended threshold, 
supporting an acceptable fit, while the TLI (0.92) falls below the ideal cut-off of 0.97. The 
SRMR value of 0.029 is well within the acceptable range (≤ 0.05), suggesting minimal residual 
error. However, the RMSEA value of 0.16, with a 90% confidence interval of 0.00 to 0.34, 
exceeds the recommended threshold of 0.05.  
    Initially, a one-factor structure was tested for the 4C Misophonia Management 
Questionnaire.  While some fit indices indicated reasonable fit, others suggested potential 
misspecifications. The CFI (0.91) and TLI (0.72) were below the recommended thresholds,

131 
 
and the relative chi-square (χ²/df = 4.90) exceeded the acceptable cut-off of 2, indicating a poor 
fit. Additionally, the RMSEA value of 0.32, with a 90% confidence interval of 0.16 to 0.49, 
was significantly above the ideal threshold of ≤ 0.05, suggesting misfit in the model. The 
SRMR (0.086) was also slightly above the acceptable cut-off of 0.08. To address these issues, 
a two-factor structure was tested, and this provided a much better fit to the data. The CFI (0.99) 
and TLI (0.96) exceeded the recommended thresholds, and the relative chi-square (χ²/df = 1.51) 
was within an acceptable range. Although the RMSEA value (0.11) remained above the 
preferred threshold, the SRMR (0.018) indicated good fit.  
3.2.2. Reliability  
     The reliability of these measures was found to be excellent, with Cronbach's Alpha and 
Omega values of 0.90 (95% CI [0.87–0.93]) for the 4C Hyperacusis 0.87 (95% CI [0.83–0.91]) 
for the 4C Misophonia Management, respectively.  
3.2.3. Construct Validity  
    For the 4C Hyperacusis Management Questionnaire , convergent validity was evaluated 
by examining its correlation with the Hyperacusis Impact Questionnaire (HIQ). As shown in 
Table 6, a significant negative moderate correlation with the HIQ (ρ = -0.41, p < .05) suggests 
that as hyperacusis management improves (higher scores on the 4C), the impact of 
hyperacusis (lower HIQ scores) decreases. This indicates that both measures capture similar 
aspects of hyperacusis, supporting convergent validity for the 4C Hyperacusis Management 
Questionnaire.  
     Discriminant validity was assessed through correlations with the Tinnitus Impact 
Questionnaire (TIQ), Misophonia Impact Questionnaire (MIQ), and Screening for Anxiety and 
Depression in Tinnitus (SAD-T). The low and non-significant correlations with these measures 
(e.g., ρ = -0.08 with TIQ, ρ = 0.15 with MIQ, and ρ = -0.26 with SAD-T) indicate that the 4C

132 
 
Hyperacusis Questionnaire does not strongly relate to distinct constructs, such as tinnitus, 
misophonia, or anxiety and depression, supporting its discriminant validity. 
Table 6: Correlations among items and total scores of 4C Hyperacusis Management 
Questionnaire, HIQ, TIQ, MIQ, and SADT.  
 HIQ TIQ MIQ SADT 
4C Hyperacusis Management-Total  -.41* -.08  .15 -.26 
4C Hyperacusis Management -Q1 -.56* -.17 .16 -.34* 
4C Hyperacusis Management -Q2 -.52* -.15 .04 -.40* 
4C Hyperacusis Management -Q3 -.45* -.09 .06 -.39* 
4C Hyperacusis Management -Q4 -.33* -.03 .20 -.23 
Note. Number of patients = 48; (*: statistically significant at p < .05). HIQ, Hyperacusis Impact 
Questionnaire; TIQ, Tinnitus Impact Questionnaire; MIQ, Misophonia Impact Questionnaire; 
SADT, the Screening for Anxiety and Depression in Tinnitus/Sound Sensitivity.  
     For the 4C Misophonia Management Questionnaire , convergent validity was evaluated 
by its correlation with the Misophonia Impact Questionnaire (MIQ). As shown in Table 7, a 
significant negative high correlation with the MIQ (ρ = -0.56, p < .05) suggests that higher 
misophonia management scores are associated with lower misophonia impact, indicating that 
both questionnaires measure related aspects of misophonia, thus supporting convergent 
validity.  
     Discriminant validity was assessed using the Hyperacusis Impact Questionnaire (HIQ), 
Tinnitus Impact Questionnaire (TIQ), and the Screening for Anxiety and Depression in 
Tinnitus (SAD-T). The 4C Misophonia Questionnaire showed low or non-significant 
correlations with the HIQ (ρ = -0.16) and TIQ (ρ = 0.10), suggesting it does not strongly overlap 
with hyperacusis or tinnitus impact measures, which supports its discriminant validity 
regarding these conditions. However, the moderate significant correlation with SAD-T (ρ = -
0.46, p < .05) indicates an association between misophonia management and anxiety and

133 
 
depression symptoms. This finding suggests that the 4C Misophonia Questionnaire may share 
common elements with psychological constructs like anxiety and depression, which impacts 
its discriminant validity.  
Table 7: Correlations among items and total scores of 4C Misophonia Management 
Questionnaire, HIQ, TIQ, MIQ, and SADT.  
 HIQ TIQ MIQ SADT 
4C Misophonia Management-Total  -.16 .10 -.56* -.46* 
4C Misophonia Management -Q1 -.13 .03 -.31 -.34* 
4C Misophonia Management -Q2 -.04 .29 -.52* -.43* 
4C Misophonia Management -Q3 -.34* -.10 -.54* -.67* 
4C Misophonia Management -Q4 -.12 .24 -.54* -.38* 
Note. Number of patients = 40; (*: statistically significant at p < .05). HIQ, Hyperacusis Impact 
Questionnaire; TIQ, Tinnitus Impact Questionnaire; MIQ, Misophonia Impact Questionnaire; 
SADT, the Screening for Anxiety and Depression in Tinnitus/Sound Sensitivity.  
 
4. Discussion   
     This study evaluated the psychometric properties of the 4C Hyperacusis and Misophonia 
Management Questionnaires in patients with hyperacusis and misophonia, focusing on 
reliability, validity, and confirmatory factor structure analyses. Our results indicate strong 
reliability and convergent validity for both questionnaires, showing that they are useful for 
measuring patients' confidence in managing their symptoms.  
Confirmatory Factor Analysis 
   The confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) results for the 4C Hyperacusis and Misophonia 
Management Questionnaires provide evidence regarding their structural validity. The one-
factor structure of the 4C Hyperacusis Management Questionnaire showed an acceptable model

134 
 
fit overall, with indices such as the comparative fit index (CFI) and standardized root mean 
square residual (SRMR) meeting recommended thresholds, indicating the model effectively 
captures the covariance structure with minimal residual error. However, some fit indices, 
particularly RMSEA had a higher value than recommended threshold by Schermelleh-Engel et 
al. (2003).  
    In contrast, the one-factor model of the 4C Misophonia Management Questionnaire initially 
exhibited poor fit, with several indices falling below recommended thresholds. Testing a two-
factor model for the 4C Misophonia Management Questionnaire resulted in a significant 
improvement in fit, with most indices exceeding recommended cut-offs. This improvement 
suggests that the questionnaire captures two distinct but related dimensions of confidence in 
managing misophonia symptoms. However, it is important to note that the two-factor model 
was derived through a data-driven approach rather than being guided by prior theoretical 
justification. While this approach enhanced the model fit, caution is required when interpreting 
the findings.  
    The poor RMSEA values observed for both questionnaires may partly reflect the small 
sample sizes (n = 48 for hyperacusis; n = 40 for misophonia). RMSEA is known to overestimate 
model misfit in smaller samples, making it less reliable in this context (Taasoobshirazi and 
Wang, 2016, Kenny et al., 2015). By contrast, CFI and SRMR, which are less sensitive to 
sample size (Shi et al., 2022), indicated acceptable fit for the 4C Hyperacusis Management 
Questionnaire and improved fit for the 4C Misophonia Management Questionnaire under the 
two-factor model.  
     Both questionnaires demonstrated high internal consistency, with Cronbach’s α and ω 
values above 0.87, supporting their reliability. For convergent validity, the 4C Hyperacusis 
Management Questionnaire showed a moderate negative correlation with the Hyperacusis 
Impact Questionnaire (HIQ), and the 4C Misophonia Management Questionnaire had a strong

135 
 
negative correlation with the Misophonia Impact Questionnaire (MIQ). These negative 
correlation results also indicate that greater confidence in symptom management is associated 
with a lower perceived impact, aligning with research demonstrating that self-management 
skills and Cognitive Behavioural Therapy can effectively reduce impact of misophonia and 
hyperacusis burden (Mattson et al., 2023, Aazh et al., 2024c).  
Discriminant Validity  
     The discriminant validity results revealed some unexpected findings. The 4C Hyperacusis 
Questionnaire showed low correlations with unrelated measures, suggesting that it specifically 
assesses hyperacusis management with minimal overlap with tinnitus and misophonia. 
Furthermore, our hypothesis anticipated a low correlation between hyperacusis and anxiety and 
depression; however, no significant correlation was identified in the analysis. This outcome 
supports the discriminant validity of the questionnaire, although it contrasts with previous 
studies that have reported associations between hyperacusis symptoms and anxiety and 
depression (Jüris et al., 2013, Paulin et al., 2016). Another reason for this could be that the 
SAD-T, used in this study for discriminant validity, is a screening tool designed to identify 
symptoms of anxiety and depression rather than providing a comprehensive assessment. 
     In contrast, 4C Misophonia Management Questionnaire demonstrated a different pattern in 
terms of discriminant validity, particularly in relation to anxiety and depression. The 
questionnaire showed low correlations with the HIQ and TIQ, supporting our hypothesis and 
indicating it effectively distinguishes misophonia from hyperacusis and tinnitus. However, a 
moderate to high correlation was observed between the 4C Misophonia Management 
Questionnaire and SAD-T, contradicting our expectation of a low correlation. This suggests 
that the questionnaire may not fully differentiate between misophonia-specific management 
and anxiety and depression. This outcome aligns with prior research an association between

136 
 
misophonia and anxiety and depression (Rouw and Erfanian, 2018, Cassiello-Robbins et al., 
2021).  
Demographic Findings 
     Our analysis of age and gender differences revealed no significant correlations with total 
scores on the 4C Hyperacusis Management Questionnaire. This result aligns with Musumano 
et al. (2023), in a systematic review study reported no significant gender differences in 
hyperacusis levels across studied populations. While some studies by Paulin et al. (2016), Ren 
et al. (2021) suggest that hyperacusis sensitivity may increase with age, this discrepancy could 
be due to differences in the focus of questionnaires. Many studies assess symptom severity, 
whereas the 4C Hyperacusis Management Questionnaire specifically measures coping 
confidence. This distinction may explain why demographic factors like age and gender did not 
significantly impact 4C scores, as confidence in managing symptoms may be less influenced 
by these factors than symptom sensitivity. 
     Similarly, for the 4C Misophonia Management Questionnaire, age and gender showed no 
significant correlations, aligning with findings from Brennan et al. (2024) found no relationship 
between age and misophonia. However, our results contrast with studies by (Erfanian et al., 
2019, Stalias-Mantzikos et al., 2023), which reported higher misophonia severity scores among 
females. These differences may reflect variations in study design, sample characteristics, or the 
specific focus of each questionnaire. Further research with larger and more diverse samples is 
warranted to clarify the influence of demographic factors on both misophonia management and 
severity. 
Limitations and Future Directions  
     This study has some limitations. While the small sample size may limit the generalisability 
of the CFA results, and limitation prevented the use of latent variables to comprehensively 
evaluate convergent and discriminant validity. Latent variables provide a more robust approach

137 
 
than direct measures, as they reduce measurement error, ensure factorial validity by requiring 
proper measurement models, and avoid untested assumptions characteristic in total score 
calculations (Cheung et al., 2024). However, a notable strength of this study is the use of data 
from a clinical population, which enhances the practical relevance and applicability of the 4C 
questionnaires for patients with hyperacusis and misophonia. Future research should address 
these limitations by employing larger sample sizes and evaluating the questionnaires using 
latent variable modelling to provide a more comprehensive assessment. 
5. Conclusions  
   This study provides an evaluation of the psychometric properties of the 4C Hyperacusis and 
Misophonia Management Questionnaires, which can help assess patients’ confidence in 
managing hyperacusis and misophonia symptoms. Both questionnaires demonstrated high 
reliability, with Cronbach’s alpha and omega values exceeding 0.87, indicating consistent 
measurement.  
    Overall, these findings support the 4C Management Questionnaires as valuable tools for 
clinicians to assess management confidence. Future research with larger and more diverse 
samples will help confirm and refine these questionnaires, increasing their usefulness in 
providing tailored support for patients with hyperacusis and misophonia.

138 
 
References 
AAZH, H. 2024d. 4C Hyperacusis/Misophonia Management Questionnaires: a method to 
enhance patient's readiness for therapy. Journal of Hearing Science,  14. 
AAZH, H., HAYES, C., MOORE, B. C. J. & VITORATOU, S. 2022a. Psychometric 
evaluation of the tinnitus impact questionnaire using a clinical population of adult 
patients with tinnitus alone or combined with hyperacusis. International Journal of 
Audiology , 1-10. 
AAZH, H., KARTSONAKI, C. & MOORE, B. C. 2024b. Psychometric evaluation of the 4C 
tinnitus management questionnaire for patients with tinnitus alone or tinnitus 
combined with hyperacusis. International Journal of Audiology,  63, 21-29. 
AAZH, H., MOORE, B. C., LAMMAING, K. & CROPLEY, M. 2016. Tinnitus and 
hyperacusis therapy in a UK National Health Service audiology department: Patients' 
evaluations of the effectiveness of treatments. Int J Audiol,  55, 514-22. 
AAZH, H., MOORE, B. C., SCAGLIONE, T. & REMMERT, N. 2023. Psychometric 
Evaluation of the Misophonia Impact Questionnaire (MIQ) Using a Clinical 
Population of Patients Seeking Help for Tinnitus, Hyperacusis and/or Misophonia. 
Journal of the American Academy of Audiology . 
AAZH, H., NAJJARI, A. & MOORE, B. C. 2024c. A Preliminary Analysis of the Clinical 
Effectiveness of Audiologist-Delivered Cognitive Behavioral Therapy Delivered via 
Video Calls for Rehabilitation of Misophonia, Hyperacusis, and Tinnitus. American 
Journal of Audiology , 1-16. 
BRENNAN, C. R., LINDBERG, R. R., KIM, G., CASTRO, A. A., KHAN, R. A., 
BERENBAUM, H. & HUSAIN, F. T. 2024. Misophonia and Hearing Comorbidities 
in a Collegiate Population. Ear Hear,  45, 390-399.

139 
 
BRITTON, P. C., PATRICK, H., WENZEL, A. & WILLIAMS, G. C. 2011. Integrating 
motivational interviewing and self-determination theory with cognitive behavioral 
therapy to prevent suicide. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice,  18, 16-27. 
CASSIELLO-ROBBINS, C., ANAND, D., MCMAHON, K., BROUT, J., KELLEY, L. & 
ROSENTHAL, M. Z. 2021. A preliminary investigation of the association between 
misophonia and symptoms of psychopathology and personality disorders. Frontiers in 
psychology,  11, 519681. 
CHEUNG, G. W., COOPER-THOMAS, H. D., LAU, R. S. & WANG, L. C. 2024. Reporting 
reliability, convergent and discriminant validity with structural equation modeling: A 
review and best-practice recommendations. Asia Pacific Journal of Management,  41, 
745-783. 
COHEN, J. 1992. Statistical power analysis. Current directions in psychological science,  1, 
98-101. 
DECI, E. L. & RYAN, R. M. 2013. Intrinsic motivation and self-determination in human 
behavior, Springer Science & Business Media. 
ERFANIAN, M. & AAZH, H. Comparing tinnitus and misophonia patients profiles: 
Audiological characterictics and their impact [Conference presentation].  Misophonia 
Convention 2023 Albuquerque, New Mexio, USA. 
ERFANIAN, M., KARTSONAKI, C. & KESHAVARZ, A. 2019. Misophonia and comorbid 
psychiatric symptoms: a preliminary study of clinical findings. Nordic journal of 
psychiatry,  73, 219-228. 
JAGER, I. J., VULINK, N. C., BERGFELD, I. O., VAN LOON, A. J. & DENYS, D. A. 
2021. Cognitive behavioral therapy for misophonia: A randomized clinical trial. 
Depression and anxiety,  38, 708-718.

140 
 
JASTREBOFF, P. J. & JASTREBOFF, M. M. 2015. Decreased sound tolerance: hyperacusis, 
misophonia, diplacousis, and polyacousis. Handbook of clinical neurology,  129, 375-
387. 
JÜRIS, L., ANDERSSON, G., LARSEN, H. C. & EKSELIUS, L. 2013. Psychiatric 
comorbidity and personality traits in patients with hyperacusis. International journal 
of audiology,  52, 230-235. 
KENNY, D. A., KANISKAN, B. & MCCOACH, D. B. 2015. The performance of RMSEA 
in models with small degrees of freedom. Sociological methods & research,  44, 486-
507. 
MARKLAND, D., RYAN, R. M., TOBIN, V. J. & ROLLNICK, S. 2005. Motivational 
interviewing and self–determination theory. Journal of social and clinical psychology,  
24, 811-831. 
MATTSON, S. A., D'SOUZA, J., WOJCIK, K. D., GUZICK, A. G., GOODMAN, W. K. & 
STORCH, E. A. 2023. A systematic review of treatments for misophonia. 
Personalized medicine in psychiatry,  39, 100104. 
MUSUMANO, L. B., HATZOPOULOS, S., FANCELLO, V., BIANCHINI, C., BELLINI, 
T., PELUCCHI, S., SKARŻYŃSKI, P. H., SKARŻYŃSKA, M. B. & CIORBA, A. 
2023. Hyperacusis: Focus on Gender Differences: A Systematic Review. Life, 13, 
2092. 
PAULIN, J., ANDERSSON, L. & NORDIN, S. 2016. Characteristics of hyperacusis in the 
general population. Noise and Health,  18, 178-184. 
REN, J., XU, T., XIANG, T., PU, J.-M., LIU, L., XIAO, Y. & LAI, D. 2021. Prevalence of 
hyperacusis in the general and special populations: a scoping review. Frontiers in 
neurology,  12, 706555.

141 
 
ROSENTHAL, M. Z., ANAND, D., CASSIELLO-ROBBINS, C., WILLIAMS, Z. J., 
GUETTA, R. E., TRUMBULL, J. & KELLEY, L. D. 2021. Development and initial 
validation of the duke misophonia questionnaire. Frontiers in psychology,  12, 709928. 
ROSSEEL, Y. 2012. lavaan: An R package for structural equation modeling. Journal of 
statistical software,  48, 1-36. 
ROUW, R. & ERFANIAN, M. 2018. A large‐scale study of misophonia. Journal of clinical 
psychology,  74, 453-479. 
SALVI, R., CHEN, G.-D. & MANOHAR, S. 2022. Hyperacusis: Loudness intolerance, fear, 
annoyance and pain. Hearing research,  426, 108648. 
SCHERMELLEH-ENGEL, K., MOOSBRUGGER, H. & MÜLLER, H. 2003. Evaluating the 
fit of structural equation models: Tests of significance and descriptive goodness-of-fit 
measures. Methods of psychological research online,  8, 23-74. 
SHI, D., DISTEFANO, C., MAYDEU-OLIVARES, A. & LEE, T. 2022. Evaluating SEM 
model fit with small degrees of freedom. Multivariate behavioral research,  57, 179-
207. 
SIEPSIAK, M., ŚLIWERSKI, A. & ŁUKASZ DRAGAN, W. 2020a. Development and 
psychometric properties of misoquest—A new self-report questionnaire for 
misophonia. International journal of environmental research and public health,  17, 
1797. 
SMIT, A. L., STEGEMAN, I., EIKELBOOM, R. H., BAGULEY, D. M., BENNETT, R. J., 
TEGG-QUINN, S., BUCKS, R. S., STOKROOS, R. J., HUNTER, M. & ATLAS, M. 
D. 2021. Prevalence of Hyperacusis and Its Relation to Health: The Busselton Healthy 
Ageing Study. Laryngoscope,  131, E2887-e2896.

142 
 
STALIAS-MANTZIKOS, M. E., BARAHMAND, U., AGUERO, K., PETERS, L. & 
SHAMSINA, N. 2023. Early maladaptive schemas in misophonia. Clinical 
Psychologist,  27, 196-209. 
SWEDO, S. E., BAGULEY, D. M., DENYS, D., DIXON, L. J., ERFANIAN, M., 
FIORETTI, A., JASTREBOFF, P. J., KUMAR, S., ROSENTHAL, M. Z. & ROUW, 
R. 2022. Consensus definition of misophonia: a delphi study. Frontiers in 
Neuroscience,  16, 841816. 
TAASOOBSHIRAZI, G. & WANG, S. 2016. The performance of the SRMR, RMSEA, CFI, 
and TLI: An examination of sample size, path size, and degrees of freedom. Journal 
of Applied Quantitative Methods,  11, 31-39. 
TABER, K. S. 2018. The use of Cronbach’s alpha when developing and reporting research 
instruments in science education. Research in science education,  48, 1273-1296. 
TYLER, R. S., PIENKOWSKI, M., RONCANCIO, E. R., JUN, H. J., BROZOSKI, T., 
DAUMAN, N., COELHO, C. B., ANDERSSON, G., KEINER, A. J. & CACACE, A. 
T. 2014. A review of hyperacusis and future directions: part I. Definitions and 
manifestations. American journal of audiology,  23, 402-419. 
VITORATOU, S., HAYES, C., UGLIK-MARUCHA, N., PEARSON, O., GRAHAM, T. & 
GREGORY, J. 2023. Misophonia in the UK: Prevalence and norms from the S-Five 
in a UK representative sample. Plos one, 18, e0282777.

143 
 
CHAPTER SIX  
General Discussion and Conclusions 
 
6.1 Overview 
       The final chapter of this thesis will summarise the findings of the previous chapters, 
including the systematic review and three empirical studies, and discuss their implications 
within the context of existing literature. The overarching aim of this thesis was to contribute to 
the understanding of hyperacusis and misophonia by addressing critical gaps in their 
assessment and broader psychological impacts. This chapter will highlight contributions of the 
research, address its strengths and limitations, and outline directions for future studies.  
     As outlined in Chapter One, hyperacusis and misophonia are complex conditions, with 
hyperacusis involving a heightening sensitivity to everyday sounds and misophonia 
characterised by strong emotional, behavioural, physical reactions to specific trigger sounds or 
stimuli, both significantly impairing daily functioning and quality of life (Swedo et al., 2022, 
Aazh et al., 2016). Despite increasing recognition of their impact, these conditions lack 
consistent diagnostic frameworks and a gold standard tool for clinical assessment and research 
(Ferrer-Torres and Giménez-Llort, 2022). The validation of some existing tools across different 
languages and cultural contexts is also insufficient, limiting their applicability in diverse 
populations. In addition, current instruments have generally focussed on symptom severity but 
fail to address key aspects such as symptom management and coping strategies, which are 
essential for effective treatment planning. The psychological impact of misophonia, 
particularly its relationship with fatigue, has received limited attention in existing literature. 
These gaps provided the rationale for this thesis and informed its objectives. 
     Chapter Two presented a systematic review of psychometric measures for hyperacusis and 
misophonia, evaluating eight widely used instruments, Hyperacusis Questionnaire, Inventory

144 
 
of Hyperacusis Symptoms, questionnaire on hypersensitivity to sound, Hyperacusis Handicap 
Questionnaire, Short Hyperacusis Questionnaire, Amsterdam Misophonia Scale, MisoQuest, 
and the Misophonia Questionnaire, against COSMIN standards. The review included research 
papers published up to April 2021 and identified significant methodological gaps, including 
inconsistencies in reliability, validity, and cross-cultural applicability based on COSMIN. 
These findings emphasised the need for psychometrically robust instruments tailored for use 
in clinical populations, setting the stage for the subsequent empirical studies. 
The overarching aims of the thesis were:  
1. To systematically evaluate the psychometric properties of existing questionnaires for 
hyperacusis and misophonia, identifying gaps in their methodological quality.   
2. To validate the English version of MisoQuest, establishing its reliability, validity, and 
relationships with audiological and psychological variables, including hyperacusis and 
fatigue.  
3. To investigate the mediating roles of stress and sleep quality in the relationship between 
misophonia and fatigue, contributing to a broader understanding of the psychological 
impacts of misophonia 
4. To validate the 4C Hyperacusis and Misophonia Management Questionnaires, designed 
to assess patients' confidence in managing their symptoms without reliance on 
avoidance behaviours, with a focus on clinical applications in Cognitive Behavioural 
Therapy (CBT).  
 
     This thesis contributes to advancing the understanding of hyperacusis and misophonia by 
providing validated tools, addressing broader psychological impacts, and highlighting clinical 
applications. A summary of the findings of each chapter will be discussed in the following 
section.

145 
 
6.2 Summary of Findings 
     The first study (Chapter 2) conducted a systematic review of the psychometric properties of 
existing hyperacusis and misophonia questionnaires, evaluating their adherence to the 
COSMIN standards. The review identified eight instruments, including the Hyperacusis 
Questionnaire (HQ), MisoQuest, and Amsterdam Misophonia Scale (A-MISO-S), among 
others. While some tools demonstrated good internal consistency in specific studies, significant 
gaps were found in the reporting of reliability, validity, and cross-cultural applicability. 
Importantly, no instrument fully met the COSMIN standards. These findings underscored the 
need for more robust and clinically relevant psychometric tools, providing a foundation for the 
subsequent empirical studies.  
      The second study (Chapter 3) validated the English version of MisoQuest, a 14-item 
misophonia questionnaire initially developed in Polish. The study involved 451 adult 
participants and demonstrated excellent internal consistency, high test-retest reliability and a 
confirmed multidimensional factor structure with adequate model fit through Confirmatory 
Factor Analysis (CFA). Strong convergent validity was established through moderate to high 
correlations with other misophonia measures, while weak correlations with non-misophonia 
constructs supported discriminant validity. However, moderate correlations with fatigue and 
hyperacusis raised questions about potential construct overlap, indicating the need for further 
exploration. These results validated the English MisoQuest as a reliable tool for assessing 
misophonia while highlighting the need for further research to better understand the correlation 
between misophonia and fatigue. 
    The third study (Chapter 4) investigated the relationship between misophonia and fatigue, 
with a particular focus on the mediating roles of stress and sleep quality. Using data from the 
same sample as the second study, correlation analysis revealed a positive moderate correlation 
between misophonia severity and fatigue, supporting findings from previous research (Dibb

146 
 
and Golding, 2022). Mediation analysis further revealed that perceived stress and sleep quality 
partially mediated this relationship, indicating that these factors significantly contribute to the 
experience of fatigue in individuals with misophonia. However, the findings also suggested 
that the effect of misophonia on fatigue extends beyond the influence of stress and sleep quality. 
Interestingly, hyperacusis, anxiety, and depression did not emerge as significant predictors of 
fatigue in this context. These findings broadened the scope of the thesis by addressing the 
psychological and health impacts of misophonia, emphasising the importance of targeting 
stress and sleep quality in clinical interventions while acknowledging the need to explore other 
underlying mechanisms. 
    The final study (Chapter 5) focused on validating the 4C Hyperacusis and Misophonia 
Management Questionnaires, designed to assess patients' confidence in managing symptoms 
without reliance on avoidance behaviours. Data from 48 participants for the Hyperacusis 
Management Questionnaire and 40 participants for the 4C Misophonia Management 
Questionnaire demonstrated high reliability. CFA showed an acceptable model fit for the one 
structure 4C Hyperacusis, while the 4C Misophonia showed an acceptable better model fit in 
two factor structure. Even though the findings were based on a relatively small sample, both 
tools exhibited good convergent and discriminant validity, although the misophonia 
questionnaire showed a high correlation with anxiety and depression. These tools fill a critical 
gap in clinical assessments, providing a means to evaluate patients' confidence in managing 
their symptoms and supporting personalised treatment planning, particularly within CBT 
frameworks.    
6.3 Research and Clinical Contributions  
    This thesis is primarily psychometric in nature, focusing on the validation and evaluation of 
measurement tools. Validity reflects how well an instrument measures what it is intended to 
measure, while reliability refers to the consistency of these measurements and their resistance

147 
 
to measurement error (Mohajan, 2017). Without these essential properties, measurement 
instruments risk producing misleading conclusions, undermining the credibility and accuracy 
of research findings, and limiting their applicability in clinical and academic settings (Cohen 
et al., 2017). This issue is particularly critical in diagnosis of hyperacusis and misophonia, 
which relies generally on questionnaires (Jastreboff and Jastreboff, 2014). Ensuring that these 
tools are valid and reliable is essential for accurate assessment and meaningful clinical 
interventions. Therefore, this thesis makes a significant contribution by evaluating and 
highlighting the psychometric properties of these tools in line with COSMIN standards 
(Mokkink et al., 2018), providing a rigorous framework to ensure their methodological and 
clinical robustness. 
    This thesis makes contributions to both research and clinical practice by addressing key gaps 
in the assessment and psychological impacts of hyperacusis and misophonia. One of the 
contributions is the validation of the English version of MisoQuest, a widely used tool 
originally developed in Polish (Siepsiak et al., 2020), following COSMIN standards.  This 
validation ensures that the questionnaire can reliably assess misophonia severity in English-
speaking populations, enabling cross-cultural research and facilitating consistent comparisons 
across diverse contexts.  
    In addition to English MisoQuest, this thesis introduces the 4C Hyperacusis and Misophonia 
Management Questionnaires, specifically designed to measure patients’ confidence in 
managing their symptoms without relying on avoidance behaviours. These questionnaires 
address a critical gap in existing tools, which generally focus on symptom severity. By 
validating these tools in clinical populations, this research provides clinicians and researchers 
with practical instruments that align with the principles of Cognitive Behavioural Therapy 
(CBT) and support the development of personalised treatment strategies (Aazh et al., 2016).

148 
 
    Beyond psychometric contributions, this thesis also explored the relationship between 
misophonia and fatigue, a topic that has received limited attention in the literature. The findings 
demonstrate that stress and sleep quality partially mediate this relationship, offering key 
findings the broader psychological and health impacts of misophonia. These results emphasise 
the importance of addressing stress and sleep disturbances as part of a comprehensive treatment 
approach. Although causality could not be demonstrated, the results of the study suggest that 
the impact of misophonia on fatigue may extend beyond these mediating factors, highlighting 
the need for future research to explore additional underlying mechanisms. 
    By combining rigorous psychometric evaluations with an exploration of the psychological 
impacts of misophonia and hyperacusis, this thesis advances the understanding of these 
conditions. The validated tools and findings on fatigue help improve how hyperacusis and 
misophonia are assessed and managed to support better clinical outcomes for individuals 
affected by these conditions.  
6.4 Challenges and Limitations  
    While this thesis provides important insights, certain limitations must be acknowledged. The 
systematic review (published in 2023) included only psychometric measures published up to 
April 2021, excluding tools developed or validated after this date. As of December 2024, there 
have been an additional at least ten studies published assessing hyperacusis or misophonia.      
    In this thesis, I adhered to COSMIN standards for the systematic review and two 
psychometric empirical studies. However, I was unable to properly assess content validity 
based on these standards. Content validity refers to how well a measurement instrument 
represents the concept it is designed to measure and is crucial in developing new 
questionnaires, particularly in ensuring agreement among experts (Beckstead, 2009). 
Furthermore, as I did not develop a new questionnaire in my thesis, and the existing 
questionnaires often lacked detailed reports on content validity in the included articles, it was

149 
 
challenging to evaluate their content validity comprehensively. This is something that I aim to 
pursue in the future.  
    Another psychometric property that I was not able to address in this thesis, including within 
the systematic review (Chapter 2), relates to the notion/construct of ‘responsiveness’. 
Responsiveness refers to the ability of an instrument to detect meaningful changes over time 
in the construct being measured. In other words, it reflects how accurately a measure can 
capture changes in outcomes specific to the effects of a treatment (Mokkink et al., 2018). To 
our knowledge, none of the questionnaires included in the systematic review evaluated this 
psychometric property. Additionally, responsiveness could not be assessed in the empirical 
studies conducted for this thesis, as these studies did not involve an intervention-based design 
requiring pre- and post-treatment measurements. 
   Within this thesis, there are several methodological limitations that should be noted, with the 
specific limitations of each study discussed in their respective chapters. One important 
contextual factor is the timing of data collection for Studies 2 and 3, which occurred during the 
global COVID-19 pandemic. Recruitment was conducted online through charities and social 
media support groups for individuals with hyperacusis and misophonia. As a result, we relied 
solely on self-reports and were unable to independently diagnose participants with misophonia. 
Proper diagnosis would have ideally required structured clinical interviews alongside the 
questionnaires, which was not feasible under the circumstances. The absence of a clinically 
verified sample further limited our ability to evaluate the sensitivity and specificity of the 
measures. Additionally, in Study 3, comparisons between individuals with and without 
clinically confirmed misophonia could have provided more comprehensive insights into group 
differences, particularly in understanding the relationship between misophonia and fatigue, 
thereby enhancing the robustness of the study.

150 
 
   The sample size for the final empirical study in my thesis was limited due to time constraints 
within my PhD funding. As a result, the findings presented in this chapter are based on a 
relatively small sample. However, data collection is ongoing, and the work is planned to be 
submitted for publication at a later date. 
    Additionally, all studies included in this thesis a higher proportion of female participants. 
This is consistent with research indicating that females are more likely to report symptoms of 
misophonia, with studies suggesting that over 82% of individuals self-identifying with the 
condition are women (Claiborn et al., 2020). In contrast, findings regarding hyperacusis show 
no significant gender differences, with a relatively balanced distribution between males and 
females (Musumano et al., 2023). These patterns suggest that the gender distribution in this 
thesis may reflect the characteristics of the conditions studied rather than recruitment bias, 
although the potential impact on generalisability should still be acknowledged. 
6.5 Directions for Future Research 
    While this thesis has contributed valuable insights and extended previous research in the 
field of hyperacusis and misophonia, it has also highlighted several implications for future 
research. 
    The findings from this thesis in the systematic review suggest that none of the hyperacusis 
and misophonia questionnaires research studies published up to 2021 adhered fully to 
COSMIN standards. Recent psychometric tools for misophonia, such as the Misophonia 
Response Scale (Dibb et al., 2021), the Duke Misophonia Questionnaire (Rosenthal et al., 
2021), the Selective Sound Sensitivity Syndrome Scale (S-Five; Vitoratou et al., 2021), the 
Duke-Vanderbilt Misophonia Screening Questionnaire (DVMSQ; Williams et al., 2022), the 
Berlin Misophonia Questionnaire Revised (BMQ; Remmert et al., 2022), the Sussex 
Misophonia Scale (SMS; Rinaldi et al., 2022; Simner et al., 2024), and the Misophonia Impact 
Questionnaire (MIQ; Aazh et al., 2023), were not included in this review. Similarly, for

151 
 
hyperacusis, tools like the Hyperacusis Impact Questionnaire [HIQ; (Aazh et al., 2024a)], the 
Sound Sensitivity Symptoms Questionnaire (SSSQ; Aazh et al., 2024a), and the Hyperacusis 
Assessment Questionnaire (Raj-Koziak et al., 2023) were also not assessed. Future research 
should evaluate whether these recently developed tools meet COSMIN standards and 
rigorously assess their validity, reliability, and responsiveness. Evaluating these tools will 
provide a clearer understanding of their psychometric properties and improve their applicability 
in both clinical and research contexts. Such efforts are essential for advancing the assessment 
and management of hyperacusis and misophonia. 
   Future research should also prioritise content validity, an essential psychometric property and 
complex steps in COSMIN (Mokkink et al., 2010), particularly through expert consensus, to 
ensure new questionnaires accurately represent the intended constructs. Intervention-based 
studies assessing responsiveness, including pre- and post-treatment measurements, are also 
necessary to evaluate the effectiveness of psychometric tools in detecting changes over time. 
    To address methodological limitations, future research should include diverse and 
representative samples with balanced gender participation to improve generalisability. 
Longitudinal studies are also essential for understanding the progression of hyperacusis and 
misophonia over time, identifying predictive factors, and establishing causal relationships. 
These studies could provide useful insights into the progression of these conditions and help 
design more effective interventions. 
    By addressing these areas, future research can build on the findings of this thesis to enhance 
the development, validation, and application of psychometric tools in the fields of hyperacusis 
and misophonia.

152 
 
6.6 Overall Conclusions 
     This thesis focuses on the psychometric assessment of hyperacusis and misophonia, 
critically evaluating existing questionnaires and validating tools in accordance with COSMIN 
standards. Through a systematic review and three empirical studies, it highlights the limitations 
of current instruments, validates tools, and explores understudied psychological aspects, 
particularly the relationship between misophonia and fatigue. 
     The systematic review identified significant gaps in the reliability, validity, and adherence 
to COSMIN standards among widely used questionnaires for hyperacusis and misophonia. 
Building on these findings, the English version of MisoQuest was validated, demonstrating its 
psychometric robustness and suitability for use in English-speaking populations. 
    In addition, this thesis introduced and validated the 4C Hyperacusis and Misophonia 
Management Questionnaires, which were developed to assess patients’ confidence in 
managing symptoms without reliance on avoidance behaviours. In clinical populations support 
their potential application in treatment planning, especially within Cognitive Behavioural 
Therapy (CBT) frameworks. 
     The thesis also addresses the relationship between fatigue and misophonia, an area 
previously overlooked in the literature. By evaluating the partially mediating roles of stress and 
sleep quality, it contributes to the understanding the psychological impacts of misophonia. The 
findings reveal a strong and significant link between misophonia and fatigue, emphasizing the 
need for comprehensive treatment approaches that incorporate stress and sleep management to 
improve outcomes for individuals with misophonia. 
    By addressing the limitations of existing tools, validating measures, and examining the 
correlation between misophonia and fatigue, this thesis contributes significantly to the field. It 
provides a foundation for future research to enhance psychometric assessments and improve 
clinical care for individuals affected by hyperacusis and misophonia.

153 
 
REFERENCES FOR GENERAL INTRODUCTION AND DISCUSSION CHAPTERS 
 
AAZH, H. 2023. Commentary: Consensus definition of misophonia. Frontiers in 
Neuroscience,  16. 
AAZH, H., DANESH, A. A. & MOORE, B. C. 2021. Internal consistency and convergent 
validity of the inventory of hyperacusis symptoms. Ear and Hearing,  42, 917-926. 
AAZH, H., ERFANIAN, M., DANESH, A. A. & MOORE, B. C. 2022. Audiological and 
other factors predicting the presence of misophonia symptoms among a clinical 
population seeking help for tinnitus and/or hyperacusis. Frontiers in neuroscience,  16, 
900065. 
AAZH, H., HAYES, C., ERFANIAN, M., MOORE, B. C. & VITORATOU, S. 2024a. 
Confirmatory factor analysis of the Hyperacusis Impact Questionnaire, Sound 
Sensitivity Symptoms Questionnaire, and Screening for Anxiety and Depression in 
Tinnitus, including preliminary analyses of the parent versions for use with children. 
Journal of the American Academy of Audiology . 
AAZH, H., KNIPPER, M., DANESH, A. A., CAVANNA, A. E., ANDERSSON, L., 
PAULIN, J., SCHECKLMANN, M., HEINONEN-GUZEJEV, M. & MOORE, B. C. 
2018. Insights from the third international conference on hyperacusis: causes, 
evaluation, diagnosis, and treatment. Noise and Health,  20, 162-170. 
AAZH, H. & MOORE, B. C. 2017. Factors related to uncomfortable loudness levels for 
patients seen in a tinnitus and hyperacusis clinic. International Journal of Audiology,  
56, 793-800. 
AAZH, H., MOORE, B. C., LAMMAING, K. & CROPLEY, M. 2016. Tinnitus and 
hyperacusis therapy in a UK National Health Service audiology department: Patients' 
evaluations of the effectiveness of treatments. Int J Audiol,  55, 514-22.

154 
 
AAZH, H., MOORE, B. C., SCAGLIONE, T. & REMMERT, N. 2023. Psychometric 
Evaluation of the Misophonia Impact Questionnaire (MIQ) Using a Clinical 
Population of Patients Seeking Help for Tinnitus, Hyperacusis and/or Misophonia. 
Journal of the American Academy of Audiology . 
ADAMS, B., SEREDA, M., CASEY, A., BYROM, P., STOCKDALE, D. & HOARE, D. J. 
2021. A Delphi survey to determine a definition and description of hyperacusis by 
clinician consensus. International journal of audiology,  60, 607-613. 
ANARI, M., AXELSSON, A., ELIASSON, A. & MAGNUSSON, L. 1999. Hypersensitivity 
to sound: questionnaire data, audiometry and classification. Scandinavian audiology,  
28, 219-230. 
ASSIS, A. D. S., TYLER, R. S., PERREAU, A. E. & MANCINI, P. C. 2024. Hyperacusis: 
How You Can Help Yourself. The Hearing Journal,  77, 5-9. 
AUERBACH, B. D., RADZIWON, K. & SALVI, R. 2019. Testing the central gain model: 
loudness growth correlates with central auditory gain enhancement in a rodent model 
of hyperacusis. Neuroscience,  407, 93-107. 
BECKSTEAD, J. W. 2009. Content validity is naught. International journal of nursing 
studies, 46, 1274-1283. 
CASSIELLO-ROBBINS, C., ANAND, D., MCMAHON, K., BROUT, J., KELLEY, L. & 
ROSENTHAL, M. Z. 2021. A preliminary investigation of the association between 
misophonia and symptoms of psychopathology and personality disorders. Frontiers in 
psychology,  11, 519681. 
CEDERROTH, C. R., LUGO, A., EDVALL, N. K., LAZAR, A., LOPEZ-ESCAMEZ, J.-A., 
BULLA, J., UHLEN, I., HOARE, D. J., BAGULEY, D. M. & CANLON, B. 2020. 
Association between hyperacusis and tinnitus. Journal of Clinical Medicine,  9, 2412.

155 
 
CERLIANI, L. & ROUW, R. 2020. Increased orbitofrontal connectivity in misophonia. 
bioRxiv, 2020.10. 29.346650. 
COEY, J. G. & DE JESUS, O. 2024. Hyperacusis. StatPearls.  Treasure Island (FL): 
StatPearls Publishing 
Copyright © 2024, StatPearls Publishing LLC. 
COHEN, L., MANION, L. & MORRISON, K. 2017. Validity and reliability. Research 
methods in education.  Routledge. 
CUSACK, S. E., CASH, T. V. & VRANA, S. R. 2018. An examination of the relationship 
between misophonia, anxiety sensitivity, and obsessive-compulsive symptoms. 
Journal of Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders,  18, 67-72. 
DANESH, A. & AAZH, H. 2020. Misophonia: a neurologic, psychologic, and audiologic 
complex. The Hearing Journal,  73, 20-22. 
DAUMAN, R. & BOUSCAU-FAURE, F. 2005. Assessment and amelioration of hyperacusis 
in tinnitus patients. Acta oto-laryngologica,  125, 503-509. 
DE KLAVER, M., VAN RIJN, M., MARINUS, J., SOEDE, W. & DE LAAT, J. 2007. 
Hyperacusis in patients with complex regional pain. 
DIBB, B., GOLDING, S. & DOZIER, T. 2021. The development and validation of the 
Misophonia response scale. Journal of psychosomatic research,  149, 110587. 
DIBB, B. & GOLDING, S. E. 2022. A longitudinal investigation of quality of life and 
negative emotions in misophonia. Frontiers in neuroscience,  16, 900474. 
DIXON, L. J., SCHADEGG, M. J., CLARK, H. L., SEVIER, C. J. & WITCRAFT, S. M. 
2024. Prevalence, phenomenology, and impact of misophonia in a nationally 
representative sample of US adults. Journal of psychopathology and clinical science .

156 
 
EIJSKER, N., SCHRÖDER, A., LIEBRAND, L. C., SMIT, D. J., VAN WINGEN, G. & 
DENYS, D. 2021. White matter abnormalities in misophonia. NeuroImage: Clinical,  
32, 102787. 
ENZLER, F., FOURNIER, P. & NORENA, A. J. 2021a. A psychoacoustic test for 
diagnosing hyperacusis based on ratings of natural sounds. Hearing research,  400, 
108124. 
ENZLER, F., LORIOT, C., FOURNIER, P. & NOREÑA, A. J. 2021b. A psychoacoustic test 
for misophonia assessment. Scientific Reports,  11, 11044. 
FACKRELL, K., FEARNLEY, C., HOARE, D. J. & SEREDA, M. 2015. Hyperacusis 
questionnaire as a tool for measuring hypersensitivity to sound in a tinnitus research 
population. BioMed research international,  2015, 290425. 
FERREIRA, G. M., HARRISON, B. J. & FONTENELLE, L. F. 2013. Hatred of sounds: 
misophonic disorder or just an underreported psychiatric symptom? , 25, 4, 25, 271-
274. 
FERRER-TORRES, A. & GIMÉNEZ-LLORT, L. 2022. Misophonia: A systematic review of 
current and future trends in this emerging clinical field. International journal of 
environmental research and public health,  19, 6790. 
GREENBERG, B. & CARLOS, M. 2018. Psychometric properties and factor structure of a 
new scale to measure hyperacusis: introducing the inventory of hyperacusis 
symptoms. Ear and hearing,  39, 1025-1034. 
GU, J. W., HALPIN, C. F., NAM, E.-C., LEVINE, R. A. & MELCHER, J. R. 2010. Tinnitus, 
diminished sound-level tolerance, and elevated auditory activity in humans with 
clinically normal hearing sensitivity. Journal of neurophysiology,  104, 3361-3370.

157 
 
GUETTA, R. E., CASSIELLO-ROBBINS, C., ANAND, D. & ROSENTHAL, M. Z. 2022. 
Development and psychometric exploration of a semi-structured clinical interview for 
Misophonia. Personality and individual differences,  187, 111416. 
HADJIPAVLOU, G., BAER, S., LAU, A. & HOWARD, A. 2008. Selective sound 
intolerance and emotional distress: what every clinician should hear. Psychosomatic 
medicine,  70, 739-740. 
HANSEN, H. A., STEFANCIN, P., LEBER, A. B. & SAYGIN, Z. M. 2022. Neural evidence 
for non-orofacial triggers in mild misophonia. Frontiers in Neuroscience,  16, 880759. 
HENRY, J. A., THEODOROFF, S. M., EDMONDS, C., MARTINEZ, I., MYERS, P. J., 
ZAUGG, T. L. & GOODWORTH, M.-C. 2022. Sound tolerance conditions 
(hyperacusis, misophonia, noise sensitivity, and phonophobia): Definitions and 
clinical management. American journal of audiology,  31, 513-527. 
HOLOHAN, D., MARFILIUS, K. & SMITH, C. J. 2023. Misophonia: A review of the 
literature and its implications for the social work profession. Social Work,  68, 341-
348. 
JACQUEMIN, L., CARDON, E., MICHIELS, S., LUYTEN, T., VAN DER WAL, A., DE 
HERTOGH, W., VANDERVEKEN, O. M., VAN DE HEYNING, P., LAMMERS, 
M. J. & VAN ROMPAEY, V. 2022. Hyperacusis: demographic, audiological, and 
clinical characteristics of patients at the ENT department. European Archives of Oto-
Rhino-Laryngology,  279, 4899-4907. 
JAGER, I., DE KONING, P., BOST, T., DENYS, D. & VULINK, N. 2020. Misophonia: 
Phenomenology, comorbidity and demographics in a large sample. PloS one,  15, 
e0231390.

158 
 
JASTREBOFF, M. M. & JASTREBOFF, P. J. 2002. Decreased sound tolerance and tinnitus 
retraining therapy (TRT). Australian and New Zealand Journal of Audiology, The,  24, 
74-84. 
JASTREBOFF, P. J. & JASTREBOFF, M. M. 2000. Tinnitus retraining therapy (TRT) as a 
method for treatment of tinnitus and hyperacusis patients. Journal of the American 
Academy of Audiology,  11, 162-177. 
JASTREBOFF, P. J. & JASTREBOFF, M. M. Treatments for decreased sound tolerance 
(hyperacusis and misophonia).  Seminars in hearing, 2014. Thieme Medical 
Publishers, 105-120. 
JASTREBOFF, P. J. & JASTREBOFF, M. M. 2015. Decreased sound tolerance: hyperacusis, 
misophonia, diplacousis, and polyacousis. Handbook of clinical neurology,  129, 375-
387. 
JÜRIS, L., ANDERSSON, G., LARSEN, H. C. & EKSELIUS, L. 2013. Psychiatric 
comorbidity and personality traits in patients with hyperacusis. International journal 
of audiology,  52, 230-235. 
KHALFA, S., DUBAL, S., VEUILLET, E., PEREZ-DIAZ, F., JOUVENT, R. & COLLET, 
L. 2002. Psychometric normalization of a hyperacusis questionnaire. Orl, 64, 436-
442. 
KLEIN, A. J., ARMSTRONG, B. L., GREER, M. K. & BROWN III, F. R. 1990. 
Hyperacusis and otitis media in individuals with Williams syndrome. Journal of 
Speech and Hearing Disorders,  55, 339-344. 
KLIUCHKO, M., PUOLIVÄLI, T., HEINONEN-GUZEJEV, M., TERVANIEMI, M., 
TOIVIAINEN, P., SAMS, M. & BRATTICO, E. 2018. Neuroanatomical substrate of 
noise sensitivity. Neuroimage,  167, 309-315.

159 
 
KOOPS, E. & VAN DIJK, P. 2021. Hyperacusis in tinnitus patients relates to enlarged 
subcortical and cortical responses to sound except at the tinnitus frequency. Hearing 
research, 401, 108158. 
KULA, F. B., CROPLEY, M. & AAZH, H. 2023. Hyperacusis and Misophonia: a systematic 
review of psychometric measures. Journal of the American Academy of Audiology . 
KUMAR, S., DHEERENDRA, P., ERFANIAN, M., BENZAQUÉN, E., SEDLEY, W., 
GANDER, P. E., LAD, M., BAMIOU, D. E. & GRIFFITHS, T. D. 2021. The motor 
basis for misophonia. Journal of Neuroscience,  41, 5762-5770. 
KUMAR, S., TANSLEY-HANCOCK, O., SEDLEY, W., WINSTON, J. S., CALLAGHAN, 
M. F., ALLEN, M., COPE, T. E., GANDER, P. E., BAMIOU, D.-E. & GRIFFITHS, 
T. D. 2017. The brain basis for misophonia. Current Biology,  27, 527-533. 
LEWIN, A. B., MILGRAM, L., CEPEDA, S. L., DICKINSON, S., BOLEN, M., KUDRYK, 
K., BOLTON, C., KARLOVICH, A. R., GRASSIE, H. L. & KANGAVARY, A. 
2024. Clinical characteristics of treatment‐seeking youth with misophonia. Journal of 
Clinical Psychology,  80, 1405-1419. 
MAKANI, P., THIOUX, M., KOOPS, E. A., PYOTT, S. J. & VAN DIJK, P. 2024. 
Hyperacusis in Tinnitus Individuals Is Associated with Smaller Gray Matter Volumes 
in the Supplementary Motor Area Regardless of Hearing Levels. Brain Sciences,  14, 
726. 
MAKANI, P., THIOUX, M., PYOTT, S. J. & VAN DIJK, P. 2022. A combined image-and 
coordinate-based Meta-analysis of whole-brain voxel-based morphometry studies 
investigating subjective tinnitus. Brain Sciences,  12, 1192. 
MELTZER, J. B. & HERZFELD, M. Tinnitus, hyperacusis, and misophonia toolbox.  
Seminars in Hearing, 2014. Thieme Medical Publishers, 121-130.

160 
 
MOHAJAN, H. K. 2017. Two criteria for good measurements in research: Validity and 
reliability. Annals of Spiru Haret University. Economic Series,  17, 59-82. 
MOKKINK, L. B., DE VET, H. C., PRINSEN, C. A., PATRICK, D. L., ALONSO, J., 
BOUTER, L. M. & TERWEE, C. B. 2018. COSMIN risk of bias checklist for 
systematic reviews of patient-reported outcome measures. Quality of Life Research,  
27, 1171-1179. 
MOKKINK, L. B., TERWEE, C. B., PATRICK, D. L., ALONSO, J., STRATFORD, P. W., 
KNOL, D. L., BOUTER, L. M. & DE VET, H. C. 2010. The COSMIN study reached 
international consensus on taxonomy, terminology, and definitions of measurement 
properties for health-related patient-reported outcomes. Journal of clinical 
epidemiology,  63, 737-745. 
MUSUMANO, L. B., HATZOPOULOS, S., FANCELLO, V., BIANCHINI, C., BELLINI, 
T., PELUCCHI, S., SKARŻYŃSKI, P. H., SKARŻYŃSKA, M. B. & CIORBA, A. 
2023. Hyperacusis: Focus on Gender Differences: A Systematic Review. Life (Basel),  
13. 
NAYLOR, J., CAIMINO, C., SCUTT, P., HOARE, D. J. & BAGULEY, D. M. 2021. The 
prevalence and severity of misophonia in a UK undergraduate medical student 
population and validation of the Amsterdam misophonia scale. Psychiatric Quarterly,  
92, 609-619. 
PAULIN, J., ANDERSSON, L. & NORDIN, S. 2016. Characteristics of hyperacusis in the 
general population. Noise and Health,  18, 178-184. 
PFEIFFER, E., ALLROGGEN, M. & SACHSER, C. 2024. The prevalence of misophonia in 
a representative population-based survey in Germany. Social Psychiatry and 
Psychiatric Epidemiology , 1-8.

161 
 
PRABHU, P. & NAGARAJ, M. K. 2020. Development and validation of Hyperacusis 
Handicap Questionnaire in individuals with tinnitus associated with hyperacusis. 
Journal of Otology,  15, 124-128. 
RAJ-KOZIAK, D., GOS, E., KUTYBA, J. J., SKARZYNSKI, P. H. & SKARZYNSKI, H. 
2023. Hyperacusis Assessment Questionnaire—A New Tool Assessing Hyperacusis 
in Subjects with Tinnitus. Journal of Clinical Medicine,  12, 6622. 
REMMERT, N., SCHMIDT, K. M. B., MUSSEL, P., HAGEL, M. L. & EID, M. 2022. The 
Berlin Misophonia questionnaire revised (BMQ-R): development and validation of a 
symptom-oriented diagnostical instrument for the measurement of misophonia. PLoS 
One, 17, e0269428. 
REN, J., XU, T., XIANG, T., PU, J.-M., LIU, L., XIAO, Y. & LAI, D. 2021. Prevalence of 
hyperacusis in the general and special populations: a scoping review. Frontiers in 
neurology,  12, 706555. 
RINALDI, L. J., SMEES, R., WARD, J. & SIMNER, J. 2022. Poorer well-being in children 
with misophonia: evidence from the Sussex misophonia scale for adolescents. 
Frontiers in psychology,  13, 808379. 
ROSENHALL, U., NORDIN, V., SANDSTRÖM, M., AHLSEN, G. & GILLBERG, C. 
1999. Autism and hearing loss. Journal of autism and developmental disorders,  29, 
349-357. 
ROSENTHAL, M. Z., ANAND, D., CASSIELLO-ROBBINS, C., WILLIAMS, Z. J., 
GUETTA, R. E., TRUMBULL, J. & KELLEY, L. D. 2021. Development and initial 
validation of the duke misophonia questionnaire. Frontiers in psychology,  12, 709928. 
ROSENTHAL, M. Z., MCMAHON, K., GREENLEAF, A. S., CASSIELLO-ROBBINS, C., 
GUETTA, R., TRUMBULL, J., ANAND, D., FRAZER-ABEL, E. S. & KELLEY, L.

162 
 
2022. Phenotyping misophonia: Psychiatric disorders and medical health correlates. 
Frontiers in psychology,  13, 941898. 
ROSING, S. N., SCHMIDT, J. H., WEDDERKOPP, N. & BAGULEY, D. M. 2016. 
Prevalence of tinnitus and hyperacusis in children and adolescents: a systematic 
review. BMJ open,  6, e010596. 
ROUW, R. & ERFANIAN, M. 2018. A large‐scale study of misophonia. Journal of clinical 
psychology,  74, 453-479. 
SACCHETTO, L., APA, E., CIORBA, A., PALMA, S., CARAGLI, V., GHERPELLI, C., 
MONZANI, D., GENOVESE, E. & NOCINI, R. 2022. Psychological profile and 
social behaviors of patients with hyperacusis. Journal of Clinical Medicine,  11, 7317. 
SAN GIORGI, R. 2015. Hyperactivity in amygdala and auditory cortex in misophonia: 
preliminary results of a functional magnetic resonance imaging study. Amsterdam 
Brain Cognition Journal,  2, 21-28. 
SAVARD, M.-A., SARES, A. G., COFFEY, E. B. & DEROCHE, M. L. 2022. Specificity of 
affective responses in misophonia depends on trigger identification. Frontiers in 
Neuroscience,  16, 879583. 
SCHRÖDER, A., VAN WINGEN, G., EIJSKER, N., SAN GIORGI, R., VULINK, N. C., 
TURBYNE, C. & DENYS, D. 2019. Misophonia is associated with altered brain 
activity in the auditory cortex and salience network. Scientific reports,  9, 7542. 
SCHRÖDER, A., VULINK, N. & DENYS, D. 2013. Misophonia: diagnostic criteria for a 
new psychiatric disorder. PloS one,  8, e54706. 
SIEPSIAK, M., ROSENTHAL, M., RAJ-KOZIAK, D. & DRAGAN, W. 2022. Psychiatric 
and audiologic features of misophonia: Use of a clinical control group with auditory 
over-responsivity. Journal of Psychosomatic Research,  156, 110777.

163 
 
SIEPSIAK, M., ŚLIWERSKI, A. & ŁUKASZ DRAGAN, W. 2020a. Development and 
psychometric properties of misoquest—A new self-report questionnaire for 
misophonia. International journal of environmental research and public health,  17, 
1797. 
SIMNER, J., RINALDI, L. J. & WARD, J. 2024. An Automated Online Measure for 
Misophonia: The Sussex Misophonia Scale for Adults. Assessment , 
10731911241234104. 
SINGH, T. & SEIDMAN, M. D. 2019. Hearing Disorders Associated With Mild Traumatic 
Brain Injury (mTBI). Neurosensory Disorders in Mild Traumatic Brain Injury.  
Elsevier. 
SWEDO, S. E., BAGULEY, D. M., DENYS, D., DIXON, L. J., ERFANIAN, M., 
FIORETTI, A., JASTREBOFF, P. J., KUMAR, S., ROSENTHAL, M. Z. & ROUW, 
R. 2022. Consensus definition of misophonia: a delphi study. Frontiers in 
Neuroscience,  16, 841816. 
TAYLOR, S. 2017. Misophonia: A new mental disorder? Medical hypotheses,  103, 109-117. 
THEODOROFF, S. M., REAVIS, K. M. & NORRHOLM, S. D. 2024. Prevalence of 
Hyperacusis Diagnosis in Veterans Who Use VA Healthcare. Ear and hearing,  45, 
499-504. 
TYLER, R. S., PIENKOWSKI, M., RONCANCIO, E. R., JUN, H. J., BROZOSKI, T., 
DAUMAN, N., COELHO, C. B., ANDERSSON, G., KEINER, A. J. & CACACE, A. 
T. 2014. A review of hyperacusis and future directions: part I. Definitions and 
manifestations. American journal of audiology,  23, 402-419. 
VITORATOU, S., HAYES, C., UGLIK-MARUCHA, N., PEARSON, O., GRAHAM, T. & 
GREGORY, J. 2023. Misophonia in the UK: Prevalence and norms from the S-Five 
in a UK representative sample. Plos one, 18, e0282777.

164 
 
VITORATOU, S., UGLIK-MARUCHA, N., HAYES, C. & GREGORY, J. 2021. Listening 
to people with misophonia: exploring the multiple dimensions of sound intolerance 
using a new psychometric tool, the S-five, in a large sample of individuals identifying 
with the condition. Psych, 3, 639-662. 
WERTZ, J., RÜTTIGER, L., BENDER, B., KLOSE, U., STARK, R. S., DAPPER, K., 
SAEMISCH, J., BRAUN, C., SINGER, W. & DALHOFF, E. 2024. Differential 
cortical activation patterns: pioneering sub-classification of tinnitus with and without 
hyperacusis by combining audiometry, gamma oscillations, and hemodynamics. 
Frontiers in Neuroscience,  17, 1232446. 
WILLIAMS, Z. J., CASCIO, C. J. & WOYNAROSKI, T. G. 2022. Psychometric validation 
of a brief self-report measure of misophonia symptoms and functional impairment: 
The duke-vanderbilt misophonia screening questionnaire. Frontiers in Psychology,  
13, 897901. 
WILLIAMS, Z. J., SUZMAN, E. & WOYNAROSKI, T. G. 2021. Prevalence of decreased 
sound tolerance (hyperacusis) in individuals with autism spectrum disorder: A meta-
analysis. LWW. 
WU, M. S., LEWIN, A. B., MURPHY, T. K. & STORCH, E. A. 2014. Misophonia: 
incidence, phenomenology, and clinical correlates in an undergraduate student 
sample. Journal of clinical psychology,  70, 994-1007. 
ZENG, F.-G. 2020. Tinnitus and hyperacusis: central noise, gain and variance. Current 
opinion in physiology,  18, 123-129.

165 
 
APPENDICES  
Appendix A: University Ethics Committee Approval Letter (Study 1 and 2)

166 
 
Appendix B: University Ethics Committee Approval Letter (Study 3)

167 
 
Appendix C: Definitions and criteria for good measurement properties by COSMIN guidance.  
Note. The content presented in Appendix C of the thesis has been included as Appendix 1 in 
this thesis (chapter two) to comply with the journal's formatting guidelines. The table is 
reproduced from the COSMIN guidance, using their definitions and criteria.  
 
Measurement Property  
Definition  
Rating  
Criteria 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Structural Validity 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The degree to which 
the scores of a PROM 
are an adequate 
reflection of the 
dimensionality of 
the construct to be 
measured  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
+ CTT: 
CFA: CFI or TLI or comparable measure 
>0.95 OR RMSEA 
<0.06 OR SRMR <0.082 
IRT/Rasch : 
No violation of unidimensionality3: CFI or 
TLI or comparable 
measure >0.95 OR RMSEA <0.06 OR 
SRMR <0.08 
AND 
no violation of local independence: residual 
correlations 
among the items after controlling for the 
dominant factor < 
0.20 OR Q3's < 0.37 
AND 
no violation of monotonicity: adequate 
looking graphs OR item 
scalability >0.30 
AND 
adequate model fit: 
IRT: χ2 >0.01 
Rasch: infit and outfit mean squares ≥ 0.5 
and ≤ 1.5 OR standardized 
values > ‐2 and <2  
? CTT: Not all information for ‘+’ reported 
IRT/Rasch: Model fit not reported 
- Criteria for ‘+’ not met 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Internal Consistency  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
The degree of the 
interrelatedness 
among the items 
 
 + At least low evidence for sufficient structural 
validity AND 
Cronbach's alpha(s) ≥ 0.70 for each 
unidimensional scale or 
Subscale  
? Criteria for “At least low evidence4 for 
sufficient structural 
validity” not met  
- At least low evidence4 for sufficient 
structural validity AND 
Cronbach’s alpha(s) < 0.70 for each 
unidimensional scale or 
subscale 
Reliability  
 
 The proportion of the 
total variance in the 
measurements which 
is due to ‘true’† + ICC or weighted Kappa ≥ 0.70 
? ICC or weighted Kappa not reported

168 
 
differences between 
patients - ICC or weighted Kappa < 0.70 
 
Measurement Error The systematic and 
random error 
of a patient’s score 
that is not 
attributed to true 
changes in the 
construct to be 
measured 
 + SDC or LoA < MIC5 
? MIC not defined 
- SDC or LoA > MIC5 
Hypotheses testing for 
construct validity The degree to which 
the scores of 
a PROM are 
consistent with 
hypotheses (for 
instance with 
regard to internal 
relationships, 
relationships to scores 
of other 
instruments, or 
differences 
between relevant 
groups) based 
on the assumption that 
the PROM 
validly measures the 
construct to 
be measured + The result is in accordance with the 
hypothesis 
? No hypothesis defined (by the review team) 
- The result is not in accordance with the 
hypothesis 
Cross‐cultural 
validity\measurement 
invariance The degree to which 
the performance of the 
items on a translated 
or culturally adapted 
PROM are an 
adequate reflection 
of the performance of 
the items of the 
original version of the 
PROM + No important differences found between 
group factors (such as age, gender, language) 
in multiple group factor analysis OR 
no important DIF for group factors 
(McFadden's R2 < 0.02) 
  
? o multiple group factor analysis OR DIF 
analysis performed 
 
- Important differences between group factors 
OR DIF was found 
Criterion validity The degree to which 
the scores of a PROM 
are an adequate 
reflection of a ‘gold 
standard’ + Correlation with gold standard ≥ 0.70 OR 
AUC ≥ 0.70 
? Not all information for ‘+’ reported 
- Correlation with gold standard < 0.70 OR 
AUC < 0.70  
Responsiveness The ability of a 
PROM to detect 
change over time in 
the construct 
to be measured + The result is in accordance with the 
hypothesis7 OR AUC ≥ 0.70 
? No hypothesis defined (by the review team) 
- The result is not in accordance with the 
hypothesis7 OR AUC < 0.70

169 
 
Appendix D: English MisoQuest (Study 1 and 2) 
MISOQUEST – A QUESTIONNAIRE FOR ASSESSING DECREASED SOUND TOLERANCE  
authors: Siepsiak, M., Śliwerski, A., Dragan, W. Ł  
Some people are less sensitive to certain sounds, while other people are more sensitive to 
certain sounds. Are there any sounds which you find particularly burdensome? Please 
indicate how much you agree or disagree with the following statements using the following 
scale: 
1 – I definitely do not agree  
2 – I do not agree  
3 – Hard to say  
4 – I agree  
5 – I definitely agree  
 
1 Some sounds bother me so much that I have difficulty controlling my emotions. 1 2 3 4 5 
2 Unpleasant sounds make me feel overwhelmed. 1 2 3 4 5 
3 I become anxious at the mere thought of an unpleasant sound. 1 2 3 4 5 
4 I believe that my reactions to sounds are exaggerated, but I can’t get rid of them. 1 2 3 4 5 
5 When I hear unpleasant sounds, I start sensing emotions in my body (e.g. I 
sweat, feel pain, feel pressure, my muscles tens). 1 2 3 4 5 
6 I start feeling anger the moment I see a thing/animal/person that might make an 
unpleasant sound at any time. 1 2 3 4 5 
7 I put a lot of effort into controlling emotions when I hear an unpleasant sound.  1 2 3 4 5 
8 If I can, I avoid meeting with certain people because of the sounds they make. 1 2 3 4 5 
9 I find some sounds made by the human body unbearable. 1 2 3 4 5 
10 I feel that my mental state worsens if I cannot leave a place where there’s an 
unpleasant sound. 1 2 3 4 5 
11 I often think about how to drown out unpleasant sounds. 1 2 3 4 5 
12 Some unpleasant sounds make me instantly angry. 1 2 3 4 5 
13 I am scared that unpleasant sounds may impact my future. 1 2 3 4 5 
14 When meeting with other people, I am sometimes irritated because of unpleasant 
sounds that are present. 1 2 3 4 5

170 
 
 
Appendix E: SF 1: Flowchart of the participant involvement process in the three phases of 
this study. (N= number of participants)- Study 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Participants were 
invited to 
complete the 
study.  
Study Consent 
(N=475) 
Survey 
Excluded from the 
study: N=24          
(failing the attention 
check question) 
 Completed the first phase 
of the study: N=451 
(Self-administered) 
Completed the second 
phase of the study for 
test -retest: N= 154 
(Self-Administered) 
Completed the third phase 
of the study: N=14  
 (Researcher- administered)     Dropped 
out: N=297  
Dropped 
out: N=140

171 
 
 
 
Appendix F: SF 2: Factor structure of the English version of MisoQuest from CFA (Study 1)

172 
 
 
Appendix G: SF 3: Chapter 3- Bland-Altman plot (Study 1) 
 
 
 
Bland-Altman plot of the total misophonia score of the English version of MisoQuest. The plot demonstrates the 
agreement between two time points and highlights potential outliers. Each individual is depicted on the graph by showing the 
average value of their two assessments on the x-axis and the difference between those assessments on the y-axis. The mean 
difference represents the estimated bias, while the standard deviation (SD) of the differences indicates the variations around 
this mean (with outliers being values above 1.96 SD diff). The reference lines display the average difference between time one 
and time 2 (red-colored solid line) and the 95% limits of agreement for the mean difference (green-colored solid lines).

173 
 
 
Appendix H: Three-Dimensional Fatigue Inventory (Study 1 and 2) 
Physical Fatigue : Involves extreme physical tiredness and an inability to engage in physical 
activity. 
During the PAST 12 MONTHS, 
how often did you... Everyday  At least 
once a 
week At least 
once a 
month Less than 
once a 
month Never 
1. feel physically exhausted at the 
end of the day?       
2. have difficulty engaging in 
physical activity at the end of the 
day?      
3. feel physically worn out at the 
end of the day?       
4. want to physically shut down at 
the end of the day?       
5. feel physically drained at the end 
of the day?       
6. want to avoid anything that took 
too much physical energy at the 
end of the day?       
 
Mental Fatigue : Involves extreme mental tiredness and an inability to think or concentrate. 
During the PAST 12 MONTHS, 
how often did you... Everyday  At least 
once a 
week At least 
once a 
month Less than 
once a 
month Never 
7. feel mentally exhausted at the 
end of the day?       
8. have difficulty thinking and 
concentrating at the end of the day?       
9. feel mentally worn out at the end 
of the day?       
10. want to mentally shut down at 
the end of the day?       
11. feel mentally drained at the end 
of the day?       
12. want to avoid anything that took 
too much mental energy at the end 
of the day?

174 
 
Emotional Fatigue : Involves extreme emotional tiredness and an inability to feel or show 
emotions. 
During the PAST 12 MONTHS, 
how often did you... Everyday  At least 
once a 
week At least 
once a 
month Less than 
once a 
month Never 
13. feel emotionally exhausted at 
the end of the day?       
14. have difficulty showing and 
dealing with emotions at the end of 
the day?      
15. feel emotionally worn out at the 
end of the day?       
16. want to emotionally shut down 
at the end of the day?       
17. feel emotionally drained at the 
end of the day?       
18. want to avoid anything that took 
too much emotional energy at the 
end of the day?

175 
 
Appendix I: Amsterdam Misophonia Scale – Revised (Study 1)  
 
Review your experience from hearing your misophonia sounds in the last 3 days . Read instead 
of “sounds” your most disturbing misophonia sounds and instead of “emotion” your typical 
emotion. Choose the answer that is most applicable for you. 
  
1. How many times do 
you spend a day 
(thinking about) these 
sounds? 0 hour 
0 < 1 hour 
1 1-3 hour 
2 3-8 hour 
3 >8 hour 
4 
2. To what extent do you 
focus on these sounds? not 
0 mild 
1 moderate 
2 severe 
3 extreme 
4 
3. To what extent do you 
experience impairment 
due to these sounds? not 
0 mild 
1 moderate 
2 severe 
3 extreme 
4 
4. How intense is your 
feeling of 
irritability/anger when 
you hear these sounds?  not 
0 mild 
1 moderate 
2 severe 
3 extreme 
4 
5. To what extent do you 
feel helpless against 
these sounds? not 
0 mild 
1 moderate 
2 severe 
3 extreme 
4 
6. To what extent are you 
suffering from these 
sounds? not 
0 mild 
1 moderate 
2 severe 
3 extreme 
4 
7. To what extent are you 
suffering from the 
avoidance of these 
sounds? not 
0 mild 
1 moderate 
2 severe 
3 extreme 
4 
8. To what extent are the 
sounds limiting your 
life (work, household 
etc.)?  not 
0 mild 
1 moderate 
2 severe 
3 extreme 
4 
9. To what extent are you 
avoiding specific 
places or situations 
because of the sounds? not 
0 mild 
1 moderate 
2 severe 
3 extreme 
4 
10. To what extent can you 
shift your attention 
when you are hearing 
these sounds? always 999 
0 usually 
(75%) 
1 sometimes 
(50%) 
2 seldom 
(25%) 
3 never 
9999 
4 
Total score:

176 
 
Appendix J: Misophonia Impact Questionnaire- Adult (Study 1 and 3) 
 
Please answer each item to the best of your ability as close to your experience as possible. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Over the last 2 weeks, how often would you say the following has occurred because of 
your intolerance to certain sounds related to eating, chewing gum, lip smacking, mouth 
noises, sniffling, breathing, clicking, and tapping?  
  
1. Feeling anxious 
 0-1 
day 2-6 
days 7-10 
days 11-14 
days 
2. Unable to distract yourself from certain 
sounds 0-1 
day 2-6 
days 7-10 
days 11-14 
days 
3. Experiencing difficulties in your relationships 
with family members or friends 0-1 
day 2-6 
days 7-10 
days 11-14 
days 
4. Feeling angry 0-1 
day 2-6 
days 7-10 
days 11-14 
days 
5. Finding it difficult to be around certain 
individuals because of the noises that they make 0-1 
day 2-6 
days 7-10 
days 11-14 
days 
6. Feeling irritated 0-1 
day 2-6 
days 7-10 
days 11-14 
days 
7. Avoiding certain situations because of the 
noises that you have to put up with 0-1 
day 2-6 
days 7-10 
days 11-14 
days 
8. Experiencing low mood because of your 
intolerance to certain sounds 0-1 
day 2-6 
days 7-10 
days 11-14 
days

177 
 
Appendix K: Sound Sensitivity Symptoms Questionnaire (Study 1) 
Please answer each item to the best of your ability as close to your experience as possible. 
 
Over the last 2 weeks, how often have you been bothered by any of the following 
problems?  
1. Having a problem tolerating sounds 
because they often seem “too loud” to 
you? 0–1 days  2–6 days  7–10 days  11–14 days  
2. Pain in your ears when hearing 
certain loud sounds? 
Examples: loud music, sirens, 
motorcycles, building work, lawn 
mower, train stations. 0–1 days  2–6 days  7–10 days  11–14 days  
3. Discomfort (physical sensations other 
than ear pain) in your ears when hearing 
certain loud sounds? 0–1 days  2–6 days  7–10 days  11–14 days  
4. Feeling angry or anxious when 
hearing certain sounds related to eating 
noises, lip smacking, sniffling, 
breathing, clicking sounds, tapping? 0–1 days  2–6 days  7–10 days  11–14 days  
5. Fear that certain sounds may make 
your hearing and/or tinnitus worse? 0–1 days  2–6 days  7–10 days  11–14 days

178 
 
Appendix L: Hyperacusis Impact Questionnaire  (Study 1, 2 and 3) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Please answer each item to the best of your ability as close to your experience as possible.  
Over the last 2 weeks, how often would you say each of the following has occurred because of 
certain environmental sounds that seemed too loud to you but that people around you could 
tolerate well?   
1. Feeling anxious when hearing 
loud noises 0-1 days 2-6 days  7-10 days 11-14 days  
2. Avoiding certain places because 
it is too noisy   0-1 days 2-6 days  7-10 days 11-14 days  
3. Lack of concentration in noisy 
places   0-1 days 2-6 days  7-10 days 11-14 days  
4. Unable to relax in noisy places  0-1 days 2-6 days  7-10 days 11-14 days  
5. Difficulty in carrying out certain 
day-to-day activities/tasks in 
noisy places 0-1 days 2-6 days  7-10 days 11-14 days  
6. Lack of enjoyment from leisure 
activities in noisy places 0-1 days 2-6 days  7-10 days 11-14 days  
7. Experiencing low mood because 
of your intolerance to sound 0-1 days 2-6 days  7-10 days 11-14 days  
8. Getting tired quickly in noisy 
places 0-1 days 2-6 days  7-10 days 11-14 days

179 
 
Appendix M: Tinnitus Impact Questionnaire  (Study 1 and 3) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Please answer each item to the best of your ability as close to your experience as possible.  
Over the last 2 weeks, how often would you say the following has occurred because of hearing 
a sound in your ears or head with no external source (e.g., buzzing, high-pitched whistle, 
hissing…)? 
1. Lack of concentration 0-1 days 2-6 days  7-10 days 11-14 days  
2. Feeling anxious 0-1 days 2-6 days  7-10 days 11-14 days  
3. Sleep difficulties (delay in falling 
sleep and/or difficulty getting back to 
sleep if woken up during the night) 0-1 days 2-6 days  7-10 days 11-14  days 
4. Lack of enjoyment from leisure 
activities 0-1 days 2-6 days  7-10 days 11-14 days  
5. Inability to perform certain day-to-day 
activities/tasks 0-1 days 2-6 days  7-10 days 11-14 days  
6. Feeling irritable 0-1 days 2-6 days  7-10 days 11-14 days  
7. Low mood 0-1 days 2-6 days  7-10 days 11-14 days

180 
 
Appendix N: The Screening for Anxiety and Depression in Tinnitus/Sound Intolerance 
 (Study 1, 2 and 3) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Please answer each item to the best of your ability as close to your experience as possible.  
Over the last 2 weeks, how often have you been bothered by any of the following problems? 
1. Feeling nervous, anxious or on 
edge 0-1 days 2-6 days  7-10 days 11-14 days  
2. Not being able to stop or control 
worrying 0-1 days 2-6 days  7-10 days 11-14 days  
3. Little interest or pleasure in doing 
things 0-1 days 2-6 days  7-10 days 11-15  days 
4. Feeling down, depressed or 
hopeless 0-1 days 2-6 days  7-10 days 11-14 days

181 
 
Appendix O:  Hearing Handicap Inventory (Study 1) 
Instructions: Please check “yes,” “no,” or “sometimes” in response to each of the following 
items. Do not skip a question if you avoid a situation because of a hearing problem. If you 
use a hearing aid, please answer the way you hear without the aid. 
 
 
Item  Yes  
(4 pts)  Sometimes  
(2 pts)  No  
(0 pts)  
E  Does a hearing 
problem cause you 
to feel 
embarrassed when 
meeting new 
people?  ______  ______  ______  
E  Does a hearing 
problem cause you 
to feel frustrated 
when talking to 
members of your 
family?  ______  ______  ______  
S  Do you have 
difficulty hearing 
when someone 
speaks in a 
whisper?  ______  ______  ______  
E  Do you feel 
handicapped by a 
hearing problem?  ______  ______  ______  
S  Does a hearing 
problem cause you 
difficulty when 
visiting friends, 
relatives, or 
neighbours?  ______  ______  ______  
S  Does a hearing 
problem cause you 
to attend religious  
services less often 
than you would 
like?  ______  ______  ______  
E  Does a hearing 
problem cause you 
to have arguments 
with family 
members?  ______  ______  ______  
S  Does a hearing 
problem cause you 
difficulty when ______  ______  ______

182 
 
listening to TV or 
radio?  
E  Do you feel that 
any difficulty with 
your hearing limits 
or hampers your 
personal or social 
life?  ______  ______  ______  
S  Does a hearing 
problem cause you 
difficulty when in 
a restaurant with 
relatives or 
friends?  ______  ______  ______  
TOTAL SCORE = _______ (sum of the points assigned to each of the items)

183 
 
Appendix P:  A Single Item Measure of Stress Symptoms (study 1 and 2) 
 
Stress means a situation in which a person feels tense, restless, nervous or anxious or is unable 
to sleep at night because his/her mind is troubled all the time.  
 
Do you feel this kind of stress these days? 
 
o Not at all 
o Not really 
o Undecided 
o Somewhat 
o Very Much

184 
 
Appendix R : Single Item Sleep Quality Scale (study 1 and 2)