P 023 MISOPHONIA: A DISORDER OF EMOTION PROCESSING
OF SOUNDS
Sukhbinder Kumar, Olana Hancock, Thomas Cope, William Sedley, Joel Winston,
Timothy D Grif ﬁthsAuditory Group Institute of Neuroscience, Newcastle University
Medical School, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE2 4HH, United Kingdom
10.1136/jnnp-2014-308883.38
Objective Sounds of chewing, breathing, keyboard typing are
considered by most people as ’normal ’sounds and are ignored
as background sounds in everyday listening. However, for a
group of people these sounds are not only distracting but alsoevoke a strong feeling of anger accompanied by an urge toescape from the situation producing these sounds. This condi-tion, marked by sensitivity to a selective group of sounds, wasgiven the name “misophonia ”(hatred of sounds) almost a
decade ago. Since the sounds that act as “triggers” in this condi-
tion are quite common at home, work place and in social gath-erings, misophonia has devastating effects on social, family andpersonal life of the sufferer. Presently misophonia is not fea-tured in any of ﬁcial medical/psychiatric classi ﬁcations. People
with misophonia suffer in silence because they do not sharetheir problem with others for the fear of being called “crazy ”.
The objective of the current work was to check the consistencyof pro ﬁle of symptoms and trigger sounds in a population of
subjects with misophonia.Method A group of subjects were assessed by a group of neu-
rologists in a neurology clinic. T o further assess the symptoms/triggers in a bigger population, a questionnaire was designed
asking questions about symptoms/triggers etc which was then
posted on a website dedicated to disseminate information aboutmisophonia. People were requested to ﬁll-in the questionnaire
and send back by email.Results The assessment in the neurology clinic con ﬁrmed a
striking similar pro ﬁle of symptoms and triggers in the indivi-
duals. A group of 195 subjects ﬁlled-in the questionnaire posted
on the website. Analysis of 157 questionnaire showed:
Mean Age of Onset =12.08 years [5 –50]
146/157 (93.0%) describe eating sounds as triggers135/157 (86.0%) describe anger as the dominant emotion
(other emotions include panic/anxiety)
132/157 (84.0%) describe leaving the situation which
produce trigger sounds.Conclusion Our data indicate that misophonia is a disorder of
emotion processing of sounds which need to be investigatedfurther.
J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry 2014; 85:e3 15 of 16BNA Abstracts