Citation: Magrini, A.; Di Feo, G.;
Cerniglia, A. Acoustic Quality of the
External Environment: Indications on
Questionnaire Structure for
Investigating Subjective Perception. J.
Otorhinolaryngol. Hear. Balance Med.
2023 ,4, 4. https://doi.org/10.3390/
ohbm4010004
Academic Editor: Toshihisa
Murofushi
Received: 10 May 2023
Revised: 31 May 2023
Accepted: 14 June 2023
Published: 19 June 2023
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
Journal of 
Otorhinolaryngology, Hearing 
and Balance Medicine 
Review
Acoustic Quality of the External Environment: Indications on
Questionnaire Structure for Investigating Subjective Perception
Anna Magrini1,*
, Gelsomina Di Feo2and Andrea Cerniglia2
1Department of Civil Engineering and Architecture, University of Pavia, Via Ferrata 3, 27100 Pavia, Italy
2Accon Italia, Via Trento 11/A, 27010 San Genesio ed Uniti, Italy
*Correspondence: magrini@unipv.it
Abstract: The subjective judgment on the annoyance produced by noise is always an important tool
to complete an investigation, and to ﬁnd the best way for its reduction. Therefore, acoustic analyses
for environmental improvement frequently combine objective measures with subjective surveys
to gain a comprehensive understanding of the problem. The technical speciﬁcation, concerning
the “Assessment of noise annoyance by means of social and socio-acoustic surveys”, ISO/TS 15666
(revised in 2021), has represented a basis for these activities since 2003, when it aimed to obtain
information about noise annoyance “at home”. The more recent ISO/TS 12913-2 (2018), aimed at
soundscape studies, investigations and applications, provides guidelines for conducting social and
socio-acoustic surveys to assess noise annoyance and, in particular, it gives detailed indications on
data collection and reporting. The indications provided by the technical speciﬁcations represent a
common guideline for addressing the implementation of a subjective survey in the acoustic ﬁeld, and
to make investigations as comparable as possible. However, they do not cover all the ﬁelds of acoustic
subjective investigations. Therefore, to make the collection of information from questionnaires
more effective, it is useful to have a broader review of the issues that need to be addressed. To
support this type of activity, this paper collects and presents relevant observations for the design of
subjective survey questionnaires focused on outdoor acoustic quality. Drawing on previous research
studies and experiences, it provides a series of observations on the main aspects to be considered
in order to structure multipurpose acoustic evaluation questionnaires, including discussion of the
general considerations for questionnaire structure, administration methods, population sample
characterization, question formulation, and classiﬁcation. It also deals with speciﬁc indications
related to acoustic evaluations, such as the characteristics of annoying noise, boundary conditions,
subjective feelings, and source features.
Keywords: acoustic survey; questionnaire structure; subjective assessment
1. Introduction
Noise pollution is one of the major environmental problems, particularly prevalent in
urban areas where it often becomes the subject of thorough investigation [ 1]. The health,
comfort, and productivity of individuals both outdoors and indoors [ 2] are strongly inﬂu-
enced by environmental quality.
Negative effects associated with noise annoyance include difﬁculties in verbal commu-
nication, sleep disturbance, altered behaviours and psychological conditions [ 3,4]. More-
over, the resulting stress may contribute to the onset of serious diseases, mostly related to
the cardiovascular, respiratory, and nervous systems [5,6].
In the strategies for evaluating acoustic quality, both in internal and external envi-
ronments, two main aspects can be emphasized: quantifying physical parameters using
measurements and simulations, and assessing individual perception through subjective
investigations [7,8].
J. Otorhinolaryngol. Hear. Balance Med. 2023 ,4, 4. https://doi.org/10.3390/ohbm4010004 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/ohbm

J. Otorhinolaryngol. Hear. Balance Med. 2023 ,4, 4 2 of 20
The collection of data on noise levels, the analysis of their characteristics, and of the
results is generally performed using technological tools (measurement and data-processing
tools). The methods for measuring and processing data are usually deﬁned by regulatory
indications aimed at protecting potentially exposed individuals.
However, often the thresholds do not match actual individual perception and do not
correspond to a judgment on the acoustic quality of the environment. Therefore, it can be
concluded that technical investigations alone are not exhaustive and do not adequately
represent individual perception in a satisfactory manner [9].
The opinions expressed by the population constitute a valuable source of information
on the environmental quality in which we live and work. They allow identifying and
characterizing the relationships between environment, comfort, and productivity in a
better way [10].
Based on this, it is evident that there is a need for subjective investigations to support
the usual methods of technical-scientiﬁc analysis, in order to improve the overall evaluation.
Some regulations already acknowledge the importance of citizen participation in
addressing environmental noise [ 11,12]. However, they often limit citizen involvement
to information dissemination rather than active engagement in social investigations that
provide a more complete understanding of the issue.
As a result, the population’s role is passive as they are only provided with infor-
mation after technical decisions have been made, without being asked for their opinions
beforehand.
An active survey system, on the other hand, enables the collection of data in a stan-
dardized manner on extensive samples, allowing for mathematical and statistical analyses
that can provide useful insights and support decision-making processes decisions based on
individual satisfaction.
Human perception involves both a cognitive dimension, where individuals retrospec-
tively evaluate their personal standards (expectations, desires, previous experiences, etc.),
and an affective dimension, where present experiences inﬂuence retrospective reﬂections.
These two processes inﬂuence the correlation between objective and subjective data, making
the association between the investigated event and the opinion expressed on it dynamic.
The interpretive process of the results is inﬂuenced by hysteresis, and thus it is essential
to rely on a robust statistical analysis to minimize uncertainties. When the statistical analysis
conﬁrms a non-objective but shared situation, this reveals that individual judgment has
such a high weight, to be held in high consideration, as it tends to prevail over the objectivity
of the phenomenon being studied.
The objective of this work is to provide reﬂections and guidelines to support the
development of questionnaires based on previous experiences and information collection.
Some considerations pertain to the overall structure of a questionnaire, while subsequent
ones speciﬁcally address questionnaires related to aspects of environmental acoustics. The
aspects covered encompass a wide range of contexts, extending beyond the soundscape, and
are applicable to any situation where the use of subjective survey instruments is valuable
for analysing the impact of external environmental acoustic issues on the population.
In this phase of the project, the focus was not on analysing the relationship between
questionnaire results and quantitative acoustic measurements. Instead, attention is directed
towards factors that can inﬂuence the user’s judgment beyond the conﬁnes of quantitative
parameters that characterize the phenomenon. The study complements an extensive and
speciﬁc literature review [ 13] on surveys in the acoustics ﬁeld, which has considerably
different investigation methods such as soundwalks, interviews, listening tests, and focus
groups. It provides additional insights for the formulation of questionnaires, both in general
terms and within the speciﬁc ﬁeld of application.
The analysis focuses on formulating indications to be included in guidelines for creat-
ing subjective survey questionnaires, speciﬁcally for the acoustic ﬁeld. General notes on
speciﬁc acoustic investigations developed through subjective perception questionnaires
demonstrate the usefulness of this tool. The beneﬁts of indications shared through guide-

J. Otorhinolaryngol. Hear. Balance Med. 2023 ,4, 4 3 of 20
lines and regulatory indications, which promote greater replicability of the models and
comparison of surveys, are outlined (par. 2). The article ﬁrst discusses general considera-
tions that apply to questionnaires in various ﬁelds of investigation (par. 3). It then outlines
the main steps involved in creating an effective questionnaire, starting with the overall
structure, primary questions, and population sample considerations. The section focuses
on the peculiarities of the questions that should be anticipated for different purposes of
the questionnaire, as well as some characteristics of the administration methods. It serves
as a necessary foundation for acoustic surveys. The subsequent section (par. 4) highlights
several salient aspects that are speciﬁc to acoustic surveys, including the type of noise being
studied, the characteristics of the questions and their evaluation scales, the administration
methods, and the types of sound sources being examined to collect information related to
subjective perception.
2. State of the Art: Questionnaire Approach for Outdoor Noise Investigations
The results of some previous experiences [ 14,15] have supported the notes presented
here. Some general premises related to the psychological perspective introduce the analysis
of signiﬁcant researches in the ﬁeld.
A questionnaire is generally deﬁned as a tool for gathering information, consisting of
a structured set of questions to which the subject responds by reporting and evaluating
their experiences. These tools are closely linked to the knowledge acquired through contact
with the surrounding reality [ 16]. The experiences that are the focus of this investigation
are rooted in three main concepts, sensation, perception, and attention [17]:
 Sensation is a process that originates from a physical stimulus, which can be any form
of matter or energy that affects the senses. A stimulus is any chemical or physical
activator that elicits a response in a receptor, such as light stimuli in the eye or sound
stimuli in the ear. The result is a psychological and subjective sensory experience.
 Perception is the ability to process, receive, and interpret information by extracting
organized, meaningful, and useful representations.
 Attention , meanwhile, is a cognitive process that enables the selection of some envi-
ronmental stimuli from among the many available at a given moment, while ignor-
ing others.
The stimulus, which is physically measurable and objective, is internalized, classiﬁed
and associated with some speciﬁc contexts, and is deﬁned in psychology as a process of
signiﬁcation.
This last phase often involves a reconnection with one’s own experiences, which are
mainly made up of two circumstances: personal experience and the social sphere.
Personal experience can be associated with the historical memory of the subject,
which is a database of emotions, situations, and contexts that characterize that person in a
precise way.
The social context, on the other hand, is made up of its education and the set of cultural
and relational conditions with other subjects, hence its position in the society in which it is
born and grows.
In the scientiﬁc literature, several subjective investigations have been indicated to
support the evaluation of noise annoyance both in external and internal environments.
For example, in acoustics, a subjective survey can allow one to understand the reactions
of the population to environmental noise. The subjective judgment does not always put
trafﬁc noise at the forefront. In Curitiba, Brazil, 860 questionnaires indicated that trafﬁc
was the main noise source causing disturbance (73%), but neighbourhood noise (such as
noise from neighbours, animals, sirens, civil construction, religious temples, nightclubs,
toys, and domestic electric appliances) was also mentioned. Therefore, actions that could
reduce trafﬁc noise should be combined with measures for better management of urban
spaces and activities [18].
The results of subjective investigations in Skopje, Macedonia Republic showed the
need for national building standards and public health-oriented urban planning. In this

J. Otorhinolaryngol. Hear. Balance Med. 2023 ,4, 4 4 of 20
study, 700 interviewed subjects indicated neighbourhood noise as the most annoying source,
represented by construction and other human activities (75%) [19].
The results of a questionnaire study in a residential area of Lerum Municipality for
the EU NOISUN project conﬁrmed that the most important noise sources in the residential
area were due to rail and road trafﬁc, with noise from neighbours being the second-most
important source [ 20]. The opportunity for noise barrier protection was investigated
and conﬁrmed to represent a good technical solution, increasing the satisfaction level of
the residents.
From a health point of view, good correlation between subjective noise level assess-
ments and objective noise measurements was found in a research study on young adults’
noise awareness, supporting the encouragement of young adults to take protective action
when they ﬁnd themselves in a noisy situation [21].
These ﬁndings attest to the usefulness of subjective investigation methods to identify
the most critical situations in terms of the annoyance they cause, rather than in relation to
measurable sound levels.
The survey structure generally follows an “ad hoc” scheme, depending on the type of
sound source or environmental context being analysed. The complexity of the assessment
makes it impossible to standardize a methodology for its formulation. In several studies,
a series of proposed questions aims to help us understand the sound events in urban
landscapes as a whole, without investigating a speciﬁc sound source [ 22–26]. In these
situations, the analysis of results is complex due to the large number of variables that
depend on the different types of sources that contribute to the sound ﬁeld. Speciﬁcally, one
of the main obstacles is identifying the impact that each phenomenon has on individual
perception, or how much more annoying one noise is than another.
To distinguish between noise sources, an in-depth analysis of the acoustic data mea-
sured in the areas of interest is carried out, considering percentile levels, sound levels,
spectral analyses, and psychoacoustic parameters obtained through precise analyses [27].
In urban contexts, the subjective investigation directs the empirical evaluation towards
a series of connections capable of justifying and explaining how users perceive a particular
acoustic environment.
This approach becomes even more effective and interesting when applied to city
contexts or other sound environments with similar characteristics.
However, subjective evaluation in these contexts needs to be structured according to
different areas of investigation. First of all, personal data provides the ﬁrst important aid
for the collection and analysis of data.
As indicated in Annex C of ISO/TS 12913-1 [ 28], a standard more widely considered,
in addition to age and occupation, information on hearing difﬁculty and diagnosis of
hearing loss is also required.
Other elements suggested in various studies include knowledge of the urban situation,
global assessment of the place, and ﬁnally, the assessment of the sound environment or of
the acoustic comfort [29–31].
The measurement or simulation of physical parameters alone is not always sufﬁcient
to fully characterize a disturbance or to establish a direct correlation between the object of
investigation and the perceptions of those interviewed. Knowledge of the phenomenon and
opinions can only be obtained through ﬁeld experience. Administering questionnaires to
investigate certain acoustic phenomena, whether they originate from single sources or from
several sources that characterize a soundscape, can yield a large amount of information
that can serve as a foundation for creating a database [32].
Therefore, results from surveys previously conducted in a speciﬁc context can be
useful in supporting new evaluations. It is worth noting that extensive studies and research
have been conducted over time on the acoustic quality of indoor environments and on the
annoyance that noise can cause in building occupants.
The procedures for structuring questionnaires in the ﬁeld of acoustics are the subject
of interest in the international standardization ﬁeld. Guidelines for this are included in the

J. Otorhinolaryngol. Hear. Balance Med. 2023 ,4, 4 5 of 20
technical speciﬁcation ISO/TS 15666 “Acoustics—Assessment of noise annoyance by means
of social and socio-acoustic surveys” [ 33], which is currently being revised. The ﬁrst version
of ISO/TS 15666, published in 2003, attests the strong interest to put common rules and the
need for standardized questions. The standard covers scaling, noise annoyance questions,
assessment of annoyance degree, and other elements that can make a survey statistically
relevant, and offer more and better-quality information for use by environmental policy
makers. This includes the possibility of comparing survey results. However, the indications
presented in ISO/TS 15666 refer speciﬁcally to surveys conducted to obtain information
about noise annoyance experienced “at home”.
Furthermore, the importance of subjective investigations to understand the effects of
noise inside homes has been the subject of various European projects. Under the Cost Action
TU0901 (Integrating and Harmonizing Sound Insulation Aspects in Sustainable Urban
Housing Constructions), a questionnaire for socio-acoustic surveys in residential buildings
was developed and translated into 20 languages to facilitate comparisons of perceived
satisfaction or annoyance related to neighbour noise across different countries [34].
A systematic review of more than one thousand papers selected some studies that use
questionnaires to survey the indoor acoustic environment as perceived by building occu-
pants [ 35]. In the research, some results that can be extended to the outdoor environment
were discussed. It was highlighted that aspects related to the nature of sounds and their
spectral and temporal composition, as well as factors unrelated to the acoustic environment
(such as urban context, building characteristics, personal traits, socio-economic features, sit-
uational circumstances, and environmental conditions), can signiﬁcantly affect perceptual
outcomes. The study suggested that the “the quieter, the better” strategy may not always
be the best solution and conﬁrmed that the integration of soundscape methodologies into
indoor environmental quality research would enhance user health and comfort.
In soundscape studies, the current reference document for assessing all sounds per-
ceived in an environment in all their complexity is the more recent technical speciﬁcation
ISO/TS 12913-2 “Acoustics—Soundscape—Part 2: Data collection and reporting require-
ments” [ 28]. This speciﬁcation employs a variety of data related to human perception,
acoustic environment, and context, with human perception considered more important
than physical measurements.
Two methods, based on sound walks and questionnaires (Method A: questionnaire;
Method B: questionnaire and open-answer), are proposed for data collection in an infor-
mative manner, while a third method involves narrative interviews. In [ 36], the ﬁrst two
methods were applied to test whether compatible results could be obtained, and positive
results were achieved.
Following the technical standard indications, a soundscape procedure for evaluating
urban spaces was proposed in [ 37]. Data on people’s perception of the acoustic environ-
ment in a seaport area were collected via a questionnaire. The approach aimed to avoid
considering annoyance caused by noise and to propose a new concept of soundscape and
acoustic planning for improving environmental quality.
In the following section (par. 3), some procedural indications for making the use of
a subjective survey a very effective tool are outlined, based on the general principles of a
suitable approach. Like all subjective investigations, a structural scheme is required that
goes beyond the speciﬁc context but belongs to the generic formulation.
In the next section (par. 4), more targeted criteria related to the application of subjective
surveys in the speciﬁc ﬁeld of environmental acoustics are analysed, in order to obtain an
overall methodological reference framework. In this context, the focus is on the individual’s
perception of the stimulus and their reactions, rather than on the correlation between
questionnaire survey results and objective measurements of sound levels.
3. General Observations on a Questionnaire Structure
The questionnaire is a tool commonly used to collect information from representative
samples of the population. Its standardization and structure make it an excellent research

J. Otorhinolaryngol. Hear. Balance Med. 2023 ,4, 4 6 of 20
tool, as in most cases, the researcher does not need to conduct any direct intervention
on the interviewee, but simply administers the questionnaire. The general structure of
a questionnaire is summarized in Figure 1 (with the main elements explained in the
corresponding paragraphs indicated in brackets). The following suggestions concern the
structure of a questionnaire suitable for multiple research topics, not limited to acoustics.
J. Otorhinolaryngol. Hear. Balance Med. 2023 , 4, x FOR PEER REVIEW 6 of 20 
 
 individual s perception of the stimulus and their re actions, rather than on the correlation 
between questionnaire survey results and objective measurements of sound levels. 
3. General Observations on  a Questionnaire Structure 
The questionnaire is a tool commonly used to  collect information from representative 
samples of the population. Its standardization and structure make it an excellent research 
tool, as in most cases, the researcher does not need to conduct any direct intervention on 
the interviewee, but simply administers the questionnaire. The general structure of a ques-
tionnaire is summarized in Figu re 1 (with the main elements explained in the correspond-
ing paragraphs indicated in brackets). The fo llowing suggestions concern the structure of 
a questionnaire suitable for multiple research topics, not limited to acoustics. 
 
Figure 1. General structure of a questionnaire. 
3.1. Administration Method 
The ﬁrst step in undertaking a subjective investigation to support technical and sci-
entiﬁc assessments is to choose the appropriate instrument to use. Various investigation 
techniques di ﬀer according to the method of administ ration, such as direct (e.g., face-to-
face) or indirect (telephone, online, etc.) interviews, questionnaires, direct observations 
(carried out only by the surveyor), diaries (particular types of questionnaires specially 
structured to record frequent and minor events  such as low expenses or daily activities), 
mixed techniques (e.g., diary combined with  the interview), etc. Based on the speci ﬁc type 
of investigation and the characteristics of the population sample to be analysed, speci ﬁc 
advantages and disadvantages can be identi ﬁed. For example, for health surveys or pop-
ulation samples within a certain age group, certain types of investigation may be more 
advantageous due to a direct approach, or the technology used. 
Only some general aspects of the various administration methods are outlined here. 
In general, the choice of method is essentia lly based on two factors: the subject of the 
study and the availability of resources, while considering which of the possibilities men-
tioned below can lead to results in line with the research purposes: 
1. Face-to-face questionnaires are suitable for complex formulations with the possibility 
of direct control over the interviewee and the environment in which they complete the questionnaire. In this case, the depth of the questionnaire can be managed freely 
by the researcher who can also in ﬂuence or direct the respondent s ideas. 
2. Phone surveys, generally supported by comp uters, require that the questionnaire is 
completed under the dictation of the inte rviewee. These are fast and practical 
Figure 1. General structure of a questionnaire.
3.1. Administration Method
The ﬁrst step in undertaking a subjective investigation to support technical and
scientiﬁc assessments is to choose the appropriate instrument to use. Various investi-
gation techniques differ according to the method of administration, such as direct (e.g.,
face-to-face ) or indirect (telephone, online, etc.) interviews, questionnaires, direct observa-
tions (carried out only by the surveyor), diaries (particular types of questionnaires specially
structured to record frequent and minor events such as low expenses or daily activities),
mixed techniques (e.g., diary combined with the interview), etc. Based on the speciﬁc type
of investigation and the characteristics of the population sample to be analysed, speciﬁc
advantages and disadvantages can be identiﬁed. For example, for health surveys or pop-
ulation samples within a certain age group, certain types of investigation may be more
advantageous due to a direct approach, or the technology used.
Only some general aspects of the various administration methods are outlined here.
In general, the choice of method is essentially based on two factors: the subject of
the study and the availability of resources, while considering which of the possibilities
mentioned below can lead to results in line with the research purposes:
1. Face-to-face questionnaires are suitable for complex formulations with the possibility
of direct control over the interviewee and the environment in which they complete
the questionnaire. In this case, the depth of the questionnaire can be managed freely
by the researcher who can also inﬂuence or direct the respondent’s ideas.
2. Phone surveys, generally supported by computers, require that the questionnaire is
completed under the dictation of the interviewee. These are fast and practical systems,
but unlike face-to-face interviews, it is not possible to obtain a high degree of depth.
3. Postal and online questionnaires are based on self-completion, with the great advan-
tage of extending research on a large territorial scale. The disadvantage is that the
researcher cannot know the environment and the context in which the questionnaire
is completed. The online method is an increasingly popular tool, but it should be care-
fully used by selecting a well-representative sample [ 38]. In recent times, smartphones
have been considered as a useful tool for collecting data for acoustic quality assess-
ments through digital questionnaires that can be easily accessed and distributed [ 39].

J. Otorhinolaryngol. Hear. Balance Med. 2023 ,4, 4 7 of 20
Advantages over traditional printed questionnaires include lower costs, immediate
transmission upon completion, and automatic controls to ensure proper responses.
In a study on opinions regarding education policies, online and face-to-face admin-
istration methods were analysed to assess potential differences attributed to the mode of
administration [ 40]. The survey results indicate that for online surveys, the population
sample should be chosen in a way that includes both internet users and non-users, to
provide representative insights for the entire population.
The ﬁndings emphasize the importance of interpreting responses in relation to the
mode of administration, taking into account the nature of the question, particularly for
sensitive questions.
One aspect to consider is the overall length of the questionnaire. Excessive information
and/or requests can decrease the interviewee’s attention and concentration, resulting in
unreasonable and thus unrepresentative answers in some cases, and in others, it may lead
to the non-completion of the questionnaire, rendering the survey invalid.
This issue can be solved by keeping the questionnaire concise and essential, but a
more targeted solution is to provide information on the overall length of the questionnaire.
For instance, in the case of a paper survey, page numbers can be inserted with the total
number of pages (e.g., 1/2) at the bottom of each page (the location where most people
are accustomed to reading documents). In online questionnaires, this information can
be presented using graphic tools such as a bar that is coloured and/or ﬁlled in as the
respondent progresses through the survey.
An important aspect to consider in the preliminary stage of any survey is preparing
the participant, who should be informed about the objectives of the study. The presentation
of the questionnaire should be simple and concise, yet effectively frame the subject of
the study in a clear and direct manner. Therefore, the questionnaire should include a
brief introduction that can be easily read and understood by the participant, enabling
them to respond more appropriately to the subsequent questions. This aspect must be
carefully addressed, especially in self-administered surveys where it is not possible to ask
for clariﬁcations during the completion process. The construction of the questionnaire
starts with a design phase based on the target deﬁnition. Generally, the use of this tool
begins even with minimal or unstructured knowledge of information related to the object
or area to be investigated. The design of the questionnaire has three main purposes:
 deﬁning the involved variables,
 establishing the reason for the investigation,
 identifying the target.
During this phase, macro-topics or macro-areas of interest should be deﬁned, trying
to divide the topics to be investigated as much as possible. The investigation focus can be
addressed by articulating the formulation in sections and subsections, paying attention to
factors such as the topic, the degree of respondent involvement, and the duration of the
compilation, which is closely related to the length of the questionnaire.
3.2. Characterization of the Sample Population
In statistics, the population is deﬁned as the “universe,” while the sample represents a
portion of it, including the number of people who will actually participate in the survey.
Preliminary considerations about the sample include:
The sample size, assuming a statistically adequate number of respondents;
The responsiveness of the interviewed sample, since it is possible that not all people
to whom the questionnaire is administered will ﬁll it out.
Sample selection is a complex operation based on speciﬁc statistical methods. The two
types of sampling used in subjective investigations are deﬁned according to a probabilistic
or non-probabilistic scheme:
Sample selection can take place according to probabilistic schemes, in which each
subject has a non-zero probability of being included in the sample. This form guarantees

J. Otorhinolaryngol. Hear. Balance Med. 2023 ,4, 4 8 of 20
the representability of the entire population, unlike the non-probabilistic case, in which the
survey results cannot be generalized.
In non-probabilistic samples, the sample selection method can be reasoned or subjec-
tive, while representativeness is connected to theoretical evaluations carried out by the
researcher.
Generally, the sample choice is based on the availability and reachability of the subjects.
If participation in the survey relates to a speciﬁc type of response, what can be obtained
has an effect deﬁned as “selection bias.” Nonetheless, for example, if it is assumed that
participation depends exclusively on age (or age groups), the interviewer can select a
sample non-randomly, with the attention of respecting quotas of interviews by age in the
sample, thus eliminating or reducing distortions.
However, the sample estimation process generates a result affected by a certain vari-
ability, as it is a partial and not global observation of the population [ 16]. It is necessary
to take into account not only age and gender, but also other speciﬁc characteristics of the
sample, mainly cultural level and social position. In the case of a probabilistic sampling
approach, it is impossible to determine these attributes a priori. In the deterministic case,
this operation is facilitated by making it easier to deﬁne the language and formulation for
the survey.
3.3. Question Structuring
Building a questionnaire must follow a series of rules to achieve a certain degree of
standardization and ensure clarity and consistency with the object of study. The preparation
of questions is just one step in obtaining a good questionnaire, because control techniques
are necessary for achieving thoroughness in the protocol.
Standardization processes are related to the stimulus-response technique in admin-
istration. Interviewees must receive uniform stimuli to obtain homogeneous responses
with respect to the question formulation and the investigation’s objective. The types of
questions can vary depending on the design methods and the deﬁned purposes, which
must be well established beforehand. Speciﬁc notes on conducting an acoustic survey are
indicated in technical standard [33].
In this section, question types at a more general level, valid in a wider context, are
considered. Questions can be characterized by the type of answer they imply, and they can
be divided into:
Open questions: These questions do not allow for a predetermined answer, and the
interviewee can freely respond and provide interesting data. However, the statistical
treatment of the data is complicated by the variability of the results.
Closed questions (dichotomous, polytomic, numerical, verbal, multiple scales): These
questions propose possible answers, and the subject chooses from the options presented
(generally two or three). Data collection is simple and rigorous, but this type of answer is
only suitable for very precise questions, that are not always the most appropriate questions.
For example, dichotomous questions provide a single answer between two options (ex-
amples: yes/no, true/false, agree/disagree), while polytomic questions provide a single
choice between three or more answers.
Structured questions: These questions present a predetermined set of answers selected
on the basis of previous studies by the researchers, on the basis of surveys already con-
ducted in the same area. The subject is invited to choose one of the answers or possibly to
insert his own answer. This approach allows the subject to select an answer they deem most
consistent with their own judgment. From this form of questions, improperly structured
data can be generated which require a more in-depth analysis, often of a manual type.
Inaccuracies related to clarity and comprehensibility, with respect to the reference
objective, can be generated in the formulation phase of the questions.
A structured questionnaire, composed of closed-ended questions, leads to a greater de-
gree of interpretative and elaborative simplicity of the results compared to semi-structured
questionnaires.

J. Otorhinolaryngol. Hear. Balance Med. 2023 ,4, 4 9 of 20
Semi-structured questionnaires consist mainly of open-ended questions, which gener-
ate major difﬁculties in the same processes.
General indications mainly concern the use of simple language, the choice of non-
negative formulations or doubled questions, the use of clear time references to facilitate
estimates, the provision of a logical succession of topics, and so on.
3.4. Questions Classiﬁcation and Type
The questions can be classiﬁed into three assessment areas:
 individual data (personal and sociographic data);
 behaviours;
 attitudes.
The questions that pertain to registry data or sociographic context are aimed at iden-
tifying the social and economic characteristics that distinguish the interviewee, and for
this reason, they are considered individual questions. This category includes questions
about gender, age, marital status, educational qualiﬁcations, and profession. In addition to
these individual aspects, there are other contextual factors that are considered, such as the
municipality of residence, the urban or rural context, etc.
An analysis was conducted in [ 41] regarding the inﬂuence of psychological well-
being and demographic characteristics on the perception of the acoustic environment
or soundscape. The results revealed a positive correlation between psychological well-
being and pleasantness and a negative correlation between psychological well-being and
eventfulness, mostly in males (who did not indicate their occupation in the questionnaire).
Furthermore, the occupational status, speciﬁcally retirement as a proxy for age and gender,
was found to contribute to both pleasantness and eventfulness.
Behaviours are closely linked to experiences and are therefore concrete, and far from
the imaginary and abstract dimension of attitudes (motivations, ideals, values, judgments,
etc.). This determines, in the ﬁrst case, simpler question formulations, while in the latter
case, a higher level of complexity is required.
To overcome these difﬁculties, it is possible to translate the abstract dimension into
reality, by transforming thoughts or ideas into actions, while keeping in mind the cognitive
and cultural level of the interviewee.
The types of questions that require the use of scales can be numeric, such as symmetri-
cal scales with odd numbers (usually ﬁve, seven or eleven values) when there is a central
or neutral value, or asymmetrical scales with even numbers (usually four or ten values).
The use of numerical scales reduces the possibility of distortions caused by idiosyncratic
interpretations of verbal classiﬁcations.
Scales with an odd number of responses increase the risk of thickening at intermediate
values but do not force the interviewee to ‘take sides’ and underestimate the level of
indecision, as what happens with an even number of choices.
Verbal scales usually consist of ﬁve (i.e., strongly agree, somewhat agree, neither agree
nor disagree, somewhat disagree, strongly disagree) or seven answer options, often with
numerical values attached to them, which allow for the attribution of scores. The validation
of evaluation scales is a delicate process that requires a large statistical sample. There is a
risk of not obtaining the predetermined result but instead getting a different or similar one.
The design of the answers must be based on creating an objective and valid research tool for
all respondents in relation to the context to analyse. In this context, it becomes important to
deﬁne a logical structure that encourages and assists the interviewee in responding to what
is being investigated.
3.5. Language and Graphic Limitations
The language used for creating questions and any verbal scales represents another
important aspect for the standard formulation of questionnaires.
The difﬁculty arises in the type of language and syntax to be used, which must necessar-
ily require a high level of comprehensibility and clarity in relation to the respondent’s type .

J. Otorhinolaryngol. Hear. Balance Med. 2023 ,4, 4 10 of 20
For this reason, the choice of words and their arrangement in the question setting is a
procedure that requires particular attention. Furthermore, if the questionnaire needs to be
administered in other languages besides the one in which the research is conducted, there
is also the difﬁculty of translation.
The meaning attributed to some terms is not universally the same in all languages.
Therefore, the risk is to formulate questions that deviate from the study objective. A solution
to the latter problem can be represented by a pre-test to be submitted to other researchers
or experts in the ﬁeld of research who are of a different nationality to understand if under
competent judgment, the questionnaire meaning remains unchanged (see below).
Once the appropriate language has been deﬁned for the ﬁeld of study, another aspect
to pay attention to is the graphic form of the questionnaire. The ﬁrst objective in this context
is to create an attractive look, with project objectives and section titles in evidence.
The presence of images, beyond those required for the investigation, which do not
hinder the smoothness and essentiality of the structure and are not subject to piloting with
respect to the answers to be given, is not excluded. Even the choice of colours, if provided,
both for the writings and for the images must be based on some criteria:
 avoid generating visual strains in the reader, for example by using too light or too
bright colours,
 avoid using random associations of colours, unless this use depends on the researcher’s
willingness to emphasize some concepts or contexts,
 try to pursue, as much as possible, monochromatism, with the advantage of not
generating confusion in the reader.
When the draft of the questionnaire has been outlined, it needs to be tested on people
belonging to the research context or on subjects external to the project. This check has the
purpose of detecting the presence of ambiguous or unclear questions, verifying the length
of the questionnaire, and ensuring correspondence with the objectives of the study.
Sometimes, it is useful to refer to a “control group”, which is a series of subjects not
directly involved in the investigation and who can express a judgment without being
inﬂuenced by socio-psycho-perceptual dynamics that could affect the veriﬁcation outcome.
Once an adequate degree of formulation for the investigation and a good level of
consistency with the set objectives have been reached, the questionnaire will be ready to be
administered according to a standard scheme. A well-designed investigative tool implies a
signiﬁcant reduction in uncertainties and errors in the subsequent phases of data collection,
processing, and analysis.
It is good practice for the initial part to be dedicated to an illustrative section, in
which the objectives of the research and the purposes it covers are explained and speciﬁed.
This presentation, often considered superﬂuous, plays an important role in allowing the
researcher to illustrate clearly the reasons for investigating the population’s opinion and
establishing a relationship of trust.
The compilation should then continue following a “funnel” scheme, gradually moving
towards increasingly speciﬁc questions. It is a mistake to think that the registry/sociographic
context should be placed in the ﬁnal part of the questionnaire to prevent the initial premises
from being contradicted, placing the interviewee in a suspicious position regarding the
investigation and its purposes.
Useful indications for a general approach are presented in the ISO Technical Stan-
dard [ 28], even if it regards a survey model at home, and speciﬁcally refers to questions on
noise annoyance. These guidelines are appropriate for conducting surveys on long-term
noise annoyance. Two kinds of questions can be constructed: one with a verbal rating
scale (Not at all—Slightly—Moderately—Very—Extremely) and the other with a numerical
rating scale of 0 to 10, by indicating the meaning of the two extremes.
The standard is currently being reviewed, and a recent version proposes to conduct
the overall evaluation using weighting factors. Recent studies propose values of the
weighting factor for verbal responses to achieve a satisfactory comparison between the two

J. Otorhinolaryngol. Hear. Balance Med. 2023 ,4, 4 11 of 20
methods. This is performed to ensure that the verbal responses are taken into account in an
appropriate and accurate manner [42,43].
The questionnaires for soundscape evaluation proposed in the technical speciﬁcation
ISO/TS 12913-2 [ 28] are edited in the English language. A problem related to the correct
translation of each question and the possible answers in all the proposed methods has been
addressed in [44]. In [45], the proper application of a translation methodology is outlined,
especially in cases where there are no corresponding words in the target language.
4. Speciﬁc Observations on a Questionnaire for Acoustic Investigations
When administering a questionnaire for acoustic investigations, aspects related to
sound/acoustic perception become obviously fundamental. These investigations concern
the sensory sphere and involve subjective assessments, which are independent of the
mere objectivity of the phenomenon being investigated. Noise perception is a particularly
complex issue as it involves physical, neurological, and psychological areas. These aspects,
when combined, can generate very different perceptions between different subjects, even
with the same stimulus.
The variability of the results of an acoustic investigation is different if it refers to the
evaluation of an internal environment (building or architectural acoustics) or an external
environment (environmental acoustics). In the former case, attention is paid to the usability
of the spaces and the comfort of the living environment, taking into account the inﬂuence
of the phenomenon on daily life activities. In the latter case, the respondent is immersed in
a sound landscape where the number of sources and environmental factors are difﬁcult to
control and subject to change.
To obtain a good response from the subjects involved in the investigation, it is necessary
to contextualize the research and consider all possible aspects that may inﬂuence the
responses and consequently the outcome of the study [46,47].
4.1. Annoying Noise Characteristics
The perception of noise is strongly inﬂuenced by the acoustic context in which it is
generated. For example, a disturbance that occurs in an already compromised acoustic
environment is generally less annoying than a disturbance that occurs in a low-noise
situation. To complicate matters further, there are other factors, such as the temporal trend
associated with annoying noise (continuous, ﬂuctuating, impulsive) and the characteristics
of the background noise (continuous, ﬂuctuating) [48,49].
On a physical level, stationary noise has almost constant energy as a function of time,
while ﬂuctuating noise has characteristics of temporal variability according to a more or
less regular trend. An impulsive noise is an event that occurs one or more times with a
concentrated amount of energy in a very short interval of time.
In the perceptual environment, a continuous noise, if characterized by a contained
level and without potentially annoying tonal components, can become part of the daily
background through a neurological process that allows our brain to get used to recognizing
it and “cancel” it out compared to the association with a disturbed condition.
This obviously does not apply to impulsive noises, as neurological processing, mostly
atavistic, associates a threat with a sudden event. In addition, impulsive noises are per-
ceived more intrusively than noises with a continuous or ﬂuctuating course. For example,
the sound of a dripping tap, although it has a very low acoustic energy content, can be
unbearable for a person who is trying to fall asleep. Conversely, the same person, subject to
the sound of a stream or pouring rain, with much greater energy than that of the tap, in
most cases, ﬁnds this situation conducive to falling asleep.
It is important to highlight that noise can be more or less disturbing depending on the
frequencies that constitute it. Fletcher’s masking studies [ 50] have demonstrated that one
tone with a high amplitude can mask another tone that is close in frequency but with a
lower amplitude. This indicates that the disturbance caused by an acoustic phenomenon
is not only linked to the energy of the phenomenon itself, but also to other characteristics

J. Otorhinolaryngol. Hear. Balance Med. 2023 ,4, 4 12 of 20
such as variability in the time and frequency domains, as well as the acoustic context in
which it occurs.
However, any assessment of acoustic quality is affected by subjective preferences
for the perceived sound and the discomfort it may cause to individuals. For instance,
evaluations of noise pollution in public parks [ 51] have identiﬁed areas where the sound
level limits that should characterize quiet areas were exceeded, despite some interviewees
expressing appreciation for the sound environment in the park. This implies that noise
mitigation actions should be taken to reduce noise levels, even if some individuals enjoy
the sound environment.
In another study that examined the effects of soundscape complexity on urban noise
annoyance ratings, the impact of trafﬁc-related sound sources received a higher score in
the noise annoyance evaluation than nature-related sound sources, with comparable noise
levels [ 52,53]. These results conﬁrm that the type of sound, which can be classiﬁed as
pleasant or unpleasant, also inﬂuences the judgment of annoyance associated with its
presence in the urban environment.
An acoustic questionnaire needs to take into account that technical aspects should be
linked to perception. They are part of the contextualization processes of the phenomenon,
and therefore need to be analysed in order to characterize the sound sources present in the
environment under investigation, as will be discussed later.
4.2. Boundary Conditions
Acoustic questionnaires are generally used to evaluate the discomfort caused by the
presence of one or more noise sources in a given environment, or to understand the level of
comfort related to the listening conditions. Since these assessments are related to sensory
perception, it is important to include questions about the respondent’s state of health and
quality of life in the questionnaire and/or tests aimed at understanding their hearing ability.
To assess the respondent’s hearing ability, a multimedia instrument that allows the in-
terviewee to listen to soundtracks in speciﬁc frequency ﬁelds may be necessary. This would
help to deﬁne the listening range with non-marginal limits due to device characteristics.
These exploratory questions should be asked in a preliminary phase of the questionnaire to
determine its validity. If multimedia tools are not available, the validity of the investigation
relies on the sincerity of the respondent, without direct veriﬁcation by the researcher.
Health-related questions may include requests to indicate if the respondent is suffering
from any pathology or disease that may affect their responses. Quality of life can be
investigated by asking about the level of satisfaction with daily activities [54,55].
Since these questionnaires are related to the user’s experience, it is not possible to rely
on market research to guide their design, as the respondent is not necessarily a consumer.
Therefore, attention should be focused on the comfort connected to the respondent’s life in
the speciﬁc environment being investigated.
In the case of building or architectural acoustics, the questions relating to behaviour
and attitudes should concern not only acoustic aspects but also speciﬁc assessments of the
context under investigation and all the components that contribute to the comfort of the
environment’s users. Speciﬁcally, it is necessary to investigate not only acoustic aspects
but also thermal, hygrometric, and lighting aspects. However, the acoustic aspect cannot
be isolated from the context, as all factors together determine the overall comfort, and the
poor quality of any one of the elements mentioned above can also affect the others.
Thermal comfort also affects the perception of acoustic comfort outdoors. In a study [ 56],
the relationship between acoustic perception and thermal comfort was analysed, and it was
found that people experienced higher thermal comfort with natural sounds and meaningful
sound (broadcasting music). The authors found that satisfying thermal sensation was
perceived when people were acoustically comfortable, while low thermal comfort was a
consequence of acoustic discomfort. However, in a study involving elderly adults, it was
found that thermal sensation and comfort judgments were susceptible to the acoustic and

J. Otorhinolaryngol. Hear. Balance Med. 2023 ,4, 4 13 of 20
visual environments, while the inﬂuence of the visual environment and temperature on
acoustic sensation and comfort evaluation was not signiﬁcant [57].
Moreover, it was observed that there is a seasonal dependence on these aspects: in
the summer, overall comfort is mostly affected by thermal comfort, while in the spring,
acoustic comfort has the highest impact on comfort. The thermal and acoustic environment
has some inﬂuence on subjective evaluations. It was found that high trafﬁc noise intensiﬁes
the sensation of heat in summer in the thermal evaluations. In the acoustic evaluations,
low temperature in the winter and high temperature in the summer increase acoustic
discomfort [58].
In general, the sensation produced by the other components that characterize the
urban space under investigation has an inﬂuence on the judgment of the acoustic quality. In
many cases, investigations should also take into account the assessment of aspects related
to air pollution and air quality, urban safety and legality, presence of public green areas,
urban layout, hygienic conditions, and the healthiness of areas, liveliness of the city, and
presence of commercial and work activities.
For example, comparing a town square with high air pollution, disorder, and widespread
urban decay to another characterized by the presence of public green areas, order, and
cleanliness, both influenced by the same noise level, is likely to lead to a negative judgment
for the first case rather than the second one.
From this, it can be deduced that the boundary conditions in terms of perception of
the environment mutually inﬂuence each other, creating in the subject a prejudiced attitude
towards aspects that characterize the environment.
Another aspect that deserves investigation in an acoustic questionnaire is the time
spent in the places under investigation. An appropriate formulation for these types of
questions could be: “How much time do you spend at home/ofﬁce/outdoors/etc.?” with
a structured response on a scale such as: “up to 8 h/8 to 12 h/from 12 to 16 h/over 16 h.”
Temporal permanence is an important element because it allows the quantiﬁcation of
the time of exposure to the source of noise and therefore the impact that this can have on
the psychophysical state of the interviewee.
As the investigation tool explores into increasingly speciﬁc questions regarding the
object of study, according to the previously deﬁned ‘funnel’ scheme, the level of processing
difﬁculty of the investigation tool increases. In building/architectural acoustics, the size and
number of sources are known variables and limited to the situation, as already highlighted;
in environmental acoustics, these characteristics are not always predictable, and indeed
they are often unknown.
A good solution could be represented by identifying macro-areas associated with
sound environments in order to group a signiﬁcant number of sound sources, both known
and unknown, within a single sub-group. Here are some examples of macro-areas relating
to different environmental noises:
 Anthropogenic noise (voices, footsteps, screams, laughter, nightlife, shops, etc.).
 Infrastructure noise (vehicular trafﬁc, rail trafﬁc, ship trafﬁc, air trafﬁc).
 Industrial noise (industrial activities such as textiles, metallurgy, drilling wells, etc.).
 Nature noise (wind, rain, sea, animals, etc.).
 Technological noise (HVAC, cooling/heating systems, fans, ﬁlters, etc., at home).
In relation to the indicated macro-areas, it would be useful to have an indication of
how frequently the subjects hear these noises throughout the day, using structured or
numerical response scales with deﬁned limits (for example, from rarely to frequently).
Furthermore, information on the perceived sound intensity corresponding to the noises
heard, using similar response scales, is also important (for example, by setting “high/low”
or “loud/weak” as scale limits).
In Figure 2, an example is given of categories of sound sources that can be considered
in an acoustic survey [59].

J. Otorhinolaryngol. Hear. Balance Med. 2023 ,4, 4 14 of 20
J. Otorhinolaryngol. Hear. Balance Med. 2023 , 4, x FOR PEER REVIEW 14 of 20 
 
 highlighted; in environmental acoustics, thes e characteristics are not always predictable, 
and indeed they are often unknown. 
A good solution could be represented by identifying macro-areas associated with 
sound environments in order to group a signi ﬁcant number of sound sources, both known 
and unknown, within a single sub-group. Here are some examples of macro-areas relating 
to diﬀerent environmental noises: 
• Anthropogenic noise (voices, footsteps, scre ams, laughter, nightl ife, shops, etc.). 
• Infrastructure noise (vehicular tra ﬃc, rail tra ﬃc, ship tra ﬃc, air traﬃc). 
• Industrial noise (industrial activities such as textiles, metallurgy, drilling wells, etc.). 
• Nature noise (wind, rain, sea, animals, etc.). 
• Technological noise (HVAC, cooling/heating systems, fans, ﬁlters, etc., at home). 
In relation to the indicated macro-areas, it would be useful to have an indication of 
how frequently the subjects hear these noises throughout the day, using structured or nu-
merical response scales with de ﬁned limits (for example, from rarely to frequently). Fur-
thermore, information on the perceived sound intensity corresponding to the noises 
heard, using similar response scales, is also important (for example, by se tting “high/low” 
or “loud/weak” as scale limits). 
In Figure 2, an example is given of categori es of sound sources that can be considered 
in an acoustic survey [59]. 
 
Figure 2. Example of sound-source categories. 
The response scales used to indicate the noise that mainly refers to the sound envi-
ronment can be structured and polytomic. They  mainly use adjectives such as annoying, 
noisy, unpleasant, and disturbing, which contra st with others such as pleasant, silent, 
agreeable, and relaxing. If the extremes of th e scale represented by contrary terms are not 
used, adverbs and other words can be used for the purpose of strengthening or weakening 
the concept (examples: li ttle, enough, much, neither-nor, etc.). 
  
Figure 2. Example of sound-source categories.
The response scales used to indicate the noise that mainly refers to the sound environ-
ment can be structured and polytomic. They mainly use adjectives such as annoying, noisy,
unpleasant, and disturbing, which contrast with others such as pleasant, silent, agreeable,
and relaxing. If the extremes of the scale represented by contrary terms are not used,
adverbs and other words can be used for the purpose of strengthening or weakening the
concept (examples: little, enough, much, neither-nor, etc.).
4.3. Administration Related Issues
Questionnaires used in the ﬁeld of acoustics belong to the category of surveys that
aim to evaluate perception. As mentioned in the generic formulation of a questionnaire,
perceptual aspects involve the presence of a sensory stimulus that initiates the process
leading to the deﬁnition of an experience.
A good way to investigate a sensory aspect is to stimulate the sensory organ to activate
it. Just as knowledge of the perception of ﬂavour corresponds to the action of tasting, and
knowledge of the perception of an odour corresponds to the action of smelling, noise also
requires a particular action that corresponds to listening. However, these activities are often
difﬁcult or impossible to carry out due to the method of administration.
In general, the absence of direct stimulation of the sensory organ implies the activation
of memory or, in any case, a mnemonic process, which has a particular sensation, and in
some way, the re-elaborative activity of thought can be distorted, leading to a result that is
not strictly objective.
If the sensation or emotion felt in relation to a particular sensory activity does not
manifest itself strongly and precisely, making it difﬁcult to remain inside, it is difﬁcult to
express a real judgment on the event. An optimal administration of a questionnaire linked
to perception should be conducted, therefore, directly in the context of the investigation or
in a different place but subjecting the subject to the sensory stimulus [60].
In the case of an acoustic questionnaire, this means that the compilation should take
place in an external environment, in the case of environmental acoustic investigations [51,61] ,
or in an internal environment, in case of investigations in building/architectural acoustics.

J. Otorhinolaryngol. Hear. Balance Med. 2023 ,4, 4 15 of 20
If it is impossible to put the respondent in these conditions, it is possible to set up audio,
extracted from the contexts of investigations or similar to them. This excludes all postal
and paper administrations a priori, with limiting effects also on the possibility of telephone
inquiries.
In the event that the planned administration is online or face-to-face, there are still dif-
ﬁculties related to the limitations of the acoustic devices used. It is important to remember
that devices such as computers, tablets, and smartphones are not able to reproduce low
frequencies, with limits usually at 100 Hz, while distortions may be generated above some
high frequencies.
Another issue is the regulation of listening volume, which again depends on the
devices, and can only be solved in the case of online administration when the interviewees
are in the same environment, using the same devices, and generating a homogeneous and
unambiguous stimulus.
An important step in preparing the questionnaire is normalizing the audio tracks, a
process where the signal amplitude is increased or reduced to standardize it and obtain
uniform input for all respondents.
In addition to environmental conditions, attention must also be paid to the timing
of administration. The psychological conditions of subjects can ﬂuctuate considerably
depending on the month of the year, day of the week, or different times of the day. Stress
levels are typically higher before and after holidays, during the summer and Christmas, at
the beginning of the week, and at the end of the day. These uncomfortable conditions can
result in highly negative and intolerant responses. To avoid such inﬂuences, it is preferable
to analyse in advance and identify the most appropriate moments for administration.
4.4. Procedural Implications due to the Source
The questions of an acoustic questionnaire largely concern the inﬂuence of the source(s)
in the sound environment, both outdoors and indoors.
In building and architectural acoustics, the sources of noise are clearly identiﬁable,
as well as the investigation objectives with reference to different environments. In the
case of residential environments, the analysis is often connected to the reverberation time
and the degree of acoustic insulation of ﬂoors, ceilings, walls, ﬁxtures, etc., against noise
coming from both adjacent spaces and the external environment. Depending on the place
intended for the study, many factors can be investigated. The considerations made for
residential environments can be extended to all private and public environments, such
as schools, auditoriums, conference rooms, etc. In many cases, the assessment of speech
intelligibility, by means of the Speech Transmission Index (STI), is also important, and
should be considered in the evaluations.
In the external environment, the relationship between subjects and sources of noise, as
well as their inﬂuence on the perception of the overall sound environment, are based on
analyses that must take into account numerous other elements. One of these is the distance
from the source or group of sources being examined. Depending on the position from
the source, certain frequency components may prevail. Low-frequency components are
perceived even at great distances, unlike high-frequency components that can be lost due
to atmospheric attenuation effects.
Other important aspects are connected to meteorological conditions, particularly wind
direction and thermal inversion phenomena. These conditions can contribute to modifying
the propagation of sound waves and interfere with the perception of the phenomenon.
Regarding thermal inversion, the heat released by the ground causes the air to become
colder near the Earth and warmer at higher altitudes. In this situation, the sound can reach
points that it would not have reached under constant temperature conditions, with the
possibility of going even further than in a normal situation.
Even the wind can ‘redirect’ noise to places other than those it would have reached in
its absence. In this case, it is not a matter of transport, as is often mistakenly thought, but

J. Otorhinolaryngol. Hear. Balance Med. 2023 ,4, 4 16 of 20
rather of refractive effects, which generate a change in direction compared to the natural
propagation path.
These aspects must also be considered during the preliminary assessments aimed at
creating a questionnaire, especially in cases where the administration takes place directly
at the location of interest. This is to ensure the maximum correspondence with the normal
or usual situation of exposure to noise.
5. Discussion and Conclusions
In the previous sections, general observations on questionnaire structure that can be
applied in different ﬁelds have covered some main aspects regarding the administration
method, characterization of the sample population, question structuring, question classiﬁca-
tion and type, and language and graphic limitations. Moreover, referring to questionnaires
for acoustic investigations, aspects related to characteristics of annoying noise, boundary
conditions, administration-related issues, and procedural implications due to the source
have been discussed.
To make the most effective use of technological development, improve investigation
techniques through questionnaires, and make them more reliable, further steps can be
taken, especially in the ﬁeld of reproducing situations in virtual reality and in an extended
use of mobile devices for questionnaire completion.
On one hand, the creation of virtual soundscapes and immersive solutions for rep-
resenting the real environment recreated in the laboratory allows for the evaluation of
very different situations in the same place and the effective comparison of various sound
environments in shorter times. On the other hand, the possibility of using mobile-phone
applications for questionnaire completion in the outdoor environment facilitates the distri-
bution of survey forms to a large number of individuals and the collection of data.
Virtual reality has been tested in various scenarios, for example in [ 27] with the
use of an online application, to simulate street design and trafﬁc restriction scenarios.
Some studies have analysed the differences between people’s behaviour in virtual and
real environments. In [ 62], the research results lead to afﬁrm that a virtual simulation
of the environment is closer to reality if its visual features are completed with acoustic
characteristics.
To effectively represent the real environment, it is necessary to pay attention to various
elements not only related to visual perception but also to the physical characteristics of the
reproduced sounds, especially spectral components and temporal variations, as highlighted
in [63]. The ability to analyse various scenarios using virtual reality representation tech-
niques and conduct in-depth research on the visual cityscape perception of a large number
of human subjects has been utilized in [ 64] to explore new frontiers in the application of
digital technologies to smart-city planning.
An effective alternative to creating virtual environments that accurately represent
external environments to consider a wide variety of situations and soundscapes is repre-
sented by a more extensive participation in surveys that can take place through mobile
phone applications. In this case, the questionnaire completion can involve a wider variety
of individuals compared to investigations using virtual reality. The advantages regarding
the high number of questionnaires, the heterogeneity of the interviewees, and the rapidity
of processing the responses are undeniable, although the sampling methods and other
aspects that have been discussed in the previous sections still need to be deﬁned.
Like all subjective investigations, those related to acoustics require a particular degree
of attention and knowledge in the ﬁeld of research. The creation of tools such as ques-
tionnaires is a complex operation in relation to the objective to be pursued. This study
has provided comments on different aspects that can be included in a questionnaire. The
observations intend to contribute to the realization of questionnaires in the acoustic ﬁeld
and support the aspects addressed in the ISO/TS 12913-2 technical standard, given the
vastness of the subject and the variability of the contents.

J. Otorhinolaryngol. Hear. Balance Med. 2023 ,4, 4 17 of 20
From the considerations presented in this study, the critical phases related to a general
formulation of a questionnaire survey can be identiﬁed in three processes: preliminary
study and deﬁnition of the focus, structuring of the questionnaire (types of questions and
answer scales), and method of administration.
Starting from the ﬁrst steps, the effectiveness of the investigation depends on a large
number of variables, and the degree of detail must be deﬁned at once, assuming and
foreseeing all possible situations that may generate interference or distortions in relation to
the project focus. This is a very important and delicate phase, which could compromise the
validity of the efforts and the analyses.
Some aspects have been analysed: the structure of the questionnaire, the administra-
tion method, the characterization of the sample population, the question structuring, the
question classiﬁcation and type, and the language and graphic limitations. Furthermore, in
the acoustic ﬁeld, the contextualization of the phenomenon under investigation is a funda-
mental procedure; the situation can take on completely different characteristics depending
on the sound environment (internal or external), the type of expected annoying-noise
source(s), and the surrounding conditions (other environmental parameters that contribute
to the comfort of the user). Therefore, aspects related to the characteristics of annoying
noise, boundary conditions, administration-related issues, and procedural implications
due to the source have been discussed.
The ﬁnal objective of the investigation can only be achieved through a scrupulous and
thorough analysis of all these aspects in their entirety.
The study also provides some concluding notes on potential future developments
related to the use and administration of questionnaires in the ﬁeld of environmental noise
and soundscape analysis. In the near future, our plan is to analyse questionnaire results
with a focus on the aspects emphasized during their design. This analysis aims to assess the
degree of success in relation to the level of accuracy employed in the questionnaire design.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, G.D.F. and A.M.; methodology, G.D.F.; analysis, G.D.F.,
A.M. and A.C.; writing—original draft preparation, G.D.F. and A.M.; writing—review and editing,
G.D.F. and A.M.; supervision, A.C. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of
the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Data sharing is not applicable to this article.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Goines, L.; Hagler, L. Noise Pollution: A Modern Plague. South Med. J. 2007 ,100, 287–294. [CrossRef]
2. Mujan, I.; An ¯delkovi´ c, A.S.; Mun´ can, V .; Kljaji´ c, M.; Ruži´ c, D. Inﬂuence of indoor environmental quality on human health and
productivity—A review. J. Clean. Prod. 2019 ,217, 646–657. [CrossRef]
3. Kim, M.; Chang, S.I.; Seong, J.C.; Holt, J.B.; Park, T.H.; Ko, J.H.; Croft, J.B. Road Trafﬁc Noise: Annoyance, Sleep Disturbance, and
Public Health Implications. Am. J. Prev. Med. 2012 ,43, 353–360. [CrossRef]
4. Basner, M.; McGuire, S. WHO Environmental Noise Guidelines for the European Region: A Systematic Review on Environmental
Noise and Effects on Sleep. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018 ,15, 519. [CrossRef]
5. Recio, A.; Linares, C.; Banegas, J.R.; D íaz, J. Road trafﬁc noise effects on cardiovascular, respiratory, and metabolic health: An
integrative model of biological mechanisms. Environ. Res. 2016 ,146, 359–370. [CrossRef]
6. Münzel, T.; Gori, T.; Babisch, W.; Basner, M. Cardiovascular effects of environmental noise exposure. Eur. Heart J. 2014 ,35,
829–836. [CrossRef]
7. Koprowska, K.; Łaszkiewicz, E.; Kronenberg, J.; Marci ´ nczak, S. Subjective perception of noise exposure in relation to urban green
space availability. Urban For. Urban Green. 2018 ,31, 93–102. [CrossRef]
8. da Paz, E.C.; Vieira, T.J.; Zannin, P .H.T. Urban Noise as an Environmental Impact Factor in the Urban Planning Process. In An
Overview of Urban and Regional Planning ; Intechopen: London, UK, 2018. [CrossRef]

J. Otorhinolaryngol. Hear. Balance Med. 2023 ,4, 4 18 of 20
9. Paszkowski, W.; Sobiech, M. The Modeling of the Acoustic Condition of Urban Environment Using Noise Annoyance Assessment.
Environ. Model. Assess. 2018 ,24, 319–330. [CrossRef]
10. Suman, A.B.; Van Geenhuizen, M. Not just noise monitoring: Rethinking citizen sensing for risk-related problem-solving.
J. Environ. Plan. Manag. 2020 ,63, 546–567. [CrossRef]
11. FUTURE NOISE POLICY—European Commission Green Paper. Available online: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/PL/
TXT/?uri=CELEX:51996DC0540 (accessed on 1 May 2023).
12. Wili´ nska, A.; Ka´ zmierczak, J.; Niesporek, A. Participatory approach to noise mapping and acoustic climate management. In
Proceedings of the European Conference on Noise Control, EURONOISE 2012, Prague, Czech Republic, 10–13 June 2012.
13. Engel, M.S.; Fiebig, A.; Pfaffenbach, C.; Fels, J. A Review of Socio-acoustic Surveys for Soundscape Studies. Curr. Pollut. Rep.
2018 ,4, 220–239. [CrossRef]
14. Di Feo, G.; Cerniglia, A.; Magrini, A.; Quaranta, C. I suoni della memoria: Somministrazione di un questionario ad un campione
misto di popolazione, (Sounds of Memory: Administration of a questionnaire to a mixed population sample). In Proceedings of
the 46th National Conference of the Italian Acoustical Society, Pesaro, Italy, 29–31 May 2019. (In Italian).
15. Di Feo, G.; Cerniglia, A.; Magrini, A.; Quaranta, C. Tracce del tempo: I suoni della memoria (Traces of Time: The sounds of
memory). Neo-Eubios 2019 ,69. ISSN 1825-5515. Available online: https://issuu.com/neoeubios/docs/eubios_69_web/s/164061
57 (accessed on 1 May 2023). (In Italian).
16. Zammuner, V .L. Tecniche Dell’Intervista e Del Questionario. Processi Psicologici e Qualit àDei Dati (Interview and Questionnaire
Techniques. Psychological Processes and Data Quality) , 1998 2a ed.; IL Mulino: Roma, Italy, 1996; p. 249. (In Italian)
17. Mastrandrea, S. Psicologia Della Percezione (Psychology of Perception) ; Carocci Editore: Rome Italy, 2017; ISBN 9788843088096.
(In Italian)
18. Zannin, P .H.; Calixto, A.; Diniz, F.B.; Ferreira, J.A. A survey of urban noise annoyance in a large Brazilian city: The importance of
a subjective analysis in conjunction with an objective analysis. Environ. Impact Assess. Review 2003 ,23, 245–255. [CrossRef]
19. Ristovska, G. Questionnaire Based Survey for Noise Induced Annoyance in Urban Population. In Proceedings of the EU
Symposium “Harmonisation of EU Sound Insulation Descriptors and Classiﬁcation Standards”, Florence, Italy, 14 December 2010 .
20. Zhang, X. Questionnaire Study of Perceived Noise Impact in the Residential Area—Before the Noise Barrier Protection, July
15, 2013, Action 3 Report of EU Life Project NOISUN—A Project Where Noise Barriers Produce Solar Heat. Available online:
https://noisun.ﬁles.wordpress.com/2013/05/report_questionnaire_study.pdf (accessed on 1 May 2023).
21. Beach, E.; Williams, W.; Gilliver, M. Noise level assessments: Subjective vs objective measures. In Proceedings of the Acoustics
2011, Gold Coast, Australia, 2–4 November 2011.
22. Raimbault, M.; Lavandier, C.; B érengier, M. Ambient sound assessment of urban environments: Field studies in two French cities.
Appl. Acoust. 2003 ,64, 1241–1256. [CrossRef]
23. Ballas, J.A. Common factors in the identiﬁcation of assortment of brief everyday sounds. J. Exp. Psychol. Hum. Percept. Perform.
1993 ,19, 250–267. [CrossRef]
24. Dubois, D. Categories as acts of meaning: The case of categories in olfaction and audition. Cogn. Sci. Q. 2000 ,1, 35–68.
25. Yang, W.; Kang, J. Acoustic comfort evaluation in urban open public spaces. Appl. Acoust. 2005 ,66, 211–219. [CrossRef]
26. Maristany, A.; Recuero L ópez, M.; Asensio Rivera, C. Soundscape quality analysis by fuzzy logic: A ﬁeld study in Cor-doba,
Argentina. Appl. Acoust. 2016 ,111, 106–115. [CrossRef]
27. Jiang, L.; Masullo, M.; Maffei, L.; Meng, F.; Vorländer, M. How do shared-street design and trafﬁc restriction improve urban
soundscape and human experience?—An online survey with virtual reality. Build. Environ. 2018 ,143, 318–328. [CrossRef]
28. ISO/TS 12913-2 ; Acoustics—Soundscape—Part 2: Data Collection and Reporting Requirements. International Organization for
Standardization (ISO): Geneva, Switzerland, 2018.
29. Buratti, C.; Belloni, E.; Merli, F.; Ricciardi, P . A new index combining thermal, acoustic, and visual comfort of moderate
envi-ronments in temperate climate. Appl. Acoust. 2003 ,64, 129–145.
30. Frontczak, M.; Andersen, R.K.; Wargocki, P . Questionnaire survey on factors inﬂuencing comfort with indoor environmental
quality in Danish housing. Build. Environ. 2012 ,50, 56–64. [CrossRef]
31. Nimlyat, P .S. Indoor environmental quality performance and occupants’ satisfaction [IEQPOS] as assessment criteria for green
healthcare building rating. Build. Environ. 2018 ,144, 598–610. [CrossRef]
32. Nur, P .; Yorukolu, D.; Kang, J. Development and testing of Indoor Soundscape Questionnaire for evaluating contextual expe-rience
in public spaces. Build. Acoust. 2017 ,24, 307–324.
33. ISO/TS 15666 ; Acoustics—Assessment of Noise Annoyance by Means of Social and Socio-Acoustic Surveys. International
Organization for Standardization (ISO): Geneva, Switzerland, 2003.
34. Rasmussen, B.; Machimbarrena, M. (Eds.) COST Action TU0901—Building Acoustics throughout Europe. Volume 1: Towards a
Common Framework in Building Acoustics throughout Europe ; DiScript Preimpresion: Madrid, Spain, 2014; e-ISBN: 978-84-697-0158-4.
35. Torresin, S.; Albatici, R.; Aletta, F.; Babich, F.; Kang, J. Assessment Methods and Factors Determining Positive Indoor Soundscapes
in Residential Buildings: A Systematic Review. Sustainability 2019 ,11, 5290. [CrossRef]
36. Aletta, F.; Guattari, C.; Evangelisti, L.; Asdrubali, F.; Oberman, T.; Kang, J. Exploring the compatibility of “Method A” and
“Method B” data collection protocols reported in the ISO/TS 12913-2:2018 for urban soundscape via a soundwalk. Appl. Acoust.
2019 ,155, 190–203. [CrossRef]

J. Otorhinolaryngol. Hear. Balance Med. 2023 ,4, 4 19 of 20
37. Di Loreto, S.; Serpilli, F.; Lori, V . Soundscape Approach in the Seaport of Ancona: A Case Study. Acoustics 2022 ,4, 492–516.
[CrossRef]
38. Ausejo, M.; Recuero, M.; del Carmen Morillo, M. Subjective Noise Web-Based Surveys ; Euronoise: Edinburgh, UK, 2009.
39. Brambilla, G.; Pedrielli, F. Smartphone-Based Participatory Soundscape Mapping for a More Sustainable Acoustic Environment.
Sustainability 2020 ,12, 7899. [CrossRef]
40. Grewenig, E.; Lergetporer, P .; Simon, L.; Werner, K.; Woessmann, L. Can internet surveys represent the entire population? A
practitioners’ analysis. Eur. J. Politi-Econ. 2023 ,78, 102382. [CrossRef]
41. Erfanian, M.; Mitchell, A.; Aletta, F.; Kang, J. Psychological well-being and demographic factors can mediate soundscape
pleasantness and eventfulness: A large sample study. J. Environ. Psychol. 2021 ,77, 101660. [CrossRef]
42. Clark, C.; Gjestland, T.; Lavia, L.; Notley, H.; Michaud, D.; Morinaga, M. Assessing community noise annoyance: A review of two
decades of the international technical speciﬁcation ISO/TS 15666:2003. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 2021 ,150, 3362–3373. [CrossRef]
43. Gjestland, T.; Morinaga, M. Effect of alternate deﬁnitions of “high” annoyance on exposure-response functions. J. Acoust. Soc. Am.
2022 ,151, 2856–2862. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
44. Lam, B.; Chieng, J.; Watcharasupat, K.N.; Ooi, K.; Ong, Z.T.; Hong, J.Y.; Gan, W.S. Crossing the linguistic causeway: A binational
approach for translating soundscape attributes to Bahasa Melayu. Appl. Acoust. 2022 ,199, 108976. [CrossRef]
45. Papadakis, N.M.; Aletta, F.; Kang, J.; Oberman, T.; Mitchell, A.; Stavroulakis, G.E. Translation and cross-cultural adaptation
methodology for soundscape attributes—A study with independent translation groups from English to Greek. Appl. Acoust. 2022 ,
200, 109031. [CrossRef]
46. Magrini, A.; Di Feo Cerniglia, A. Questionnaire Analysis Survey for Acoustic Investigation—Preliminary Considerations. In
IN-TER-NOISE and NOISE-CON Congress and Conference Proceedings, InterNoise19, Madrid, Spain ; 2019; pp. 4999–5997. Available
online: https://www.ingentaconnect.com/contentone/ince/incecp/2019/00000259/00000004/art00082;jsessionid=1oyj0f2i9
31y.x-ic-live-02 (accessed on 1 May 2023).
47. Cerniglia, A.; Chiarella, D.; Cutugno, P .; Marconi, L.; Magrini, A.; Di Feo, G.; Ferretti, M. Questionnaire analysis to deﬁne the
most suitable survey for port-noise investigation. In Proceedings of the 26th International Congress on Sound and Vibration
(ICSV26), Montreal, QC, Canada, 7–11 July 2019; ISBN 978-1-9991810-0-0. Available online: https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.06915
(accessed on 1 May 2023).
48. Can, A. Dynamic Approaches for the Characterization and Mitigation of Urban Sound Environments. Acoustics. Ph.D. Thesis,
Universit édu Maine, Le Mans, France, 2019. Available online: https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/tel-02318710 (accessed on
1 March 2023).
49. Rajala, V .; Hongisto, V . Annoyance of impulsive sounds—A psychoacoustic experiment involving synthetic sounds, 2019. In
Proceedings of the 23rd International Congress on Acoustics, ICA 2019, Aachen, Germany, 9–13 September 2019.
50. Fletcher, H.; Munson, W.A. Relation between loudness and masking. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 1937 ,9, 1–10. [CrossRef]
51. Curcuruto, S.; Asdrubali, F.; Brambilla, G.; Silvaggio, R.; D’Alessandro, F.; Gallo, V . Socio-acoustic survey and soundscape analysis
in urban parks in Rome. In Proceedings of the 11th International Congress on Noise as a Public Health Problem (ICBEN) 2011,
London, UK, 24–28 July 2011.
52. Mitchell, A.; Erfanian, M.; Soelistyo, C.; Oberman, T.; Kang, J.; Aldridge, R.; Xue, J.-H.; Aletta, F. Effects of Soundscape Complexity
on Urban Noise Annoyance Ratings: A Large-Scale Online Listening Experiment. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022 ,19, 14872.
[CrossRef]
53. Jin, Y.; Jin, H.; Kang, J. Effects of sound types and sound levels on subjective environmental evaluations in different seasons. Build.
Environ. 2020 ,183, 107215. [CrossRef]
54. Arcangeli, G.; Mucci, N.; Giorgi, G.; Lorini, C.; Bonaccorsi, G. 566 Evaluation of quality of life and annoyance in the context of life
monza project. BMJ J. 2018 ,75, A518. [CrossRef]
55. Bartalucci, C.; Borchi, F.; Carfagni, M.; Furferi, R.; Governi, L.; Lapini, A.; Volpe, Y.; Curcuruto, S.; Mazzocchi, E.; Marsico, G.; et al.
LIFE MONZA: Project description and actions’ updating. Noise Mapp. 2018 ,5, 60–70. [CrossRef]
56. Chen, H.; Hong, B.; Qu, H.; Geng, Y.; Su, M. Effects of Acoustic Perception on Outdoor Thermal Comfort in Campus Open Spaces
in China’s Cold Region. Buildings 2022 ,12, 1518. [CrossRef]
57. Du, M.; Hong, B.; Gu, C.; Li, Y.; Wang, Y. Multiple effects of visual-acoustic-thermal perceptions on the overall comfort of elderly
adults in residential outdoor environments. Energy Build. 2023 ,283, 112813. [CrossRef]
58. Jin, Y.; Jin, H.; Kang, J. Combined effects of the thermal-acoustic environment on subjective evaluations in urban squares. Build.
Environ. 2020 ,168, 106517. [CrossRef]
59. Brown, A.; Kang, J.; Gjestland, T. Towards standardization in soundscape preference assessment. Appl. Acoust. 2011 ,72, 387–392.
[CrossRef]
60. Aburawis, A.A.M.; Yorukoglu, P .N.D. An integrated framework on soundscape perception and spatial experience by adapting
post-occupancy evaluation methodology. Build. Acoust. 2018 ,25, 3–16. [CrossRef]
61. Mitchell, A.; Oberman, T.; Aletta, F.; Erfanian, M.; Kachlicka, M.; Lionello, M.; Kang, J. The Soundscape Indices (SSID) Protocol: A
Method for Urban Soundscape Surveys—Questionnaires with Acoustical and Contextual Information. Appl. Sci. 2020 ,10, 2397.
[CrossRef]
62. Eloy, S.; Andrade, M.; Dias, L.; Dias, M.S. The impact of sound in people’s behaviour in outdoor settings: A study using virtual
reality and eye-tracking. Appl. Ergon. 2023 ,108, 103957. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

J. Otorhinolaryngol. Hear. Balance Med. 2023 ,4, 4 20 of 20
63. Jo, H.I.; Jeon, J.Y. Perception of urban soundscape and landscape using different visual environment reproduction methods in
virtual reality. Appl. Acoust. 2022 ,186, 108498. [CrossRef]
64. Zhang, R.-X.; Zhang, L.-M. Panoramic visual perception and identiﬁcation of architectural cityscape elements in a virtual-reality
environment. Futur. Gener. Comput. Syst. 2021 ,118, 107–117. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.