Developmental Science 10:1 (2007), pp 126–134 DOI: 10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00574.x 
© 2007 The Author. Journal compilation © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and 
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA. 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd 
‘Like me’: a foundation for social cognition 
Andrew N. Meltzoff 
Institute for Learning and Brain Sciences, University of Washington, USA  
Abstract 
Infants represent the acts of others and their own acts in commensurate terms. They can recognize cross-modal equivalences
between acts they see others perform and their own felt bodily movements. This recognition of self–other equivalences in actiongives rise to interpreting others as having similar psychological states such as perceptions and emotions. The ‘like me’ natureof others is the starting point for social cognition, not its culmination. 
Introduction 
According to Piaget, infants begin life as asocial crea-
tures, in a state of ‘solipsism’ or ‘radical egocentrism’(Piaget, 1952, 1954), only gradually coming to appre-hend the similarities between the actions of self andother. An aim of genetic psychology was to investigatehow an organism starting from solipsism could developinto the mature social adult.
In this paper, I will show that the initial state differs from
this vision. The recognition of self–other equivalences isthe foundation, not the outcome, of social cognition. Theacts of the self and other are represented within a supramodalcode. This provides infants with an interpretive frameworkfor understanding the behavior they see. Input from social
encounters is therefore more interpretable than classic-ally supposed. Infants have a storehouse of knowledgeon which to draw: They can use the self to understandthe actions, goals, and psychological states of others andconversely can learn about their own powers and thepossibilities and consequences of their acts by observingthe behavior of others. The bedrock on which social cog-nition is built is the perception that others are ‘like me’. 
‘Like me’ in action 
I designed studies to explore the power of the ‘like me’
notion at the basic level of action patterns. Do infantsregister when another person behaves like them? In one
study, 14-month-old infants sat across the table fromtwo adults who were side-by-side (a paired comparison,as in looking-time studies, save that they were liveadults). Two TV monitors were placed behind the infant,one displaying the current infant and the other a record of
the immediately preceding infant. Each adult mimickedone of the infants on TV . One of the adults imitatedeverything the live infant did; the other imitated what
the previous infant had done. Although both adults wereacting like perfect babies, and thus were good controls
for one another, infants reacted differentially. Infants
looked signiﬁcantly longer and smiled more at the personwho acted like them.
What is the basis for infants’ preferences? Two candid-
ates are temporal contingency and structural equiva-
lences. The former relies on the fact that the behavior ofthe infant (X) and the adult (Y) are temporally linked,but does not require that the infant recognize that X and
Y are structurally congruent acts.
I tested these alternatives in another study by having
both adults initiate their responses contingent on thesame infant behavior. When the infant produced abehavior from a predetermined list, both adults simulta-neously sprang into action. One of the adults matchedthe infant; the other performed a controlled, mismatchingresponse. For example, whenever an infant shook a toy,
the imitating adult also shook his toy. The behavior ofthe mismatching adult was also triggered by the infant’sbehavior, but this adult performed a different action.Whenever the infant shook his toy, the control adult slid
his matched toy on the tabl e. This design achieves the
goal of having both of the adults’ acts contingent onthe infant’s. What differentiates the two adults is not thetemporal contingency information, but the structuralcongruence of the adults’ actions vis-à-vis the subject.
Infants looked signiﬁcantly longer and smiled more at
the imitator, suggesting that they can recognize thestructural congruence between the acts they see others 
Address for correspondence: Andrew N. Meltzoff, Institute for Learning and Brain Sciences, University of Washington (Box 357920 ), Seattle, W A
98195, USA; e-mail: Meltzoff@u.washington.edu

‘Like me’ and social cognition 127 
© 2007 The Author. Journal compilation © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 
perform and their own behavior. They do not just recog-
nize that another moves  
when 
 they move (temporal con-
tingency), but that another acts in the same  
manner 
 as
they do (structural congruence). Moreover, they activelyprefer the social partner who is behaving ‘like me’ overthe one who simply acts ‘contemporaneous with me’ asmeasured by preferential looking and heightenedpositive affect towards that person. 
‘Like me’ in perception 
Certain bodily movements are imbued with meaning for
adults and older children. When adults see anotherperson gazing at an object, it is not simply registered asa head-turn-to-the-side, but rather as an object-directedact picking out a target in the environment. Somedevelopmental psychologists do not think that infants
appreciate the latter (e.g. Butterworth & Jarrett, 1991;
Corkum & Moore, 1995). A lean view is that in gaze-following situations the infant notices the adult’s head as
it rotates and by tracking this physical motion in spacethe infant’s own head is pulled to the correct hemi-ﬁeld.Once it is there, the distal object is encountered byhappenstance. Infants turn in the direction of the adult’sgaze, but they are simply processing salient physicalmovements in space caused by the adult’s head. They arenot gaze following, properly called, and don’t appreciatethe directedness / ‘aboutness’ of adult gaze.
We tested this by having an adult turn to look at one
of the two identical objects in a random order over fourtrials (Brooks & Meltzoff, 2002, 2005). For one group ofinfants, the adult turned to the target object with eyesopen, and for the other, the adult turned with eyesclosed. If infants relied simply on gross head motions,they should turn in both cases. If they relied solely on anabstract rule to look in the same direction as a ‘contin-
gent interactant’ or ‘agent’ that turned (e.g. Johnson,Slaughter & Carey, 1998), they should also look regardlessof whether the adult’s eyes were open or closed, becauseit was the same agent, with the same history of inter-active behavior turning in both groups. If, however, infantsunderstand that the eyes are relevant for connectingviewer and object, then they should differentiate the twoconditions, looking at the target object when the adult’seyes are open but not closed.
The results showed that 12-, 14-, and 18-month-old
infants turned selectively, seeking out the target signiﬁ-cantly more often when the adult turned with eyes openthan with eyes closed. We also scored other behaviors –such as looking duration and pointing – beyond thetraditional frequency of looking measure. We found thatthe average length of a look to the correct target waslonger when infants followed the adult’s open eyes versus
closed eyes. Inanimate objects thus become ‘marked’ or‘distally touched’ by the adult’s looking at them, andinfants inspected the marked object as if searching forthe aspect of interest. The infants also pointed to theobject more when the adult looked at it with open thanwith closed eyes. This behavior is striking because it isclearly ostensive – infants point more often when thesocial partner can see the object than when the partnercannot (see also Liszkowski, Carpenter, Henning, Striano,& Tomasello, 2004, on the development of pointing).How have infants come to know about the meaning ofanother person’s eye closure? According to the ‘Like Me’framework, they may have learned this through theirexperience with their own eye closures.
Of course, eye closure is only one way to block a
person’s line of sight. Another way is to use an inanimateobject. From an adult perspective, blindfolds have thesame effect as closed eyes – both prevent visual access –whereas a headband does not obscure the adult’s vision.
We tested 12-, 14- and 18-month-old infants using the
same paradigm with a blindfold versus a headband. Theresults were different than the eye-closure case. The 14-
and 18-month-olds looked at the adult’s target signiﬁ-cantly more often in the headband than the blindfoldcondition. In contrast, the 12-month-old infants did notdistinguish between the two conditions. They looked atthe indicated target just as often when the adult turnedwearing the blindfold as the headband.
This is not a matter of blindfolds causing some
general suppression of activity. Quite the contrary; theyoung infants make the mistake of following the ‘gaze’
of the adult wearing the blindfold as much as they dowhen there is no blindfold involved. It is as if they do
not yet understand that blindfolds block perception,even though they understand that eye closure does. Per-
haps they understand eye closure earlier than blindfoldsbecause their own experience teaches them that vision isobscured when their eyes are closed. 
A training study 
We provided 12-month-olds ﬁrst-person experience with
the effects of blindfolds (Meltzoff & Brooks, 2004). Infantswere randomly assigned to one of three groups: (a)
blindfold experience, (b) experience with a blindfold with
a window cut out of it, and (c) a baseline condition inwhich they merely became familiarized with the opaque
blindfold as an object on the table.
Infants in the opaque-blindfold and windowed-
blindfold groups were provided with various interesting
objects to play with on the table; when they lookeddown to visually inspect an object, the experimenter held

128 Andrew N. Meltzoff 
© 2007 The Author. Journal compilation © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 
the blindfold in between the object and the child’s eyes.
Thus, the infants experienced that their own view wasblocked when the opaque blindfold was held in front of
their eyes and was restored again when the blindfold wasremoved. This experience had nothing to do with the
experimenter’s viewpoint; it was a ﬁrst-person experi-
ence. Infants in the windowed-blindfold group receivedexactly the same treatment, thus controlling for the
experience of an adult repeatedly inserting a cloth
between them and the objects; however, they could peerthrough the windowed blindfold. Infants in the baselinegroup were simply familiarized with the blindfold as anobject. It rested ﬂat on the table with the infant andexperimenter taking turns sliding it back and forth, but
it was not used to block their view of distal events.
At the end of the training period all three groups were
given our standard gaze-following test. This was the ﬁrsttime the infants were presented with the blindfoldedadult who turned toward the distal objects. The resultsshowed that infants who had received ﬁrst-person train-ing on the opaque blindfold now interpreted the adult’sblindfolded turning correctly. They did not turn when
the adult wore the blindfold. Importantly, infants whohad the windowed-blindfold experience and the baselineinfants who received no training still mistakenly followedthe blindfolded adult’s ‘gaze’ to the distal object whenshe wore the blindfold. This is in line with the Brooksand Meltzoff (2002) report that 12-month-olds withoutspecial training do not seem to treat blindfolds as objectsthat block the adult’s view.
In a second study we tested 18-month-olds. Recall
that infants of this age do not turn when the adult isblindfolded. They seem to understand that blindfolds
block vision. We wanted to see if ﬁrst-person experience
with a trick see-through blindfold would change theirminds and reverse what they had learned.
Infants were randomly assigned to one of three
groups: (a) ﬁrst-person experience with an opaque blind-fold, (b) ﬁrst-person experience with a trick blindfold
that looked identical to the opaque one but was made ofsheer material that could be seen through when heldclose to the eyes, and (c) baseline in which they simplyplayed with the blindfold as an object while it lay ﬂat onthe table. As in the previous study, infants in the twotreatment groups were allowed to play with toys and theblindfold was interposed between their eyes and the toys
during the training period. However, in this case, theopaque blindfold blocked their view, and the trick blind-fold allowed infants the experience that this particular
(apparently opaque) blindfold could be seen through.
After training, infants in all thr ee groups sa w the adult
wear the blindfold in our standard test. As expected,
infants in the baseline group and the opaque-blindfoldtraining group refrained from following the adult’s head
turns when the adult wore the blindfold (in line withBrooks and Meltzoff’s, 2002, results with this age). Thenew ﬁnding is that infants who had ﬁrst-person experi-ence with the trick see-through blindfold followed theadult’s head turns signiﬁcantly more often than didinfants in the two other groups. We believe that ﬁrst-person experience with blindfolds changes infants’understanding of the other’s situation.
This study shows that infants use ﬁrst-person
experience about a mental state such as ‘seeing’ to make
interpretations about another person. We think thesetraining effects are a case of ‘like me’ projection, withfar-reaching implications for how infants use self-experience as leverage for understanding the behavior of
others who act ‘like me’ (e.g. Meltzoff, 2006; Sommerville& Woodward, 2005a, 2005b), as will be elaborated in theconclusions.
 
Applicable to me 
In the work described so far infants were engaged in
dyadic interaction. However, much can be learned by
observing interactions between others, even though theseinteractions do not directly involve the self. There hasbeen surprisingly little work done on infants’ learningfrom eavesdropping on other people’s social interactions.Repacholi and Meltzoff (in press) explored whether
infants understand that emotional information ininteractions between others (who are like me) is also‘applicable to me’.
We investigated what we called ‘emotional eavesdrop-
ping’. An adult demonstrated how to manipulate novelobjects in certain ways. We knew from previous workthat infants would tend to imitate these actions. How-ever, there were two new twists. First, an adult ‘Emoter’
expressed anger (or a neutral expression) when the ﬁrst
adult performed the action. The infants were subsequentlygiven the object to manipulate to see whether theirimitation varied as a function of what emotion the adult
had expressed (the Emoter now had a neutral face). Thesecond twist was that we systematically varied whetheror not the Emoter could see the infant’s imitative per-formance. We predicted that infants would not imitate
the action if the previously angry adult could see themmanipulating the object (and thus might become angryat them for performing the forbidden act), but would
imitate if they were out of the Emoter’s sight.
Eighteen-month-old infants were randomly assigned
to one of three treatment groups: Anger-present (thepreviously angry Emoter faced the infant with a neutralexpression during the response period), Neutral-present

‘Like me’ and social cognition 129 
© 2007 The Author. Journal compilation © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 
(the previously neutral Emoter faced the infant during
the response period), or Anger-absent (the previouslyangry Emoter left the room for the response period).The results showed that infants in the latter two groupshad signiﬁcantly higher imitation scores than did infantsin the ﬁrst group. In a further study the Emoter stayedin the room in all conditions (Repacholi & Meltzoff, inpress, Experiment 2). After her emotional display, theEmoter adopted a passive expression and either: (a)turned around so that she was not looking at the infant(Anger-back), or (b) directly faced the infant with a neutralexpression (Anger-face). The infant was then given the
object to manipulate. We predicted that infants in theAnger-back group would display higher levels of imitationrelative to those infants in the Anger-face group, and the
results conﬁrmed this prediction.
These effects cannot be explained by the raw physical
presence of the previously angry Emoter during the timethat infants had access to the object. The child andEmoter were in the same room both in the Anger-backand Anger-face groups, but infants responded to themdifferentially. Nor can emotional contagion account forthe results, because the infant had the chance to ‘catch’the adult’s emotion equally well in both groups, whichwere matched during the emotional outburst phase of
the experiment (they only differed in where the adult wasfacing during the response period). In addition, wescored infants’ own emotional responses during the adults’emotional interaction. In both experiments, we foundthat infants in the Anger conditions did not exhibit morenegative affect than those infants in the Neutral condi-tions. Thus, the behavioral regulation reported here isnot reducible to emotional contagion.
In sum, infants’ actions were inﬂuenced by their
memory of past emotions and their behavior varied as afunction of whether the Emoter was currently looking atthem. If the previously angry person was absent (Experi-ment 1) or turned her back (Experiment 2) in theresponse period, infants imitated.
One unanswered question is whether infants were
interpreting the Emoter’s anger as being about theperformance of a ‘forbidden act’ (the act is bad) orabout the object itself (that’s a bad object). Our working
hypothesis is that infants interpret the Emoter’s anger to
be about the act, inasmuch as infants rarely refused totouch the object, but they signiﬁcantly refrained fromimitating the act even though they picked up the objectand had it in hand.
This research provides evidence that infants regulate
their actions based on watching the emotional exchangesbetween two other people – ‘emotional eavesdropping’.By 18 months of age, infants are not restricted to glean-ing information from dyadic interactions that directlyinvolve them, but are also capable of learning from
eavesdropping on others. We think that after observingthe Emoter express anger at the adult’s actions, infantsare concerned that the Emoter will become angry if shesees the infants themselves perform the target act. Thiswould explain the conditions under which they do
imitate (Neutral-present, Anger-absent, Anger-back) aswell as those in which they do not (Anger-face). Evidently
infants regulate their behavior based on whether or notthe previously angry person now has  
visual access 
 to
their own actions: ‘She won’t get angry if she doesn’t seeme do it.’
 
Payoff of the ‘like me’ framework 
The puzzle of social cognition stems from the fact that
persons are more than physical objects. Enumerating aperson’s height, weight, and eye color does not exhaustour description of that person. We have skipped overtheir psychological makeup. Each of us has the phenom-enological experience that we are not alone in the world,not the unique bearer of psychological properties. Weknow that we perceive, feel, and intend, and we believeothers have psychological states much like ours. Philo-sophers seek criteria that justify the inference that themoving mounds of ﬂesh we observe are animated bypsychological states (e.g. Russell, 1948; Ryle, 1949;Strawson, 1959). Developmental psychologists ask dif-ferent questions. We inquire how such a view takes holdin the typical human mind (regardless of whether it islogically justiﬁed). Is it innately speciﬁed? Does thechild’s understanding of agents transform with age andsocial experience? 
The starting state 
Imitation indicates that infants, at some level of process-
ing no matter how primitive, can map actions of otherpeople onto actions of their own body – they process theacts of others as ‘like me’. 
1 
 Facial imitation is especially
informative because infants cannot see their own faces.If infants are young enough they will never have seen 
1 
 The use of the English word ‘me’, is not meant to suggest that the
young infant has an adult sense of self. I think that the adult notions
of ‘I’, ‘me’, and ‘self’ develop. The ‘like me’ notion could be rephrasedby purging the theoretically laden word, ‘me’, and saying that the
infant recognizes: ‘ 
that 
 looks like  
this 
 feels’. Similarly, I emphasize the 
bi-directionality 
 of the effects supported by the framework. The tight
relation between perception and production allows young infants to
move in two directions – from self to other (as manifest in our trainingstudy, see text) and from other to self (as manifest by the imitation ofnovel acts that infants have not previously performed; Meltzoff, 1988).See Meltzoff (2006) for further analysis of this bi-directionality.

130 Andrew N. Meltzoff 
© 2007 The Author. Journal compilation © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 
their own face in a mirror. The fact that young infants
can imitate facial gestures shows that the perception andproduction of human acts are intrinsically intertwined.
We hypothesized that infants can represent human
movement patterns they see and ones they perform usingthe same mental code (Meltzoff & Moore, 1977, 1997).There is thus something like an act space or primitivebody scheme that allows the infant to unify the visualand motor/proprioceptive information into one common‘supramodal’ framework. This supramodal act space isnot restricted to modality-speciﬁc information (visual,tactile, motor, etc.). A more detailed analysis of themetric of equivalence used by infants to solve the corre-spondence problem, and the possible role of intrauterinemotor experience, is provided elsewhere (Meltzoff &Moore, 1997). 
Neuroscience and cognitive science 
This hypothesis of a supramodal act space that emerged
from developmental science is compatible with discoveriesin neuroscience concerning mirror neurons (e.g. Gallese,
2003; Iacoboni, 2005; Rizzolatti, 2005) and proposals incognitive science about action coding (e.g. Prinz, 2002).An important task for the future is to examine thecommonalities and differences among these differentperspectives and levels of analysis; such papers arebeginning to emerge (Brass & Heyes, 2005; Meltzoff &Decety, 2003; Rizzolatti, Fadiga, Fogassi & Gallese,2002; Wilson, 2001).
In all of these approaches there is an emphasis on the
commonality between observation and execution. But assoon as one focuses on commonality, it immediately raisesthe question about differentiation. Perhaps the supramodal
code means that there are no grounds for distinguishingself from other. Thought of in this way, the supramodalsystem would simply be a translation device for turningvisual perceptions into motor output, a perception-production transducer: A Gibsonian tuning fork.
There are three reasons to think that we need a more
nuanced notion than this to account for the empirical
phenomena. First, the infant does not always producewhat is given to perception. In one study of facial imita-
tion we used a paciﬁer to stop the infant from imitatingin an immediate, resonance-like way (Meltzoff & Moore,1977). The adult assumed a passive-face pose beforeremoving the paciﬁer. Infants imitated from memory
when the actual stimulus now was a passive face. This
same effect was shown more strongly in the Meltzoffand Moore (1994) study demonstrating that infants
imitated yesterday’s gesture after a 24-hour delay whenthey re-encountered the adult with a passive face. Thus,the information picked up by vision can be accessed ata later time. This seems to require a stored representa-
tion of the adult’s act and not simply a direct resonancesystem. Second, infants self-correct their imitative actsto achieve a more faithful match (Meltzoff & Moore,1994, 1997). In order to correct their performance,information about their own acts has to be available for
comparison to the representation of the adult’s act. Third,infants show special interest in being imitated, indicatingthe capacity to recognize when their unseen facial behav-ior is being copied. Such recognition implies that thereis a representation of their own bodies.
These three facts go beyond the simple resonance
account. They suggest that, at minimum, the infant’srepresentational system performs three functions: (a)
preserving information about the movements in theexternal world, (b) preserving information about one’s
own body movements, and (c) providing a means of
comparison. This indicates a differentiation in thesupramodal system such that the representation of theother’s body is separate from the representation of one’sown body. They are not confused. The cognitive act is
to compare these two representations – in one case tomatch one’s own acts to the other (imitative correction),and in the other case to detect being matched oneself(recognizing being imitated). Thus exteroception (per-ception of the acts of others) and proprioception (per-ception of one’s own acts) are not one undifferentiatedwhole. Cognitive neuroscience work is now being directed
at examining the neural underpinnings of self–other
equivalence mappings that preserve a differentiationbetween self and other (Decety, Chaminade, Grèzes& Meltzoff, 2002; Jackson, Meltzoff & Decety, 2006;Jackson, Brunet, Meltzoff & Decety, 2006).
The representation of action we have postulated has
implications for the development of social cognition.Human behavior is especially relevant to infants becausethe actions they see others perform look similar to theinfant’s own behavior and because these acts are eventsinfants can intend themselves. When a human act isshown to a young infant, even a newborn, it may providea salient recognition experience: ‘That seen event is likethis felt event.’ Because human acts are seen in othersand performed by the self, the infant can grasp that theother is at some level ‘like me’. The other acts like meand I can act like the other. The cross-modal knowledgeof what it feels like to do the act that was seen providesa privileged access to people not afforded by things. 
‘Like me’ as leverage for developmental change 
That young infants can interpret the acts of others in
terms of their own acts and experiences provides themwith a mechanism for development. For example, the

‘Like me’ and social cognition 131 
© 2007 The Author. Journal compilation © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 
infant knows that when she wants something she reaches
out and grasps it. The infant experiences her own inter-nal desires and the concomitant bodily movements(hand extension, ﬁnger movements, etc.). The experienceof grasping to satisfy desires gives infants leverage for
making sense of the grasping behavior they see othersperform. When the child sees another person reachingfor an object, she sees the person extending his hand in
the same way, complete with ﬁnger curling. Object-directed,grasping movements can be imbued with goal-directedness,because of the child’s own experience with these acts.
One reason that such experienced-based ‘projection to
others’ has not typically been ascribed to young infantsis that classical theories argue that they are incapable ofmapping their own manual movements to those they seeothers perform. But the research on imitation shows thisis wrong. Infants in the ﬁrst half-year of life imitatemanual gestures (Meltzoff & Moore, 1977, 1997; Vinter,1986). Such imitation shows that infants detect the sim-ilarity between their own manual movements and thosethey see adults perform. This basic ‘like me’ analogy canthen be put to work in their understanding the acts ofothers. For example, it may be the avenue by which theinfants’ own reaching experience changes their under-standing of the reaching behavior of others (Sommerville,Woodward & Needham, 2005; Woodward, Sommerville
& Guajardo, 2001): My goal-directed acts help me inter-pret the similar acts of others – ‘like me’ in action.
A similar argument applies to infants’ understanding
of goal-directed ‘striving’ in intention-reading studies(Meltzoff, 1995; see also Tomasello, Carpenter, Call,Behne & Moll, 2005). For example, the Meltzoff (1995)study showed 18-month-old infants an unsuccessful actthat did not fulﬁll the actor’s intentions. The studycompared infants’ tendency to perform the target act inseveral situations: (a) after they saw the full-target actdemonstrated, (b) after they saw the unsuccessful attemptto perform the act, and (c) after it was neither shown norattempted. Infants who saw the unsuccessful attempt and
the full-target act produced target acts at a signiﬁcantlyhigher rate than controls. Evidently, toddlers can under-stand our goals even if we fail to fulﬁll them, but whatis the developmental mechanism by which they come tomake this sort of interpretation?
The ‘Like Me’ framework provides leverage for under-
standing these results, by highlighting children’s previousﬁrst-person experience. Infants have goals and act inten-tionally. They have experienced their own failed plansand unfulﬁlled intentions. Indeed in the second half-yearof life they become obsessed with the success and failureof their plans. They begin to mark such self-failures withspecial labels (‘uh-oh’; see Gopnik, 1982; Gopnik &Meltzoff, 1986); and they actively experiment with theirown failed efforts (Gopnik & Meltzoff, 1997; Moore &
Meltzoff, 2004). When an infant sees another act in
this same way, the infant’s self-experience could suggest
that there is a goal, plan, or intention beyond the surfacebehavior. Thus infants would come to read the adult’sfailed attempts, and the behavioral envelope in whichthey occur, as a pattern of ‘strivings’ rather than ends inthemselves. (For brain imaging work exploring the neuralcorrelates of goal attribution, see Blakemore, Boyer,Pachot-Clouard, Meltzoff, Segebarth & Decety, 2003;
Chaminade, Meltzoff & Decety, 2002; Cheng, Meltzoff& Decety, 2006.)
The understanding of another’s looking behavior
could also beneﬁt from ﬁrst-person experience – in thiscase, experience of oneself as a looker/perceiver. Infantscan imitate head movements (Meltzoff, 1988; Meltzoff &Moore, 1989; Piaget, 1962). This indicates that infantscan map between the head movements they see othersperform and their own head movements. Infants’ sub-jective experiences gained from ‘turning in order to see’could be used to make sense of the head movements ofothers who are orienting toward an object. Moreover,infants experience that eye closure cuts off their ownperceptual access. Inasmuch as infants can map the eyeclosures of others onto their own eye closures (as manifestin imitating blinking; Fontaine, 1984; Piaget, 1962), thiswould provide input for developing inferences about
perception in others who have their eyes closed.
This also makes sense of the fact that young infants
have a more advanced understanding of eye closure thanof blockage by an inanimate object (Brooks & Meltzoff,2002). One-year-olds have had months of practice withvoluntary looking away and eye closing to cut off
unwanted stimuli. However, it is only around 12 to 14months old that infants begin actively experimentingwith removing and replacing inanimate occluders, suchas when they uncover and re-hide objects from them-selves (Gopnik & Meltzoff, 1997; Moore & Meltzoff,2004). Our intervention experiment provided systematicﬁrst-person experience with the fact that the blindfoldcould block their own view, and infants were immediatelyable to use this to understand the blindfold-wearing adult
in a new way (Meltzoff & Brooks, 2004). I argue that theinfant is using ﬁrst-person experience to interpret others.
Finally, Repacholi and I have found the ‘Like Me’
framework useful in understanding the imitation andemotion studies. In this case, infants are bringing to bearthree converging ‘like me’ inferences: (a) that they andthe other person can both perform the same actions, (b)if they perform the matching act, that the Emoter islikely to become as angry at them as she did at the otherperson, and (c) when the Emoter has her back turned tothe infant, the Emoter cannot see what action is being

132 Andrew N. Meltzoff 
© 2007 The Author. Journal compilation © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 
performed, just as the child’s own perceptual access is
blocked when she has her own back turned to a scene.
Repacholi and I plan to use infant confederates in the
study. What will happen if an age-matched peer is scolded
for performing the action? We expect that as the recipient
of the anger becomes increasingly ‘like me’, the infantswill be increasingly loathe to imitate the act that is scornedby the Emoter. Related work has already established
infants’ sensitivity to age-matched peers in an imitationsetting (Hanna & Meltzoff, 1993). 
Conclusions and new directions 
It has long been thought that the commonality between
self and other is integral to our commonsense psychologyand is a basis for feeling empathy for others and ‘ment-ally standing in their shoes’ (Baldwin, 1906; Hume,1739/1978; Husserl, 1950/1960; Smith, 1759/1976). Thestumbling block for classical philosophy was that theself–other equivalence was postulated to be late developingand therefore could not play a formative role (Gallagher& Meltzoff, 1996). Nearly a quarter century of infancyresearch serves to revise this view, and contemporary
philosophers have begun to take note (Campbell, 1994;Goldman, 2005; Gordon, 2005).
The ﬁndings from developmental science suggest that
young infants already register the equivalence between
acts of self and other. They do so before the use of lan-guage or comparisons of self and other in a mirror. Thisbasic equivalence colors infants’ ﬁrst interpretations ofthe social world and allows them to imbue the behaviorof others with felt meaning.
The ‘Like Me’ framework is useful for generating pre-
dictions and tests in autism, robotics, and neuroscience.For example, deﬁciencies in the ‘like me’ comparison may
help us understand the pattern of impairments exhibitedby children with autism; they have deﬁcits in imitation,
gaze following, and emotion understanding – all ofwhich are underwritten by a ‘like me’ understanding
(Dapretto, Davies, Pfeifer, Scott, Sigman, Bookheimer &Iacoboni, 2006; Dawson, Meltzoff, Osterling & Rinaldi,1998; Dawson, Meltzoff, Osterling, Rinaldi & Brown,1998; Meltzoff & Gopnik, 1993; Hobson & Lee, 1999;Hobson & Meyer, 2005; Rogers, 1999; Toth, Munson,Meltzoff & Dawson, in press).
In computer science, researchers are designing algo-
rithms that enable artiﬁcial agents to learn from observingthe behavior of others and to imitate – a key step towardsconstructing socially intelligent robots (Buchsbaum,Blumberg, Breazeal & Meltzoff, 2005; Demiris &Hayes, 2002; Demiris & Meltzoff, in press; Hoffman,Grimes, Shon & Rao, 2006; Rao, Shon & Meltzoff,2007).In cognitive neuroscience, work on human empathy
shows that adults react differently to the injury of anentity as a function of the like-me-ness of that entity(Jackson, Brunet, Meltzoff & Decety, 2006). Brain imag-ing studies of imitation reveal that observing actionsfrom a ﬁrst- versus third-person perspective leads todifferent neural processing and speed of imitation(Jackson, Meltzoff & Decety, 2006). Evidently the human
brain registers the like-me-ness of stimuli. Tracing thedevelopment of the relevant neural architecture is a goalfor future studies. Such work will contribute to creating
a ﬁeld of developmental  
social 
 neuroscience to comple-
ment the burgeoning ﬁeld of developmental cognitiveneuroscience.
 
Acknowledgements 
I gratefully acknowledge support by NIH (HD-22514),
NSF (# 0354453) and the Tamaki Foundation. Thanksare due to Pat Kuhl, Rechele Brooks, Betty Repacholi,David Liu, Alison Gopnik and Keith Moore for sharpen-ing my thoughts on the topics discussed here. I thank
Mark Johnson and Denis Mareschal for their wisdom
and support. 
References 
Baldwin, J.M. (1906).  
Mental development in the child and
the race 
 (3rd edn.). New York: Macmillan (original work
published 1894).
Blakemore, S., Boyer, P ., Pachot-Clouard, M., Meltzoff, A.N.,
Segebarth, C., & Decety, J. (2003). The detection of contin-gency and animacy from simple animations in the humanbrain.  
Cerebral Cortex 
,  
13 
, 837–844.
Brass, M., & Heyes, C. (2005). Imitation: is cognitive neuro-
science solving the correspondence problem?  
Trends in
Cognitive Sciences 
,  
9 
, 489–495.
Brooks, R., & Meltzoff, A.N. (2002). The importance of eyes:
how infants interpret adult looking behavior.  
Developmental
Psychology 
,  
38 
, 958–966.
Brooks, R., & Meltzoff, A.N. (2005). The development of gaze
following and its relation to language.  
Developmental Science 
, 
8 
, 535–543.
Buchsbaum, D., Blumberg, B., Breazeal, C., & Meltzoff, A.N.
(2005, August). A simulation-theory inspired social learningsystem for interactive characters. Paper presented at the 14thIEEE International Workshop on Robot and Human Inter-active Communication (RO-MAN 2005), Nashville, TN.
Butterworth, G., & Jarrett, N. (1991). What minds have in
common is space: spatial mechanisms serving joint visualattention in infancy.  
British Journal of Developmental
Psychology 
,  
9 
, 55–72.
Campbell, J. (1994).  
Past, space, and self 
. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.

‘Like me’ and social cognition 133 
© 2007 The Author. Journal compilation © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 
Chaminade, T., Meltzoff, A.N., & Decety, J. (2002). Does the
end justify the means? A PET exploration of the mechanismsinvolved in human imitation.  
NeuroImage 
,  
15 
, 318–328.
Cheng, Y ., Meltzoff, A.N., & Decety, J. (2006). Motivation
modulates the activity of the human mirror-neuron system. 
Cerebral Cortex 
; doi:10.1093/cercor/bhl107.
Corkum, V ., & Moore, C. (1995). Development of joint visual
attention in infants. In C. Moore & P .J. Dunham (Eds.), 
Joint attention: Its origins and role in development 
 (pp. 61–83).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Dapretto, M., Davies, M., Pfeifer, J., Scott, A., Sigman, M.,
Bookheimer, S., & Iacoboni, M. (2006). Understandingemotions in others: mirror neuron dysfunction in children withautism spectrum disorders.  
Nature Neuroscience 
,  
9 
, 28–30.
Dawson, G., Meltzoff, A.N., Osterling, J., & Rinaldi, J. (1998).
Neuropsychological correlates of early symptoms of autism. 
Child Development 
,  
69 
, 1276–1285.
Dawson, G., Meltzoff, A.N., Osterling, J., Rinaldi, J., &
Brown, E. (1998). Children with autism fail to orient tonaturally occurring social stimuli.  
Journal of Autism and
Developmental Disorders 
,  
28 
, 479–485.
Decety, J., Chaminade, T., Grèzes, J., & Meltzoff, A.N. (2002).
A PET exploration of the neural mechanisms involved inreciprocal imitation.  
NeuroImage 
,  
15 
, 265–272.
Demiris, J., & Hayes, G. (2002). Imitation as a dual-route
process featuring predictive and learning components:a biologically plausible computational model. In K.Dautenhahn & C. Nehaniv (Eds.),  
Imitation in animals and
artifacts 
 (pp. 327–361). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Demiris, Y ., & Meltzoff, A.N. (in press). The robot in the crib:
a developmental analysis of imitation skills in infants androbots.  
Infant and Child Development 
.
Fontaine, R. (1984). Imitative skills between birth and six
months.  
Infant Behavior and Development 
,  
7 
, 323–333.
Gallagher, S., & Meltzoff, A.N. (1996). The earliest sense of
self and others: Merleau-Ponty and recent developmentalstudies.  
Philosophical Psychology 
,  
9 
, 211–233.
Gallese, V . (2003). The manifold nature of interpersonal relations:
the quest for a common mechanism.  
Philosophical Transac-
tions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, BiologicalSciences 
,  
358 
, 517–528.
Goldman, A.I. (2005). Imitation, mind reading, and simulation.
In S. Hurley & N. Chater (Eds.),  
Perspectives on imitation: From
neuroscience to social science 
 (Vol. 2: Imitation, human devel-
opment, and culture, pp. 79–93). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gopnik, A. (1982). Words and plans: early language and the
development of intelligent action.  
Journal of Child Language 
, 
9 
, 303–318.
Gopnik, A., & Meltzoff, A.N. (1986). Relations between
semantic and cognitive development in the one-word stage:the speciﬁcity hypothesis.  
Child Development 
,  
57 
, 1040–1053.
Gopnik, A., & Meltzoff, A.N. (1997).  
Words, thoughts, and
theories 
. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Gordon, R.M. (2005). Intentional agents like myself. In S.
Hurley & N. Chater (Eds.),  
Perspectives on imitation: From
neuroscience to social science 
 (Vol. 2: Imitation, human
development, and culture, pp. 95–106). Cambridge, MA:MIT Press.Hanna, E., & Meltzoff, A.N. (1993). Peer imitation by toddlers
in laboratory, home, and day-care contexts: implications forsocial learning and memory.  
Developmental Psychology 
,  
29 
,
701–710.
Hobson, R.P ., & Lee, A. (1999). Imitation and identiﬁcation in
autism.  
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 
,  
40 
, 649 – 659.
Hobson, R.P ., & Meyer, J.A. (2005). Foundations for self and
other: a study of autism.  
Developmental Science 
,  
8 
, 481–491.
Hoffman, M.W ., Grimes, D.B., Shon, A.P ., & Rao, R.P .N.
(2006). A probabilistic model of gaze imitation and sharedattention.  
Neural Networks 
,  
19 
, 299– 310.
Hume, D. (1978).  
A treatise of human nature 
. New Y ork:
Oxford University Press (Origially published 1739).
Husserl, E. (1960).  
Cartesian meditations: An introduction to
phenomenology 
 (D. Cairns, trans.). The Hague: Martinus
Nijhoff (original work published 1950).
Iacoboni, M. (2005). Neural mechanisms of imitation.  
Current
Opinion in Neurobiology 
,  
15 
, 632–637.
Jackson, P .L., Brunet, E., Meltzoff, A.N., & Decety, J. (2006).
Empathy examined through the neural mechanisms involvedin imagining how I feel versus how you feel pain.  
Neuropsy-
chologia 
,  
44 
, 752–761.
Jackson, P .L., Meltzoff, A.N., & Decety, J. (2006). Neural circuits
involved in imitation and perspective taking.  
NeuroImage 
, 
31 
, 429–439.
Johnson, S.C., Slaughter, V ., & Carey, S. (1998). Whose gaze
will infants follow? The elicitation of gaze-following in 12-month-olds.  
Developmental Science 
,  
1 
, 233–238.
Liszkowski, U., Carpenter, M., Henning, A., Striano, T., &
Tomasello, M. (2004). Twelve-month-olds point to share
attention and interest.  
Developmental Science 
,  
7 
, 297–307.
Meltzoff, A.N. (1988). Infant imitation after a 1-week delay:
long-term memory for novel acts and multiple stimuli. 
Developmental Psychology 
,  
24 
, 470–476.
Meltzoff, A.N. (1995). Understanding the intentions of others:
re-enactment of intended acts by 18-month-old children. 
Developmental Psychology 
,  
31 
, 838–850.
Meltzoff, A.N. (2006). The ‘like me’ framework for recog nizing
and becoming an intentional agent.  
Acta Psychologica 
;
doi:10.1016/j.actpsy.2006.09.005
Meltzoff, A.N., & Brooks, R. (2004). Developmental changes
in social cognition with an eye towards gaze following. In M.Carpenter & M. Tomasello (Chairs),  
Action-based measures
of infants’ understanding of others’ intentions and attention 
.
Symposium conducted at the Biennial meeting of the Inter-national Conference on Infant Studies, Chicago, Illinois.
Meltzoff, A.N., & Decety, J. (2003). What imitation tells us
about social cognition: a rapprochement between develop-
mental psychology and cognitive neuroscience.  
Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological
Sciences 
,  
358 
, 491–500.
Meltzoff, A.N., & Gopnik, A. (1993). The role of imitation in
understanding persons and developing a theory of mind. InS. Baron-Cohen, H. Tager-Flusberg, & D.J. Cohen (Eds.), 
Understanding other minds: Perspectives from autism 
 (pp . 335–
366). New Y ork: Oxford University Press.
Meltzoff, A.N., & Moore, M.K. (1977). Imitation of facial and
manual gestures by human neonates.  
Science 
,  
198 
, 75–78.

134 Andrew N. Meltzoff 
© 2007 The Author. Journal compilation © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 
Meltzoff, A.N., & Moore, M.K. (1989). Imitation in newborn
infants: exploring the range of gestures imitated and theunderlying mechanisms.  
Developmental Psychology 
,  
25 
,
954–962.
Meltzoff, A.N., & Moore, M.K. (1994). Imitation, memory,
and the representation of persons.  
Infant Behavior and
Development 
,  
17 
, 83–99.
Meltzoff, A.N., & Moore, M.K. (1997). Explaining facial
imitation: a theoretical model.  
Early Development and
Parenting 
,  
6 
, 179–192.
Moore, M.K., & Meltzoff, A.N. (2004). Object permanence
after a 24-hr delay and leaving the locale of disappearance:the role of memory, space, and identity.  
Developmental
Psychology 
,  
40 
, 606–620.
Piaget, J. (1952).  
The origins of intelligence in children 
 (M.
Cook, trans.). New Y ork: International Universities Press.
Piaget, J. (1954).  
The construction of reality in the child 
 (M. Cook,
trans.). New Y ork: Basic Books.
Piaget, J. (1962).  
Play, dreams and imitation in childhood 
(C. Attegno & F .M. Hodgson, trans.). New Y ork: Norton.
Prinz, W . (2002). Experimental approaches to imitation.
In A.N. Meltzoff & W . Prinz (Eds.),  
The imitative mind:
Development, evolution, and brain bases 
 (pp. 143–162).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Rao, R.P .N., Shon, A.P ., & Meltzoff, A.N. (2007). A Bayesian
model of imitation in infants and robots. In  C. Nehaniv &K. Dautenhahn (Eds.),  
Imitation and social learning in robots,
humans, and animals 
 (pp. 217–247). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Repacholi, B.M., & Meltzoff, A.N. (in press). Emotional eaves-
dropping: infants selectively respond to indirect emotionalsignals.  
Child Development 
.
Rizzolatti, G. (2005). The mirror neuron system and imitation.
In S. Hurley & N. Chater (Eds.),  
Perspectives on imitation:
From neuroscience to social science 
 (Vol. 1, pp. 55–76).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Rizzolatti, G., Fadiga, L., Fogassi, L., & Gallese, V . (2002).
From mirror neurons to imitation, facts, and speculations.
In A.N. Meltzoff & W . Prinz (Eds.),  
The imitative mind:Development, evolution, and brain bases 
 (pp. 247–266).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Rogers, S.J. (1999). An examination of the imitation deﬁcit in
autism. In J. Nadel & G. Butterworth (Eds.),  
Imitation in infancy 
(pp. 254–283). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Russell, B. (1948).  
Human knowledge: Its scope and limits 
. New
York: Simon and Schuster.
Ryle, G. (1949).  
The concept of mind 
. London: Hutchinson.
Smith, A. (1976).  
The theory of moral sentiments 
. New Y ork:
Oxford University Press (original work published in 1759).
Sommerville, J.A., & Woodward, A.L. (2005a). Infants’ sensi-
tivity to the causal features of means–end support sequencesin action and perception.  
Infancy 
,  
8, 119–145.
Sommerville, J.A., & Woodward, A.L. (2005b). Pulling out the
intentional structure of action: the relation between actionprocessing and action production in infancy. Cognition , 95,
1–30.
Sommerville, J.A., Woodward, A.L., & Needham, A. (2005).
Action experience alters 3-month-old infants’ perception ofothers’ actions. Cognition , 96, B1–B11.
Strawson, P .F . (1959). Individuals: An essay in descriptive
metaphysics . London: Methuen & Co.
Tomasello, M., Carpenter, M., Call, J., Behne, T., & Moll, H.
(2005). Understanding and sharing intentions: the origins ofcultural cognition. Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 28, 675–735.
Toth, K., Munson, J., Meltzoff, A.N., & Dawson, G. (in press).
Early predictors of communication development in youngchildren with autism spectrum disorder: joint attention, imitation,and toy play. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders .
Vinter, A. (1986). The role of movement in eliciting early
imitations. Child Development , 57, 66–71.
Wilson, M. (2001). Perceiving imitatible stimuli: consequences
of isomorphism between input and output. Psychological
Bulletin , 127, 543–553.
Woodward, A.L., Sommerville, J.A., & Guajardo, J.J. (2001).
How infants make sense of intentional action. In B.F . Malle,L.J. Moses, & D.A. Baldwin (Eds.), Intentions and intention-
ality: Foundations of social cognition  (pp. 149 –169). Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.

