For any issues with this document, please contact your library.

____________________________________________________________________________________

Title: Behavior therapy

ArticleTitle: State of the Science: Disgust and the Anxiety Disorders

ArticleAuthor: Benjamin J. Mitchell

ISSN - 00057894; LCN - 2006264554;

Publisher: New York, New York : Association for the Advancement of Behavior Therapy; 2024-02-01

Source: LibKeyNomad

Copyright: CCL

____________________________________________________________________________________

## NOTICE CONCERNING COPYRIGHT RESTRICTIONS:

The copyright law of the United States [Title 17, United StatesCode] governs the making of photocopies or other reproductions of copyrighted materials.

Under certain conditions specified in the law, libraries and archives are authorized to furnish a photocopy or other reproduction. One of these specific conditions is that the photocopy is not to be "used for any purpose other than private study, scholarship, or research." If a user makes a request for, or later uses, a photocopy or reproduction for purposes in excess of "fair use," that user may be liable for copyright infringement.

This institution reserves the right to refuse to accept a copying order if, in its judgment, fulfillment of that order would involve violation of copyright law.

## Journal Pre-proofs

State of the Science: Disgust and the Anxiety Disorders

Benjamin J. Mitchell, Bunmi O. Olatunji

PII:

S0005-7894(24)00028-5

DOI:

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.beth.2024.02.005

Reference:

BETH 1345

To appear in:

Behavior Therapy

Received Date:

20 October 2023

Revised Date:

5 February 2024

Accepted Date:

24 February 2024

Please cite this article as: B.J. Mitchell, B.O. Olatunji, State of the Science: Disgust and the Anxiety Disorders, Behavior Therapy (2024), doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.beth.2024.02.005

This is a PDF file of an article that has undergone enhancements after acceptance, such as the addition of a cover page and metadata, and formatting for readability, but it is not yet the definitive version of record. This version will undergo additional copyediting, typesetting and review before it is published in its final form, but we are providing this version to give early visibility of the article. Please note that, during the production process, errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

- © 2024 Association for Behavioral and Cognitive Therapies. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

## RUNNING HEAD: DISGUST AND THE ANXIETY DISORDERS

## State of the Science: Disgust and the Anxiety Disorders

Benjamin J. Mitchell 1  &amp; Bunmi O. Olatunji 2

1 Department of Psychological Science, Kent State University, Kent, OH United States

2 Psychological Sciences, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN United States

## Authors Note:

Declarations of interest: none.

Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Benjamin J. Mitchell, Department of Psychological Sciences, Kent State University, 144 Kent Hall, Kent, OH 44242, United States of America. E-mail: bmitch27@kent.edu.

## Highlights

- · Emerging literature has increasingly implicated disgust in certain anxiety-related disorders.
- · Research has accumulated evidence identifying processes linking disgust to these disorders.
- · Processes include trait-level vulnerabilities, cognitive processes, and learning mechanisms.
- · Research is needed that leverages a guiding framework that informs treatment development.

## Abstract

Anxiety disorders have long been conceptualized as disorders of fear, while other emotions have largely been overlooked. However, an emerging literature has increasingly implicated disgust in certain

anxiety-related disorders, including obsessive-compulsive disorder, specific phobias (e.g., spider phobia), health anxiety, and post-traumatic stress disorder. Roughly two decades of research has accumulated evidence identifying various mechanisms linking disgust-related phenomena to these disorders. In the present 'State of the Science' review, we sought to summarize the current state of the literature with respect to disgust-related mechanisms in anxiety disorders, including trait-level vulnerabilities (e.g., disgust proneness), cognitive processes (e.g., biases of attention and memory), and associated learning mechanisms (e.g., evaluative conditioning). Research in these areas has revealed important ways in which disgust differs from fear-related phenomena, which have important treatment implications. From there, we sought to summarize research on laboratory interventions that attempt to target and attenuate disgust, as well as the early research on formal cognitive-behavioral treatments that integrate disgust-related interventions for anxiety disorders. Although the past two decades of research have revealed important insights related to the role of disgust in psychopathology, much remains to be learned in this area. We propose some future directions, emphasizing the importance of a guiding framework that highlights studying disgust-related mechanisms across different levels of analysis.

Keywords: disgust, anxiety disorders, disgust proneness, evaluative conditioning, cognitive behavioral therapy

## State of the Science: Disgust and the Anxiety Disorders

Owing to its historical precedence in affective science, fear stands out as one of the most comprehensively examined emotions, with an expansive literature on its behavioral, physiological, and neural bases (Ohman &amp; Mineka, 2001). Research on fear has been instrumental in advancing our understanding of the nature and treatment of anxiety disorders. In stark contrast to fear, disgust only began acquiring a small (but enthusiastic) research literature in the 1980s (Rozin &amp; Fallon, 1987). This early work on disgust focused on its structure and function. Whereas fear is thought to be a response to imminent threats (e.g., predators), disgust's primary function is to motivate the avoidance of sources of germs and contamination (Oaten et al., 2009). Early in the emerging disgust literature, it was hypothesized that disgust might play a critical role in certain forms of psychopathology due to its aversive, visceral phenomenology and its promotion of behavioral avoidance (Haidt et al., 1994). By 1998, Phillips and colleagues announced that disgust was 'the forgotten emotion of psychiatry' and set forth a series of hypotheses about its role in disorders like obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), phobias, eating disorders, and other forms of psychopathology (e.g., depression). Since the year 2000, research on disgust has soared and outpaced other emotions, including fear (Tybur et al., 2018), with increased attention toward its role in psychopathology (Olatunji &amp; McKay, 2007).

It is now well-established that disgust plays an important role in anxiety disorders-beyond fear-including disorders like OCD, specific phobias, health anxiety, and even post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD; Knowles et al., 2018). At this stage, the field has made substantial progress toward explicating the different mechanisms linking disgust and anxiety disorders. Moreover, the field is in the early stages of investigating methods for effectively attenuating disgust reactions in the laboratory and-

even earlier stages-of integrating these methods into evidence-based treatments for disgust-related symptoms and disorders. In this 'State of the Science' review, we aim to summarize the current state of the literature with respect to important mechanisms of disgust in anxiety disorders. This will include a discussion of disgust proneness, cognitive processes, and behavioral and learning mechanisms. Then, we will summarize and describe the research on interventions to target disgust-most of which comes from laboratory research focused on non-clinical (or clinical analogue) samples. We will also discuss the nascent literature in which researchers have integrated a focus on disgust in formal treatments for some disorders. Lastly, we will propose some future directions, with an emphasis on leveraging the Research Domain Criteria (RDoC; Insel et al., 2010) as a framework for advancing research on disgust in psychopathology.

## Individual Differences in Disgust Proneness

Much of the early work in this area examined associations between trait measures of disgust vulnerabilities and symptoms of anxiety disorders. Most research has focused on disgust propensity (the tendency to be easily disgusted), but research has also examined the role of disgust sensitivity (a dislike of the experience of disgust; van Overveld et al., 2010). Disgust sensitivity is not unlike anxiety sensitivity (the belief that anxiety or arousal sensations can have harmful consequences), a major risk factor for anxiety-related psychopathology (Naragon-Gainey, 2010). However, research has shown that disgust sensitivity predicts anxiety symptoms even when controlling for anxiety sensitivity (i.e., Winder et al., 2021). Disgust propensity and disgust sensitivity can be conceptualized as indicators of a higher order vulnerability termed 'disgust proneness'. There is research suggesting that half of the variation in disgust proneness is due to genetic effects (Sherlock, Zietsch, Tybur, &amp; Jern, 2016). However, the etiology of disgust proneness is likely very complex and may arise as a function of dimension-specific and nonspecific etiologic factors in conferring risk for anxiety and related disorders (Olatunji, Taylor, &amp; David, 2019). A major aim of existing research, however, has been to determine whether disgust proneness accounts for unique variance in symptoms beyond broader measures of anxiety or negative affect. Evidence for this relationship was found for symptoms of several anxiety disorders, including specific phobias, OCD, health anxiety, and PTSD (Knowles et al., 2018).

Specific Phobias. The earliest research on disgust proneness in psychopathology focused on specific phobias, like blood-injection injury phobia (BII) and spider phobia. For example, disgust proneness was shown to be higher in participants with BII or spider phobia compared to healthy controls (Tolin et al., 1997). In addition, this study found that BII-relevant stimuli were rated as primarily disgusting, and spider-related stimuli were rated as both fearful and disgusting. Subsequent research has consistently found associations between disgust proneness and spider phobia (e.g., Muris et al., 2008), and BII phobia (e.g., Olatunji et al., 2007), even when controlling for measures of negative affect. Since then, disgust proneness has also been shown to be associated with emetophobia (fear of vomiting; e.g., Verwoerd et al., 2015), and even more recently, misophonia (negative reactions to normal oral or nasal sounds, like slurping or breathing; Barahmand et al., 2021). Indeed, these phobias match the disease avoidance model of disgust, as the feared stimuli (e.g., spiders, blood, vomit, noises denoting the movement of bodily fluids) are plausible sources of disease (e.g., Curtis &amp; Birans, 2001) and contain physical features known to elicit disgust (e.g., slimy, hairy, moist, etc.; Stevenson et al., 2019).

Taken together, disgust proneness has clear associations with certain forms of specific phobias. However, very limited research has investigated prospective associations between disgust proneness and phobia symptoms. Therefore, whether disgust proneness functions as an underlying risk or maintenance factor (or both) for these phobias lacks strong empirical tests. Future longitudinal research could help delineate prospective relationships between disgust proneness and various phobia symptoms. For example, specific phobias typically emerge before the age of 10 (Wardenaar et al., 2017). Therefore,

longitudinal tests of the causal role of disgust proneness in specific phobias could be integrated into larger cohort studies of risk factors for childhood anxiety disorders.

Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD): The disorder with perhaps the greatest level of evidence for its link with disgust proneness is contamination-based OCD (C-OCD). OCD is characterized by intrusive thoughts (obsessions) which are typically followed by compulsive acts. Although OCD is a highly heterogeneous disorder and manifests in several ways, over half of OCD patients present with worries about germs, dirt, or contamination, with excessive reliance on safety behaviors, like handwashing to avoid getting sick (Rachman, 2004). Given this pre-occupation with germs, C-OCD was an obvious candidate for classification as a 'disgust-related' disorder. Indeed, dozens of studies have found that C-OCD symptoms are associated with higher disgust proneness in both healthy (e.g., Tolin et al., 2006) and clinical samples (e.g., Olatunji et al., 2017), even when controlling for measures of anxiety or negative affect. In fact, Tybur and colleagues (2020) found that the correlation between disgust proneness and C-OCD symptoms reflected overlapping genetic (54%) influences.

Cross-sectional relationships between disgust proneness and C-OCD symptoms are reliable and well-replicated, but the longitudinal literature is more mixed and nuanced. For example, Berle and colleagues (2012) found that disgust proneness predicted changes in overall OCD symptoms, but not contamination-based symptoms in adults with OCD. Other research found no longitudinal associations between disgust proneness and changes in C-OCD symptoms (e.g., Melli et al., 2019). However, more recent research has found prospective relationships between disgust proneness and C-OCD (but not other forms of OCD) in both non-clinical adults (Olatunji et al., 2019) and children with OCD (Georgiadis et al., 2020).

One possible explanation for these mixed results is that the proposed causal direction (disgust proneness predicting C-OCD) is wrong. Instead, greater C-OCD symptoms could increase disgust proneness over time, and therefore disgust proneness might be best conceptualized as a maintenance factor, rather than a risk factor (Melli et al., 2019). Indeed, Olatunji and colleagues (2023) conducted a cross lagged panel model of disgust proneness and C-OCD symptoms across four timepoints and found that C-OCD symptoms predicted higher disgust proneness-but not vice versa. In contrast, recent research has shown that disgust proneness is a highly temporally stable trait, with greater time invariant than time variant components (Olatunji et al., 2020). In addition, this study found that the time invariant components of disgust proneness were most predictive of overall OCD symptoms. Given the temporal stability of disgust proneness, it likely develops early in life, exerting risk for OCD as early as childhood (Olatunji et al., 2020). Indeed, one of the few investigations of disgust proneness as a predictor of OCD in children did find prospective associations between disgust propensity and C-OCD symptoms (Georgiadis et al., 2020). Moreover, they found that changes in disgust propensity during treatment predicted changes in overall OCD (but not specifically C-OCD) symptoms. Therefore, disgust proneness is likely both a risk and maintenance factor in childhood OCD, but additional research focusing on youth is necessary to replicate these findings.

Health Anxiety. Another form of anxiety for which disgust likely plays an important role is health anxiety (or illness anxiety disorder), which is characterized by a severe overestimation of the risk and consequences of getting sick (Asmundson et al., 2010). Again, this form of anxiety fits the disease avoidance model of disgust well. However, evidence for disgust proneness as a unique risk factor for health anxiety is mixed. Research has shown that disgust proneness is associated with health-related anxiety and behavioral avoidance (e.g., Davey &amp; Bond, 2006; Fan &amp; Olatunji, 2013), and several studies have found that health anxiety is associated with similar disgust reactions and avoidance as seen in other disgust-related disorders, like C-OCD (e.g., Goetz et al., 2013). Moreover, research during various disease outbreaks has shown that disgust proneness is associated with greater anxiety about being infected and greater engagement in preventative health behaviors to avoid infection (COVID-19: Cox et al., 2020;

H1N1: Brand et al., 2013; Ebola: Blakey et al., 2015). However, studies focused on the relationship between health anxiety symptoms and disgust proneness have not consistently found unique associations when accounting for other variables (e.g., anxiety sensitivity; Brady et al., 2014). Moreover, Weck and colleagues (2014) found that a clinical sample of patients with hypochondriasis did not report higher disgust proneness than patients with other anxiety disorders. On balance, disgust proneness very likely plays an important role in certain presentations of health anxiety (Knowles et al., 2018). However, its importance relative to other anxiety-related factors in the development and/or maintenance of health anxiety has not been fully delineated.

PTSD. An emerging literature has established various mechanisms through which disgust-related processes, including trait disgust vulnerabilities, are likely to influence symptoms of PTSD. Indeed, many potentially traumatizing events involve exposure to common disgust-eliciting situations and stimuli, including gruesome injuries and sexual violence (Badour &amp; Feldner, 2018). For example, adolescent survivors of sexual assault reported high levels of disgust, and reports of disgust were stronger in sexual assault survivors compared to victims of other forms of physical abuse (Feldner et al., 2010).

Researchers have argued, based on a diathesis-stress model, that pre-trauma disgust proneness may serve as a vulnerability factor for developing PTSD following a potentially traumatizing event (Knowles et al., 2018). Indeed, in a study that included healthy college students, disgust proneness predicted a greater frequency of intrusive cognitions following a distressing film clip (Bomyea &amp; Amir, 2012). However, direct relationships between measures of disgust proneness and PTSD symptoms have not consistently been observed. A recent study did find that sexual assault survivors with PTSD reported greater disgust proneness than survivors without PTSD and healthy controls (Olatunji et al., 2023). However, Engelhard and colleagues (2011) found no relationship between disgust proneness and PTSD symptoms. Instead, self-reported peritraumatic disgust predicted PTSD, particularly for those with higher disgust sensitivity . Thus, the presence of disgust-related symptoms in PTSD may depend on whether disgust was elicited at the time of the traumatic event (e.g., peritraumatic disgust: Badour &amp; Feldner, 2018). Moreover, the aversiveness of the disgust-evoking event likely depends on individual differences in how the experience of disgust is interpreted (i.e., disgust sensitivity). Indeed, additional research has shown that lower disgust sensitivity was protective against PTSD in trauma-exposed veterans (Olatunji et al., 2014). Thus, within the diathesis-stress model, higher disgust sensitivity is likely a vulnerability factor, whereas lower disgust sensitivity may be a protective factor (Badour &amp; Feldner, 2018).

The strongest evidence for a link between disgust and PTSD comes from laboratory research, particularly investigations of peritraumatic disgust as a predictor of PTSD symptoms (e.g., Badour et al., 2013), as well as research on posttraumatic disgust reactions to trauma-relevant inductions (e.g., scriptdriven imagery inductions: Matson et al., 2023). In addition, research has found that trauma survivors often experience both 'mental contamination'-referring to an internal sense of dirtiness without having made physical contact with a contaminant (Rachman, 2004)-as well as self-focused disgust (Badour et al., 2013). Indeed, self-focused disgust has been shown to be particularly common in survivors of sexual trauma (Olatunji et al., 2023). Following a sexual assault, a survivor might feel as though their body has been contaminated by the experience resulting in both self-disgust and mental contamination (Badour &amp; Feldner, 2018).

Research on these phenomena has moved beyond cross-sectional designs by using ecological momentary assessment (EMA) to investigate experiences of trauma-related symptoms, disgust, and mental contamination in daily life. For example, a recent study found that momentary changes in PTSD symptoms across a week of sampling covaried with changes in reports of self-disgust while controlling for overall negative affect. However, lagged analyses did not find that disgust predicted subsequent changes in PTSD, or vice versa (Olatunji et al., 2023). Similarly, another study found concurrent, but not prospective associations between mental contamination and state disgust within and between days of a

two-week sampling period (Brake et al., 2021). Thus, the current research suggests that experiences of disgust, mental contamination, and PTSD symptoms co-occur rather than one causing the other over time. However, future research could investigate these processes within shorter windows of time (e.g., hourly sampling), as any prospective or causal relationships between state-level indicators such as these might only be evident within shorter timescales.

Disgust Proneness Conclusion : Research on disgust proneness in anxiety disorders culminated in two meta-analyses that found that: 1) individuals with higher anxiety disorder symptoms reported higher disgust proneness than those with lower anxiety disorder symptoms (43 samples; large effect size), and 2) anxiety disorder symptoms were correlated with disgust proneness (83 samples; moderate effect size; Olatunji et al., 2017). Importantly, in both cases, the effect of disgust proneness was largest for anxiety disorder symptoms thought to be 'disgust-related' (e.g., C-OCD, specific phobias, PTSD) compared to other forms of anxiety (e.g., panic disorder, generalized anxiety disorder). In addition, the correlation seen in the second meta-analysis remained robust when controlling for negative affect. By contrast, the relationship between non-disgust-relevant anxiety disorder symptoms and disgust proneness became nonsignificant once controlling for negative affect. These results provide strong support for a unique role of disgust proneness in the aforementioned anxiety disorders.

## Cognitive Mechanisms

A growing body of research has investigated cognitive mechanisms that might facilitate the development and maintenance of disgust-related anxiety disorders. In a systematic review, Knowles and colleagues (2019) summarized findings from 98 studies on biases in memory, attention, interpretation, and expectancy judgments in disgust, all as possible mechanisms for disgust in psychopathology. Among these, there is evidence for a disgust-specific memory bias, such that disgusting stimuli are more easily recalled and recognized than fearful or neutral stimuli (e.g., Chapman et al., 2013; Schienle et al., 2021). Given disgust's evolved function as a disease avoidance mechanism, this memory bias is likely essential for effectively identifying and then proactively avoiding contact with sources of infection or contamination. Although a disgust-related memory bias might generally be adaptive, disgust-prone individuals are more likely to interpret ambiguous cues as threatening, which could result in a high number of 'false positives' (e.g., interpreting benign cues as contamination threats; Charash &amp; McKay, 2009). Therefore, the combination of disgust-related interpretive and memory biases might enable maladaptive avoidance of benign cues that is observed in anxiety and related disorders.

Based on their review of the literature, Knowles and colleagues concluded that attentional biases may be the most robust in disorders characterized by excessive disgust reactions. The authors summarized the literature with respect to attentional orienting, maintenance, and avoidance biases. An orienting bias for disgust (e.g., attending more rapidly to disgust-relevant cues at the onset of their presentation) has been identified via a number of methods, including dot-probe (and related) tasks (e.g., Chapman et al., 2013) and eye-tracking studies (e.g., Armstrong et al., 2012). In addition, researchers have used electroencephalogram (EEG) methods to investigate event-related potentials (ERPs) to delineate temporal differences in attentional responses to disgust- versus fear-evoking stimuli. Although the results of this literature have been somewhat mixed, Knowles and colleagues concluded that there is likely a more general initial orientation toward threatening stimuli that is present in both anxious and disgust-prone individuals. This orienting response toward disgusting stimuli has been shown via larger P2 amplitudes in ERP studies (e.g., Lu et al., 2016), which reflect quick, automatic orientation toward emotional stimuli (Carretié et al., 2004).

At the time of their review, there was limited evidence for a maintenance bias for disgust (e.g., preferentially maintaining attention on disgust-related cues; Knowles et al., 2019). However, since then, a study using a dot-probe task with eye tracking found that participants had slower reaction times for and

longer fixations on disgusting images compared to neutral or fearful images (Fink-Lamotte et al., 2022). Moreover, this effect was strongest for those with higher contamination fears commonly observed in OCD. This finding supports a maintenance attentional bias toward disgusting cues, which may reflect a motivation to examine objects (e.g., food) for evidence of contamination prior to approaching or consuming (Carretié et al., 2011).

Lastly, Knowles and colleagues concluded that there is robust evidence for an attentional avoidance bias that is unique to disgust. For example, conditioning studies have found that a visual avoidance response to a neutral stimulus can be conditioned via its pairing with a disgusting stimulus (Armstrong et al., 2014; Mason &amp; Richardson, 2010). This conditioned visual avoidance response was not observed in a group that was conditioned with generally threatening (non-disgust) stimuli, suggesting it was unique to disgust (Armstrong et al., 2014). In both studies, visual avoidance was greater in disgust prone individuals and was resistant to extinction. In addition, a recent investigation found that visual avoidance of disgusting stimuli increases with time spent with the stimuli-and that there was greater visual avoidance of disgusting stimuli compared to other unpleasant stimuli (Armstrong et al., 2022). Thus, this visual avoidance response is likely a strategic response that is initiated consciously via topprocesses (Knowles et al., 2018). This attentional avoidance of disgusting stimuli has been further demonstrated in disgust-related phobias, like spider and BII phobia (Armstrong &amp; Olatunji, 2012).

One hypothesis for why attentional avoidance is unique to disgust (versus fear) relates to the level of urgency assigned to different forms of threat (Knowles et al., 2019). Fear is a response to imminent threats to bodily safety, and thus, fear-related cues are often appraised as highly urgent, requiring sustained attention to coordinate immediate behavioral responses (e.g., fleeing). By contrast, signs of contamination-though threatening-may be perceived as less urgent, requiring less immediacy in the response. When perceived urgency is low, and an immediate response less necessary, attentional avoidance may be deemed an acceptable strategy to reduce unpleasant feelings of disgust (Armstrong &amp; Olatunji, 2012). This tendency to visually avoid disgusting stimuli likely contributes to the maintenance of anxiety related disorders and symptoms in individuals with heightened disgust proneness, as avoidance of disgusting visual cues likely precludes the process of habituation or extinction (Knowles et al., 2019). However, little is known about the conditions that predict attentional maintenance versus attentional avoidance of disgusting stimuli. Carretié and colleagues (2011) proposed that attention toward disgusting stimuli might depend on the costs and benefits of exploring versus avoiding a stimulus. For example, when the threat of contamination is uncertain, and the stimulus resembles a potential fitness-enhancing opportunity (e.g., food), it would be advantageous to attend to the stimulus to further ascertain whether it poses a contamination threat or not. However, future research is needed to determine context factors that differentially facilitate attentional maintenance versus avoidance in disorders of disgust.

## Disgust-related Behavior and Learning Mechanisms

Disgust related avoidance. Dominant theories of fear and anxiety disorders are based on a twoprocess model of fear and avoidance, where fears can be acquired through associative learning, which are then maintained via avoidance or escape behaviors that have a negatively reinforcing effect (Krypotos et al., 2015). Researchers have investigated the learning and behavioral mechanisms of disgust and found that they function like fear, but with important differences. First, disgust-related avoidance can take several forms. As noted throughout this review, disgust proneness is robustly associated with washing symptoms in C-OCD, which involve excessive washing of hands and surfaces, avoiding contact with potential contaminants (e.g., toilets), or avoiding places that could serve as potential sources of germs (e.g., public restrooms; Knowles et al., 2018). Like how social avoidance maintains fear in social anxiety disorder, disgust-related avoidance maintains disgust proneness. For example, Olatunji (2015) randomly assigned participants to either actively engage in health-related behavioral avoidance (e.g., carry antibacterial hand sanitizer, avoid touching public door handles, etc.) or behave as they normal would over a

three-week period. Those who engaged in the daily health-related behaviors reported increased disgust proneness over the subsequent weeks, and these changes were mediated by the frequency at which participants engaged in these health-related behaviors. Similar results have been found for contamination fears commonly observed in OCD (Deacon &amp; Maack, 2008). In addition, laboratory studies have consistently shown that disgust proneness predicts avoidance of potential contaminants (e.g., Campbell et al., 2019). Thus, disgust-related avoidance and safety behavior use likely reinforce disgust proneness and disgust-related beliefs about the dangers of disgusting stimuli. This model of learned avoidance likely applies to all disgust-related anxiety disorders, including specific phobias (e.g., disgust motivating avoidance of spiders) and PTSD (e.g., avoiding disgust-inducing memories).

Disgust learning: As part of the two-process model of fear and avoidance, fear of a specific stimulus is thought to be acquired via classical conditioning. Fear conditioning occurs when a neutral stimulus (or conditioned stimulus; CS) is paired with an aversive, fear-evoking stimulus (or unconditioned stimulus; US). After the CS-US contingency is learned, the CS comes to elicit fear on its own via a learned expectancy that the US will follow it. Fear conditioning is an important mechanism involved in fear-related anxiety disorders (Duits et al., 2015). Indeed, some of the most important insights into the etiology, maintenance, and treatment of anxiety disorders comes fear conditioning research. Research has shown that, like fear, disgust is rapidly acquired via classical conditioning (Mason and Richardson, 2010). In addition, research has found that disgust conditioning is an important process involved in disgust-related anxiety disorders, including C-OCD (Armstrong &amp; Olatunji, 2017), bloodinjection phobia (Olatunji et al., 2009), and likely PTSD (Badour et al., 2013).

Research on disgust conditioning has found that acquired disgust is resistant to extinction, particularly for disgust-prone individuals (Mason &amp; Richardson, 2010) and individuals with high levels of disgust-related anxiety disorder symptoms (e.g., C-OCD; Armstrong &amp; Olatunji, 2017). Extinction occurs when the CS is repeatedly observed absent any aversive event, which eventually results in a diminished conditioned response. This process results in inhibitory learning-the formation of a new association that the CS predicts the absence of an aversive outcome (Craske et al., 2014). In fear research, when inhibitory learning is achieved, the US is no longer expected to occur, and individuals can then effectively inhibit their fear response to the CS. However, disgust is thought to also be acquired via evaluative conditioning , which has been shown to be a more durable form of classical conditioning (Hofmann et al., 2010). Whereas traditional classical conditioning results in an expectancy of the US following the CS, in evaluative conditioning, the CS comes to acquire the valence of the US (Ludvik et al., 2015). Thus, in evaluative disgust conditioning, observation of the CS likely activates a mental representation of the US and its valence (Ludvik et al., 2015). Indeed, disgust conditioning research has shown that even when the US expectancy is attenuated, the CS continues to be evaluated as disgusting following extinction (Ludvik et al., 2015).

Recent research has confirmed that learned disgust is more resistant to extinction than fear (Mitchell et al., 2024; Zeng et al., 2021). In an experimental study, Zeng and colleagues (2021) found that conditioned fear responses were successfully attenuated following extinction trials, but conditioned disgust responses remained elevated. In addition, a recent meta-analysis compared the pooled effect sizes of extinction learning for disgust and fear using results from laboratory conditioning studies and found that, indeed, disgust was overall more resistant to extinction than fear (Mitchell et al., 2024). These findings have major treatment implications, as extinction and inhibitory learning are thought to underlie symptom reduction via exposure therapy techniques (Craske et al., 2014). Indeed, dominant treatments for disgust-related disorders emphasize exposure as a primary intervention (e.g., ERP for OCD: Foa et al., 2012; prolonged exposure for PTSD; Foa et al., 2007). However, the original formulation of these disorders and their treatments were based on our understanding of fear conditioning and extinction, and disgust has largely been overlooked in exposure treatment protocols (Pascal et al., 2020). Indeed, disgust may play a role in both short- and long-term treatment outcomes. For example, despite the overall

efficacy of exposure-based treatments for anxiety disorders, roughly half of patients are classified as nonresponders (Springer et al., 2021), and a significant proportion of treatment responders (e.g., 14% to 23.8%) relapse within 12 months (Levy et al., 2021). It is possible (though currently uncertain) that the presence of disgust in anxiety disorders contributes to these therapy outcomes. In a meta-analysis, Pascal and colleagues (2020) found that the effect size of exposure-based interventions was smaller when disgust was the outcome variable compared to anxiety and emotional distress. Thus, additional efforts are necessary to optimize the extinction of disgust reactions when treating individuals with disgust-related psychopathology.

Along with disgust conditioning and extinction, research has recently begun to investigate the generalization of acquired disgust. Generalization refers to the transfer of a conditioned response to stimuli that resemble the CS (referred to as the GS+), which is a well-studied phenomenon in fear conditioning (Dymond et al., 2015). Several studies have now shown that during disgust conditioning, acquired disgust generalizes to the GS+ in a manner similar to fear (e.g., Berg et al., 2021; Olatunji &amp; Tomarken, 2023). However, whether individual differences variables, like disgust proneness or disgustrelated anxiety disorder symptoms, influence the degree of disgust generalization currently remains uncertain. Berg and colleagues (2021) found that disgust proneness predicted greater disgust generalization. Moreover, they found that disgust generalization during the conditioning task predicted greater avoidance during a subsequent avoidance task. However, Olatunji and Tomarken (2023) did not find any associations between disgust proneness and disgust generalization. This literature is young, but important insights into disgust-related anxiety disorders will likely come from further investigations into disgust generalization processes. For example, like past research on disgust conditioning and extinction, research using analogue (or clinical) samples could help determine whether disgust generalization is a mechanism distinguishing anxious from healthy individuals.

## Interventions for Disgust

To overcome the challenge that disgust appears to be more difficult to attenuate than fear, Ludvik and colleagues (2015) recommended investigating methods that attempt to directly target the valence of the CS (e.g., counterconditioning) or the US (e.g., US revaluation) instead of the typical extinction learning (multiple unpaired presentations of the CS absent the US). Counterconditioning consists of pairing the CS (previously paired with a disgusting US) with a new positively valenced US. So far, a few investigations have found that counterconditioning significantly reduces acquired disgust (e.g., Engelhard et al., 2014; Novara et al., 2021). However, Chua and Sündermann (2023) found that while counterconditioning was effective at attenuating CS-US expectancy ratings, it was no more effective than extinction at attenuating disgust evaluations of the CS. US revaluation is a similar procedure that targets the US's natural valence, rather than the CS's conditioned valence. For US revaluation, the disgusting US would be paired repeatedly with a positively valenced US to modify its original valence. This revaluation is then hypothesized to transfer to the CS that was previously paired with the disgusting US. To date, only one investigation has applied US revaluation to conditioned disgust and found that, like counterconditioning, it was no more effective than extinction for attenuating disgust evaluations of the CS (Chua &amp; Sündermann, 2023). Although additional research along these lines is needed, the paucity of existing studies suggest that counterconditioning and US revaluation are insufficient methods to enhance disgust extinction.

Based on an inhibitory learning model of extinction, research has shown that expectancy violations help drive the extinction of fear. That is, when predictions about feared outcomes are disconfirmed during exposure to feared stimuli, inhibitory learning is enhanced (Craske et al., 2014). However, given the disease avoidance model of disgust, there is naturally a significant temporal gap between exposure to a contaminated or infectious stimulus and the onset of illness symptoms. Therefore, it is often difficult to set up clear, unambiguous expectancy violations within a given exposure session.

Bosman and colleagues (2016) therefore investigated whether adding safety information to the CS could enhance extinction learning. Specifically, after pairing food based CSs (e.g., pea soup) with disgusting USs, safety information was added by either allowing participants to interact with the CS (e.g., to examine it) or by having participants witness a confederate eat the CS. This added safety information resulted in increased willingness to eat the CS, as well as lower disgust evaluations during a one-week follow-up. Although not precisely an expectancy violation, adding safety information to the CS may also provide corrective information that enhances inhibitory learning. Based on this research, one simple and actionable strategy that clinicians could adopt is to engage in the exposures with their patients. Observing the clinician make physical contact with disgusting objects might be perceived as evidence of safety, which could motivate reluctant patients to engage in exposures.

Other research has investigated cognitive approaches to enhancing disgust extinction. Olatunji and colleagues (2017) had an analogue sample of participant high in C-OCD symptoms undergo disgust conditioning, and then randomly assigned them to either cognitive reappraisal training or a control task. In the cognitive reappraisal condition, participants were trained to find alternative ways of thinking about the CS and US, a standard technique seen in cognitive therapies. The next day, participants underwent additional disgust conditioning followed by extinction. Results showed that the cognitive reappraisal training attenuated the degree of additional disgust acquisition and enhanced the effectiveness of subsequent extinction training. Although it has been suggested that reappraising the meaning of a disgusting stimulus is futile, because disgust responding is based on concrete rather than abstract properties of a stimulus (Royzman &amp; Sabini, 2001), results from this study are perhaps the most promising with respect to reducing disgust acquisition and then attenuating acquired disgust. Indeed, cognitive restructuring is a common component of cognitive-behavioral treatments for anxiety disorders that could be easily tailored toward restructuring beliefs about disgust and disgusting stimuli.

Although literature is mounting for interventions targeting disgust, very limited research has investigated formalized treatments for disgust-related disorders. To date (to the authors' knowledge), only two investigations have implemented and tested treatments that explicitly target disgust in disgust-related disorders. First, Salmani and colleagues (2022) recently conducted a randomized clinical trial investigating the efficacy of an 'anti-disgust' treatment for C-OCD, and the results were promising. The anti-disgust intervention included initial psychoeducation, an anti-disgust cognitive intervention, nine sessions of exposure with response prevention, and a session focused on relapse prevention. The antidisgust cognitive intervention involved psychoeducation about disgust's function and cognitive distortions related to disgust (e.g., magical thinking). This also included training for challenging beliefs about disgust with an overarching aim of increasing acceptance of feelings of disgust. Results indicated that the anti-disgust cognitive intervention resulted in significantly lower disgust proneness and significantly greater disgust acceptance prior to starting exposures compared to the standard CBT treatment group. In addition, this intervention appeared to reduce the dropout rate during the exposure phase. Further, exposure sessions resulted in significantly greater decreases in disgust proneness and OCD symptoms for the anti-disgust group compared to the standard CBT group, and greater sustained improvement at a three-month follow-up. This investigation was limited by relatively small sample sizes, but it provides very promising preliminary evidence for a disgust-specific treatment for C-OCD.

Another recent investigation incorporated a focus on disgust in a group-based CBT treatment for BII phobia (Mason et al., 2022). This included psychoeducation about disgust (versus fear) in BII symptoms and monitoring levels of both disgust and fear during exposure sessions. Results showed substantial reductions in disgust-based BII phobia symptoms, as well as marginal reductions in overall disgust proneness. Moreover, changes in disgust responses to BII stimuli were associated with overall reductions in BII phobia symptoms. These results suggest that disgust-related symptoms can be successfully treated with a combination of cognitive and behavioral interventions, but that treatments are enhanced when disgust is specifically addressed. It is important to note, however, that this investigation

did not include a control group (e.g., standard in vivo exposure without specific focus on disgust). Therefore, the reported treatment's relative efficacy for reducing disgust reactions above standard treatment methods for BII phobia remains unclear (Mason et al., 2022). To translate laboratory findings on disgust reduction strategies into practical therapeutic interventions, it will be crucial to assess these methods through comparisons with standard in vivo exposures in both experimental research and randomized controlled trials. Nevertheless, there is currently sufficient evidence to recommend incorporating disgust ratings and discussions of disgust-related processes when treating patients with disgust-related symptoms, as opposed to the traditional focus on fear or broader ratings of distress (e.g., SUDs). Thus, it is especially important for clinicians to assess for the specific emotions underlying symptom manifestations in order to provide more targeted treatment.

## Conclusions and Future Directions

It has been over 25 years since disgust was labeled 'the forgotten emotion of psychiatry' (Phillips et al., 1998). Since then, a large body of literature has accumulated delineating the various mechanisms linking disgust to several anxiety disorders. At this stage, there are clear paths forward for basic and applied research on disgust in anxiety and related disorders. For example, more integrated approaches that seek to test models of disgust across different levels of analysis will be essential for advancing our understanding of the mechanism(s) that account for disgust in various disorders. Research along these lines will be vital to establishing additional targets for intervention. The Research Domain Criteria (RDoC) initiative may be a useful framework for furthering this research agenda. A major aim of the RDoC framework is to investigate the different disease mechanisms across different levels of analysis (e.g., behavioral, neural, genetic, etc.). Although several disgust-related mechanisms have been identified that have transdiagnostic implications, disgust is not included in the Negative Valence Systems Domain of RDoC. According to Amoroso and colleagues (2020), the exclusion of disgust is a limitation of the RDoC that reduces its effectiveness for fully understanding disorders in which disgust plays a contributive role. The absence of disgust from RDoC may be, in part, because the level of synchrony seen across different indicators remains largely untested, and few attempts have been made to formulate and test integrative models of the different disgust-related mechanisms. For example, while research suggests that individual differences in disgust proneness may be partially heritable (Olatunji et al., 2019; Sherlock et al., 2016), the underling genes remain largely unknown. The findings of Kang and colleagues (2010) suggest that the dopamine receptor D4 and catechol-O-methyltransferase genes are likely candidates but these findings have yet to be replicated. Application of the RDoC framework to disgust across different levels of analysis ranging from genes to behavior may foster new research approaches that will lead to a better understanding of disorders that are characterized by heightened disgust reactions.

The RDoC also highlights several areas that can inform future research in psychopathology, including lifespan and development and environmental influences on disgust. For example, most of our current understanding of disgust in psychopathology comes from research in adults, and there is a relative paucity of research applying a developmental psychopathology approach. A better understanding of the developmental process (e.g., early learning, intergenerational transmission of vulnerabilities) of disgust is essential given that anxiety disorders tend to emerge in childhood (Beesdo et al., 2009). In addition, early work suggests that disgust has both biological and social functions (e.g., Keltner &amp; Haidt, 2001). Given its various functions, disgust may have reach beyond the anxiety disorders. Indeed, there is growing research suggesting that disgust may be an important component of the psychopathology of eating disorders (Betkas et al., 2022). Despite the observed social function of the emotion, very limited research has also investigated differences in the experience of disgust across cultures and populations, and whether this has implications for the manifestation of psychopathology or its treatment. Thus, future research should begin investigating disgust-related processes in more diverse samples that include individuals from underrepresented groups to determine whether their links to psychopathology vary across groups.

An important path forward for applied research on the psychopathology of disgust is the development and dissemination of evidence-based treatments. There is now enough evidence to suggest that disgust should be explicitly targeted in treatment to enhance outcomes. Therefore, formalizing and testing disgust-focused treatments (or integrating disgust-focused components into existing treatments) is a necessary next step. Indeed, there remains a need for translational research to investigate whether disgust reduction strategies contribute to treatment efficacy for anxiety disorders. One novel area where this could be pursued is through the integration of disgust concepts into transdiagnostic treatments for emotional disorders, which are becoming more prominent. For example, the Unified Protocol emphasizes emotional appraisals as an important treatment target across emotional disorders, with modules focused on psychoeducation about emotions, their function, and building a more accepting attitude toward negative emotions (along with cognitive and exposure-based treatment components; Farchione et al., 2024). However, disgust is largely absent from current transdiagnostic treatments, potentially leading to the neglect or insufficient emphasis on crucial symptom areas. In addition, future research could seek to investigate disgust-related interventions from a prevention standpoint. Indeed, research has shown that anxiety disorder development can be prevented in some children through early intervention (e.g., Dadds et al., 1997). Given that disgust-related beliefs and avoidance likely develop in childhood (in part) through parental modeling (Reynolds &amp; Askew, 2022), targets for prevention might include parental accommodation of disgust-related avoidance (Thompson-Hollands et al., 2014).

In general, research focused on interventions for disgust-related disorders can be informed by the Stage Model of behavioral intervention development which is composed of six stages (Onken et al., 2014): basic science (Stage 0), intervention generation, refinement, modification, and adaptation and pilot testing (Stage I); traditional efficacy testing (Stage II); efficacy testing with real-world providers (Stage III); effectiveness research (Stage IV); and dissemination and implementation research (Stage V). There is now good evidence on how basic research on disgust can directly inform intervention generation. For example, research has implicated anterior insula activation in disgust processing, which may be a link between disgust and C-OCD (Gan et al., 2022). Based on this evidence, Salvo and colleagues (2022) were able to attenuate disgust reactions and reports of moral rigidity via noninvasive brain stimulation targeting the insula. Moreover, this reduction of disgust was greatest for those with greater OCD symptoms. Thus, a greater understanding of the neural basis of disgust processing and its association to other levels of analysis will likely reveal important targets for treatment. Although our knowledge of the role of disgust in various disorders has advanced considerably over the past two decades, research along these lines remains uncharted territory that is well positioned to reveal new important insights.

## References

Armstrong, T., McClenahan, L., Kittle, J., &amp; Olatunji, B. O. (2014). Don't Look Now! Oculomotor Avoidance as a Conditioned Disgust Response. Emotion (Washington, D.C.) , 14 (1), 95-104. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0034558

Armstrong, T., &amp; Olatunji, B. O. (2012). Eye tracking of attention in the affective disorders: A metaanalytic review ands. Clinical Psychology Review , 32 (8), 704-723. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpr.2012.09.004

Armstrong, T., &amp; Olatunji, B. O. (2017). Pavlovian disgust conditioning as a model for contaminationbased OCD: Evidence from an analogue study. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 93, 7887. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brat.2017.03.009

Armstrong, T., Stewart, J. G., Dalmaijer, E. S., Rowe, M., Danielson, S., Engel, M., Bailey, B., &amp; Morris, M. (2022). I've seen enough! Prolonged and repeated exposure to disgusting stimuli increases oculomotor avoidance. Emotion, 22 (6), 1368-1381. https://doi.org/10.1037/emo0000919

Asmundson, G. J., Abramowitz, J. S., Richter, A. A., &amp; Whedon, M. (2010). Health anxiety: Current perspectives and future directions. Current Psychiatry Reports , 12 (4), 306-312. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11920-010-0123-9

Badour, C. L., &amp; Feldner, M. T. (2018). The role of disgust in posttraumatic stress: A critical review of the empirical literature. Journal of Experimental Psychopathology, 9 (3), Article pr.032813. https://doi.org/10.5127/pr.032813

Badour, C. L., Feldner, M. T., Babson, K. A., Blumenthal, H., &amp; Dutton, C. E. (2013). Disgust, mental contamination, and posttraumatic Stress: Unique relations following sexual versus non-sexual assault. Journal of Anxiety Disorders , 27 (1), 155-162. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.janxdis.2012.11.002

Barahmand, U., Stalias-Mantzikos, M. E., Rotlevi, E., &amp; Xiang, Y. (2023). Disgust and emotion dysregulation in misophonia: A case for mental contamination? International Journal of Mental Health and Addiction , 21 (3), 1550-1569. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11469-021-00677-x

- Beckers, T., Hermans, D., Lange, I., Luyten, L., Scheveneels, S., &amp; Vervliet, B. (2023). Understanding clinical fear and anxiety through the lens of human fear conditioning. Nature Reviews Psychology , 2 (4), 233-245. https://doi.org/10.1038/s44159-023-00156-1

Beesdo, K., Knappe, S., &amp; Pine, D. S. (2009). Anxiety and anxiety disorders in children and adolescents: developmental issues and implications for DSM-V. The Psychiatric Clinics of North America , 32 (3), 483-524. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psc.2009.06.002

- Berg, H., Hunt, C., Cooper, S. E., Olatunji, B. O., &amp; Lissek, S. (2021). Generalization of conditioned disgust and the attendant maladaptive avoidance: Validation of a novel paradigm and effects of trait disgust-proneness. Behaviour Research and Therapy , 146 .
- Berle, D., Starcevic, V., Brakoulias, V., Sammut, P., Milicevic, D., Hannan, A., &amp; Moses, K. (2012). Disgust propensity in obsessive-compulsive disorder: cross-sectional and prospective relationships. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry , 43 (1), 656-663. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbtep.2011.09.002
- Bektas, S., Keeler, J. L., Anderson, L. M., Mutwalli, H., Himmerich, H., &amp; Treasure, J. (2022). Disgust and self-disgust in eating disorders: A systematic review and meta-Analysis. Nutrients, 21, 1728. doi: 10.3390/nu14091728.
- Blakey, S. M., Reuman, L., Jacoby, R. J., &amp; Abramowitz, J. S. (2015). Tracing "fearbola": Psychological predictors of anxious responding to the threat of ebola. Cognitive Therapy and Research , 39 (6), 816-825. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10608-015-9701-9
- Bomyea, J., &amp; Amir, N. (2012). Disgust propensity as a predictor of intrusive cognitions following a distressing film. Cognitive Therapy and Research , 36 (3), 190-198. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10608-010-9331-1
- Bosman, R. C., Borg, C., &amp; de Jong, P. J. (2016). Optimising extinction of conditioned disgust. PLoS ONE, 11 (2), Article e0148626. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0148626
- Brady, R. E., Cisler, J. M., &amp; Lohr, J. M. (2014). Specific and differential prediction of health anxiety by disgust sensitivity and propensity. Anxiety, Stress, and Coping , 27 (1), 90-99. https://doi.org/10.1080/10615806.2013.772588
- Brake, C. A., Tipsword, J. M., &amp; Badour, C. L. (2021). Mental contamination, disgust, and other negative emotions among survivors of sexual trauma: Results from a daily monitoring study. Journal of Anxiety Disorders , 84 , 102477. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.janxdis.2021.102477
- Brand, J., McKay, D., Wheaton, M. G., &amp; Abramowitz, J. S. (2013). The relationship between obsessive compulsive beliefs and symptoms, anxiety and disgust sensitivity, and Swine Flu fears. Journal of Obsessive-compulsive and Related Disorders , 2 (2), 200-206. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jocrd.2013.01.007

Campbell, R. L., Bynion, T.-M., Forte, J., Feldner, M. T., &amp; Adams, T. G. (2020). Specificity of disgust in the prediction of behavioral avoidance of possible contaminants. Cognitive Therapy &amp; Research , 44 (2), 386-392. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10608-019-10067-2

- Carretié, L., Hinojosa, J. A., Martín-Loeches, M., Mercado, F., &amp; Tapia, M. (2004). Automatic attention to emotional stimuli: neural correlates. Human brain mapping , 22 (4), 290-299. https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.20037
- Carretié, L., Ruiz-Padial, E., López-Martín, S., &amp; Albert, J. (2011). Decomposing unpleasantness: differential exogenous attention to disgusting and fearful stimuli. Biological Psychology , 86 (3), 247-253. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsycho.2010.12.005
- Chapman, H. A., Johannes, K., Poppenk, J. L., Moscovitch, M., &amp; Anderson, A. K. (2013). Evidence for the differential salience of disgust and fear in episodic memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 142 (4), 1100-1112. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0030503
- Charash, M., &amp; McKay, D. (2009). Disgust and contamination fear: Attention, memory, and judgment of stimulus situations. International Journal of Cognitive Therapy, 2 (1), 5365. https://doi.org/10.1521/ijct.2009.2.1.53
- Chua, J., &amp; Sündermann, O. (2023). Attenuating experimentally acquired disgust: Comparing counterconditioning, exposure and unconditioned stimulus revaluation. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry , 79 , 101813. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbtep.2022.101813
- Cox, R. C., Jessup, S. C., Luber, M. J., &amp; Olatunji, B. O. (2020). Pre-pandemic disgust proneness predicts increased coronavirus anxiety and safety behaviors: Evidence for a diathesis-stress model. Journal of Anxiety Disorders , 76 , 102315. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.janxdis.2020.102315
- Craske, M. G., Treanor, M., Conway, C. C., Zbozinek, T., &amp; Vervliet, B. (2014). Maximizing exposure therapy: an inhibitory learning approach. Behaviour Research and Therapy , 58 , 10-23. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brat.2014.04.006
- Curtis, V., &amp; Biran, A. (2001). Dirt, disgust, and disease. Is hygiene in our genes? Perspectives in Biology and Medicine , 44 (1), 17-31. https://doi.org/10.1353/pbm.2001.0001
- Davey, G. C. L., &amp; Bond, N. (2006). Using controlled comparisons in disgust psychopathology research: The case of disgust, hypochondriasis and health anxiety. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 37 (1), 4-15. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbtep.2005.09.001
- Deacon, B., &amp; Maack, D. J. (2008). The effects of safety behaviors on the fear of contamination: An experimental investigation. Behaviour Research and Therapy,46 (4), 537547. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brat.2008.01.010.
- Duits, P., Cath, D. C., Lissek, S., Hox, J. J., Hamm, A. O., Engelhard, I. M., van den Hout, M. A., &amp; Baas, J. M. P. (2015). Updated meta analysis of classical fear conditioning in the anxiety -disorders. Depression and Anxiety , 32 (4), 239-253. https://doi.org/10.1002/da.22353
- Dymond, S., Dunsmoor, J. E., Vervliet, B., Roche, B., &amp; Hermans, D. (2015). Fear generalization in humans: Systematic review and implications for anxiety disorder research. Behavior Therapy , 46 (5), 561-582. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.beth.2014.10.001
- Engelhard, I. M., Leer, A., Lange, E., &amp; Olatunji, B. O. (2014). Shaking that icky feeling: effects of extinction and counterconditioning on disgust-related evaluative learning. Behavior Therapy , 45 (5), 708-719. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.beth.2014.04.003

- Engelhard, I. M., Olatunji, B. O., &amp; de Jong, P. J. (2011). Disgust and the development of posttraumatic stress among soldiers deployed to Afghanistan. Journal of Anxiety Disorders , 25 (1), 58-63. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.janxdis.2010.08.003
- Fan, Q., &amp; Olatunji, B. O. (2013). Individual differences in disgust sensitivity and health-related avoidance: Examination of specific associations. Personality and Individual Differences, 55 (5), 454-458. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.paid.2013.04.007
- Farchione, T.J., Long, L.J, Spencer-Laitt, D., Moreno, J., &amp; Barlow, D.H. (2024, this issue). State of the science: The unified protocol for the transdiagnostic treatment of emotional disorders. Behavior Therapy.
- Feldner, M. T., Frala, J., Badour, C., Leen-Feldner, E. W., &amp; Olatunji, B. O. (2010). An empirical test of the association between disgust and sexual assault. International Journal of Cognitive Therapy, 3 (1), 11-22. https://doi.org/10.1521/ijct.2010.3.1.11
- Fink-Lamotte, J., Svensson, F., Schmitz, J., &amp; Exner, C. (2022). Are you looking or looking away? Visual exploration and avoidance of disgust- and fear-stimuli: An eye-tracking study. Emotion, 22 (8), 1909-1918. https://doi.org/10.1037/emo0000993
- Foa, E. B., Hembree, E. A., &amp; Rothbaum, B. O. (2007). Prolonged exposure therapy for PTSD : emotional processing of traumatic experiences : therapist guide . Oxford University Press.
- Foa, E. B., Yadin, E., &amp; Lichner, T. K. (2012). Exposure and response (ritual) prevention for obsessivecompulsive disorder: therapist guide (Second edition.). Oxford University Press.
- Gan, X., Zhou, X., Li, J., Jiao, G., Jiang, X., Biswal, B., Yao, S., Klugah-Brown, B., &amp; Becker, B. (2022). Common and distinct neurofunctional representations of core and social disgust in the brain: Coordinate-based and network meta-analyses. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews , 135 .
- Goetz, A. R., Lee, H. J., &amp; Cougle, J. R. (2013). The association between health anxiety and disgust reactions in a contamination-based behavioral approach task. Anxiety, Stress, and Coping , 26 (4), 431-446. https://doi.org/10.1080/10615806.2012.684241
- Georgiadis, C., Schreck, M., Gervasio, M., Kemp, J., Freeman, J., Garcia, A., &amp; Case, B. (2020). Disgust propensity and sensitivity in childhood anxiety and obsessive-compulsive disorder: Two constructs differentially related to obsessional content. Journal of Anxiety Disorders , 76 , 102294. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.janxdis.2020.102294
- Haidt, J., McCauley, C., &amp; Rozin, P. (1994). Individual differences in sensitivity to disgust: A scale sampling seven domains of disgust elicitors. Personality and Individual Differences, 16 (5), 701713. https://doi.org/10.1016/0191-8869(94)90212-7
- Hofmann, W., De Houwer, J., Perugini, M., Baeyens, F., &amp; Crombez, G. (2010). Evaluative conditioning in humans: a meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin , 136 (3), 390-421. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0018916
- Insel, T., Cuthbert, B., Garvey, M., Heinssen, R., Pine, D. S., Quinn, K., Sanislow, C., &amp; Wang, P. (2010). Research domain criteria (RDoC): toward a new classification framework for research on mental disorders. American Journal of Psychiatry , 167 (7), 748-751. https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.ajp.2010.09091379

| Kang, J.I., Kim, S. J., Namkoong, K., An, S. K. (2010). Association of DRD4 and COMT polymorphisms with disgust sensitivity in healthy volunteers. Neuropsychobiology. 61, 105-112. doi: 10.1159/000275822.                                                                        |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Keltner, D., &Haidt, J. (2001). Social functions of emotions. In T. J. Mayne &G. A. Bonanno (Eds.), Emotions: Currrent Issues and Future Directions (pp. 192-213). The Guilford Press.                                                                                             |
| Knowles, K. A., Cox, R. C., Armstrong, T., &Olatunji, B. O. (2019). Cognitive mechanisms of disgust in the development and maintenance of psychopathology: A qualitative review and synthesis. Clinical Psychology Review , 69 , 30-50. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpr.2018.06.002  |
| Knowles, K. A., Jessup, S. C., &Olatunji, B. O. (2018). Disgust in anxiety and obsessive-compulsive disorders: Recent findings and future directions. Current Psychiatry Reports , 20 (9), 68. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11920-018-0936-5                                           |
| Krypotos, A. M., Effting, M., Kindt, M., &Beckers, T. (2015). Avoidance learning: a review of theoretical models and recent developments. Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience , 9 , 189. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnbeh.2015.00189                                                 |
| Levy, H. C., O'Bryan, E. M., &Tolin, D. F. (2021). A meta-analysis of relapse rates in cognitive- behavioral therapy for anxiety disorders. Journal of Anxiety Disorders , 81 , 102407. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.janxdis.2021.102407                                              |
| Lu, Y., Luo, Y., Lei, Y., Jaquess, K. J., Zhou, C., &Li, H. (2016). Decomposing valence intensity effects in disgusting and fearful stimuli: an event-related potential study. Social Neuroscience , 11 (6), 618-626. https://doi.org/10.1080/17470919.2015.1120238                |
| Ludvik, D., Boschen, M. J., &Neumann, D. L. (2015). Effective behavioural strategies for reducing disgust in contamination-related OCD: A review. Clinical Psychology Review , 42 , 116-129. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpr.2015.07.001                                             |
| Mason, E. C., Gaston, J. E., Pestell, C. F., &Page, A. C. (2022). A comprehensive group-based cognitive behavioural treatment for blood-injection-injury phobia. The British Journal of Clinical Psychology , 61 (2), 494-509. https://doi.org/10.1111/bjc.12345                   |
| Mason, E. C., &Richardson, R. (2010). Looking beyond fear: The extinction of other emotions implicated in anxiety disorders. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 24 (1), 63- 70. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.janxdis.2009.08.007                                                           |
| Matson, L. A., Moeck, E. K., &Takarangi, M. K. T. (2023). Disgust and fear reactions uniquely affect intrusions and posttraumatic stress symptoms. Journal of Anxiety Disorders , 95 , 102683. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.janxdis.2023.102683                                       |
| Melli, G., Poli, A., Chiorri, C., &Olatunji, B. O. (2019). Is heightened disgust propensity truly a risk factor for contamination-related obsessive-compulsive disorder? Behavior Therapy , 50 (3), 621- 629. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.beth.2018.10.002                           |
| Mitchell, B. J., Coifman, K. G., &Olatunji, B. O. (2024). Is disgust more resistant to extinction than fear? A meta-analytic review of laboratory paradigms. Behaviour Research and Therapy , 174 , 104479. Advance online publication. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brat.2024.104479 |

Muris, P., van der Heiden, S., &amp; Rassin, E. (2008). Disgust sensitivity and psychopathological symptoms in non-clinical children. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry , 39 (2), 133146. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbtep.2007.02.001

Naragon-Gainey, K. (2010). Meta-analysis of the relations of anxiety sensitivity to the depressive and anxiety disorders. Psychological Bulletin, 136 (1), 128-150. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0018055

Novara, C., Lebrun, C., Macgregor, A., Vivet, B., Thérouanne, P., Capdevielle, D., &amp; Raffard, S. (2021). Acquisition and maintenance of disgust reactions in an OCD analogue sample: Efficiency of extinction strategies through a counter-conditioning procedure. PLoS ONE, 16 (7), Article e0254592. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0254592

- Oaten, M., Stevenson, R. J., &amp; Case, T. I. (2009). Disgust as a disease-avoidance mechanism. Psychological Bulletin , 135 (2), 303-321. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0014823

Öhman, A., &amp; Mineka, S. (2001). Fears, phobias, and preparedness: Toward an evolved module of fear and fear learning. Psychological Review, 108 (3), 483-522. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033295X.108.3.483

- Olatunji B. O. (2015). Selective effects of excessive engagement in health-related behaviours on disgust propensity. Cognition &amp; Emotion , 29 (5), 882-899. https://doi.org/10.1080/02699931.2014.951314

Olatunji, B. O., Armstrong, T., &amp; Elwood, L. (2017). Is disgust proneness associated with anxiety and related disorders? A qualitative review and meta-analysis of group comparison and correlational studies. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 12 (4), 613648. https://doi.org/10.1177/1745691616688879

Olatunji, B. O., Armstrong, T., Fan, Q., &amp; Zhao, M. (2014). Risk and resiliency in posttraumatic stress disorder: Distinct roles of anxiety and disgust sensitivity. Psychological Trauma: Theory, Research, Practice, and Policy, 6 (1), 50-55. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0029682

Olatunji, B. O., Berg, H., Cox, R. C., &amp; Billingsley, A. (2017). The effects of cognitive reappraisal on conditioned disgust in contamination-based OCD: An analogue study. Journal of Anxiety Disorders , 51 , 86-93. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.janxdis.2017.06.005

Olatunji, B. O., Cox, R. C., &amp; Cole, D. A. (2020). The longitudinal structure of disgust proneness: Testing a latent trait-state model in relation to obsessive-compulsive symptoms. Behaviour Research and Therapy , 135 , 103749. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brat.2020.103749

Olatunji, B. O., Cox, R. C., Liu, Q., Garcia, A., &amp; Jessup, S. C. (2023). Linking self-disgust, negative affect, and PTSD in sexual assault: An ecological momentary assessment approach. Psychological Trauma: Theory, Research, Practice and Policy , 15 (4), 567-575. https://doi.org/10.1037/tra0001424

Olatunji, B. O., Ebesutani, C., Kim, J., Riemann, B. C., &amp; Jacobi, D. M. (2017). Disgust proneness predicts obsessive-compulsive disorder symptom severity in a clinical sample of youth: Distinctions from negative affect. Journal of Affective Disorders , 213 , 118-125. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2017.02.017

- Olatunji, B. O., Forsyth, J. P., &amp; Cherian, A. (2007). Evaluative differential conditioning of disgust: a sticky form of relational learning that is resistant to extinction. Journal of Anxiety Disorders , 21 (6), 820-834. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.janxdis.2006.11.004
- Olatunji, B. O., &amp; Kim, J. (2023). Examining reciprocal relations between disgust proneness and OCD symptoms: A four-wave longitudinal study. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry , 101907. Advance online publication. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbtep.2023.101907
- Olatunji, B. O., Kim, J., Cox, R. C., &amp; Ebesutani, C. (2019). Prospective associations between disgust proneness and OCD symptoms: Specificity to excessive washing compulsions. Journal of Anxiety Disorders , 65 , 34-40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.janxdis.2019.05.003

Olatunji, B. O., Lohr, J. M., Smits, J. A., Sawchuk, C. N., &amp; Patten, K. (2009). Evaluative conditioning of fear and disgust in blood-injection-injury phobia: specificity and impact of individual differences in disgust sensitivity. Journal of Anxiety Disorders , 23 (2), 153-159. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.janxdis.2008.06.002

- Olatunji, B. O., &amp; McKay, D. (2007). Disgust and psychiatric illness: Have we remembered? The British Journal of Psychiatry, 190, 457-459. https://doi.org/10.1192/bjp.bp.106.032631
- Olatunji, B. O., Smits, J. A., Connolly, K., Willems, J., &amp; Lohr, J. M. (2007). Examination of the decline in fear and disgust during exposure to threat-relevant stimuli in blood-injection-injury phobia. Journal of Anxiety Disorders , 21 (3), 445-455. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.janxdis.2006.05.001
- Olatunji, B. O., Taylor, S., &amp; Zald, D. (2019). Sex differences in the etiology of disgust sensitivity: A preliminary behavioral genetic analysis. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 65, 41-46. doi: 10.1016/j.janxdis.2019.05.004
- Olatunji, B. O., &amp; Tomarken, A. (2023). Pavlovian disgust conditioning and generalization: Specificity and associations with individual differences. Behavior Therapy , 54 (1), 1-13. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.beth.2022.06.008
- Onken, L. S., Carroll, K. M., Shoham, V., Cuthbert, B. N., &amp; Riddle, M. (2014). Reenvisioning clinical science: Unifying the discipline to improve the public health. Clinical Psychological Science, 2 (1), 22-34. https://doi.org/10.1177/2167702613497932
- Pascal, S. A., Podina, I. R., &amp; Nedelcea, C. (2020). A meta-Analysis on the efficacy of exposure-based treatment in anxiety disorders: Implications for disgust. Journal of Evidence-Based Psychotherapies , 20 (2), 31-49. https://doi.org/10.24193/jebp.2020.2.10

Phillips, M. L., Senior, C., Fahy, T., &amp; David, A. S. (1998). Disgust--the forgotten emotion of psychiatry. British Journal of Psychiatry , 172 , 373-375. https://doi.org/10.1192/bjp.172.5.373

Rachman S. (2004). Fear of contamination. Behaviour Research and Therapy , 42 (11), 1227-1255. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brat.2003.10.009

- Royzman, E. B., &amp; Sabini, J. (2001). Something it takes to be an emotion: The interesting case of disgust. Journal for the Theory of Social Behaviour, 31 (1), 29-59. https://doi.org/10.1111/14685914.00145

- Rozin, P., &amp; Fallon, A. E. (1987). A perspective on disgust. Psychological Review, 94 (1), 2341. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.94.1.23
- Rozin, P., Millman, L., &amp; Nemeroff, C. (1986). Operation of the laws of sympathetic magic in disgust and other domains. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 50 (4), 703712. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.50.4.703
- Salmani, B., Mancini, F., Hasani, J., &amp; Zanjani, Z. (2022). Anti-disgust cognitive behavioral therapy for contamination-based obsessive compulsive disorder: A randomized controlled clinical trial. Journal of Clinical Medicine , 11 (10), 2875. https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm11102875
- Salvo, G., Provenzano, S., Di Bello, M., D'Olimpio, F., Ottaviani, C., &amp; Mancini, F. (2022). Filthiness of immorality: Manipulating disgust and moral rigidity through noninvasive brain stimulation as a promising therapeutic tool for obsessive compulsive disorder. Clinical Psychological Science , 10 (1), 127-140.
- Schienle, A., Potthoff, J., Schönthaler, E., &amp; Schlintl, C. (2021). Disgust-related memory bias in children and adults. Evolutionary Psychology, 19 (2), 1474704921996585. https://doi.org/10.1177/1474704921996585
- Sherlock, J. M., Zietsch, B. P., Tybur, J. M., &amp; Jern, P. (2016). The quantitative genetics of disgust sensitivity. Emotion, 16 (1), 43-51. https://doi.org/10.1037/emo0000101
- Springer, K. S., Levy, H. C., &amp; Tolin, D. F. (2018). Remission in CBT for adult anxiety disorders: A meta-analysis. Clinical Psychology Review , 61 , 1-8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpr.2018.03.002
- Stevenson, R. J., Case, T. I., Oaten, M. J., Stafford, L., &amp; Saluja, S. (2019). A proximal perspective on disgust. Emotion Review, 11 (3), 209-225. https://doi.org/10.1177/1754073919853355
- Thompson-Hollands, J., Kerns, C. E., Pincus, D. B., &amp; Comer, J. S. (2014). Parental accommodation of child anxiety and related symptoms: range, impact, and correlates. Journal of Anxiety Disorders , 28 (8), 765-773. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.janxdis.2014.09.007
- Tolin, D. F., Lohr, J. M., Sawchuk, C. N., &amp; Lee, T. C. (1997). Disgust and disgust sensitivity in bloodinjection-injury and spider phobia. Behaviour Research and Therapy , 35 (10), 949-953. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0005-7967(97)00048-x
- Tolin, D. F., Woods, C. M., &amp; Abramowitz, J. S. (2006). Disgust sensitivity and obsessive-compulsive symptoms in a non-clinical sample. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental psychiatry , 37 (1), 30-40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbtep.2005.09.003
- Tybur, J. M., Çınar, Ç., Karinen, A. K., &amp; Perone, P. (2018). Why do people vary in disgust?. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences , 373 (1751), 20170204. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2017.0204
- Tybur, J. M., Wesseldijk, L. W., &amp; Jern, P. (2020). Genetic and environmental Influences on disgust proneness, contamination sensitivity, and their covariance. Clinical Psychological Science , 8 (6), 1054-1061. https://doi.org/10.1177/2167702620951510

van Overveld, M., de Jong, P. J., &amp; Peters, M. L. (2010). The Disgust Propensity and Sensitivity Scale Revised: Its predictive value for avoidance behavior. Personality and Individual Differences, 49 (7), 706-711. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.paid.2010.06.008

Verwoerd, J., van Hout, W. J., &amp; de Jong, P. J. (2016). Disgust- and anxiety-based emotional reasoning in non-clinical fear of vomiting. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry , 50 , 8389. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbtep.2015.05.009

Wardenaar, K. J., Lim, C. C. W., Al-Hamzawi, A. O., Alonso, J., Andrade, L. H., Benjet, C., Bunting, B., de Girolamo, G., Demyttenaere, K., Florescu, S. E., Gureje, O., Hisateru, T., Hu, C., Huang, Y., Karam, E., Kiejna, A., Lepine, J. P., Navarro-Mateu, F., Oakley Browne, M., Piazza, M., … de Jonge, P. (2017). The cross-national epidemiology of specific phobia in the World Mental Health Surveys. Psychological Medicine , 47 (10), 1744-1760. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0033291717000174

Weck, F., Esch, S., &amp; Rohrmann, S. (2014). The role of disgust in patients with hypochondriasis. Anxiety, Stress, and Coping , 27 (5), 576-586. https://doi.org/10.1080/10615806.2013.873793

Winder, J. R., Mangen, K. H., Martinez-Snyder, A. E., &amp; Valentiner, D. P. (2001). Anxiety sensitivity, disgust sensitivity and aversive reactions to four stimuli. Behavior and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 49, 206-217. doi: 10.1017/S1352465820000570.

Zeng, Q., Lv, L., &amp; Zheng, X. (2021). Is acquired disgust more difficult to extinguish than acquired fear? an event-related potential study. Frontiers in Psychology , 12 , 687779. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2021.687779