Frontiers in Psychology 01 frontiersin.org
A conceptual framework on 
body representations and their 
relevance for mental disorders
Anne Möllmann *, Nina Heinrichs  and Arvid Herwig 
Department of Psychology, Faculty of Psychology and Sports Science, Bielefeld University, 
Bielefeld, Germany
Many mental disorders are accompanied by distortions in the way the own 
body is perceived and represented (e.g., eating disorders, body dysmorphic 
disorder including muscle dysmorphia, or body integrity dysphoria). 
We are interested in the way these distortions develop and aim at better 
understanding their role in mental health across the lifespan. For this 
purpose, we first propose a conceptual framework of body representation 
that defines this construct and integrates different perspectives (e.g., 
cognitive neuroscience, clinical psychology) on body representations. 
The framework consists of a structural and a process model of body 
representation emphasizing different goals: the structural model  aims 
to support researchers from different disciplines to structure results 
from studies and help collectively accumulate knowledge about body 
representations and their role in mental disorders. The process model  is 
reflecting the dynamics during the information processing of body-related 
stimuli. It aims to serve as a motor for (experimental) study development 
on how distorted body representations emerge and might be  changed. 
Second, we  use this framework to review the normative development of 
body representations as well as the development of mental disorders that 
relate to body representations with the aim to further clarify the potential 
transdiagnostic role of body representations.
KEYWORDS
body representation, body image, body schema, developmental psychopathology, 
body dysmorphic disorder, muscle dysmorphia, eating disorders, body integrity 
dysphoria
1 Introduction
The way people perceive their own body, that is, represent it mentally, is essential in 
everyday life, and has thus been researched from a variety of disciplines and perspectives. 
Some researchers primarily focus on the very basic functions  of body representations, such 
as being able to move in three-dimensional space which is usually a perspective taken in 
cognitive neurosciences, general psychology and motor sciences (e.g., Holmes and 
Spence, 2004 ; Prinz et al., 2013 ). Others concentrate on the normative development  of 
different body representations over the lifespan (e.g., Slaughter and Brownell, 2011 ) which 
is usually a perspective taken in developmental psychology and again others are mainly 
interested in the role body representations play in the context of different neurological or 
mental disorders , a perspective usually taken in clinical psychology or psychiatry (e.g., 
Keizer and Engel, 2022  for anorexia nervosa). Due to the many perspectives involved, OPEN ACCESS
EDITED BY
Andrea Hernández-Martínez,  
University of Castilla-La Mancha, Spain
REVIEWED BY
Paolo Meneguzzo,  
University of Padua, Italy
Jamie Donald Feusner,  
University of Toronto, Canada
Emily Choquette,  
Laureate Institute for Brain Research, 
United States
*CORRESPONDENCE
Anne Möllmann   
 anne.moellmann@uni-bielefeld.de
RECEIVED 30 May 2023
ACCEPTED 11 December 2023
PUBLISHED 05 January 2024
CITATION
Möllmann A, Heinrichs N and Herwig A (2024) 
A conceptual framework on body 
representations and their relevance for 
mental disorders.
Front. Psychol.  14:1231640.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1231640
COPYRIGHT
© 2024 Möllmann, Heinrichs and Herwig. 
This is an open-access article distributed 
under the terms of the Creative Commons 
Attribution License (CC BY) . The use, 
distribution or reproduction in other forums is 
permitted, provided the original author(s) and 
the copyright owner(s) are credited and that 
the original publication in this journal is cited, 
in accordance with accepted academic 
practice. No use, distribution or reproduction 
is permitted which does not comply with 
these terms.TYPE Review
PUBLISHED  05 January 2024
DOI 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1231640

Möllmann et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1231640
Frontiers in Psychology 02 frontiersin.orgthere is a certain diversity of concepts and terms. In this article, 
we therefore use the term body representation as an umbrella term for 
many aspects that have been differentiated to investigate the way the 
own body is mentally represented. Moreover, we attempt to elaborate 
on each perspective with the aim of illustrating their useful 
contributions ultimately to better understand mental disorders that 
relate to body representations.
Mental disorders associated with distortions in body 
representations are often severe and persistent. Such disorders include 
eating disorders, body dysmorphic disorder (BDD), muscle 
dysmorphia (MD), and body integrity dysphoria (BID). The 
distortions in body representation observable in the clinical picture of 
each disorder may relate either to the whole body or to specific body 
parts. The majority of the disorders are by criteria definitions (ICD-11; 
World Health Organization, 2018 ) rather related to one of these poles 
(e.g., criteria for eating disorders or muscle dysmorphia relate to the 
body perception as too fat or too lean/unmuscular). However, even 
with concerns relating to the entire body, it is not rare that also specific 
parts of the body are evaluated negatively. In BDD, these specific 
regions are often related to the face and perceived as defective or 
flawed, or in BID, affected individuals perceive single limbs as not 
belonging and thus desire an amputation ( World Health Organization, 
2018 ). On a general level, a shared feature of these disorders are 
distortions in the individuals’ body representation. However, it is 
challenging to integrate research findings within one disorder or to 
compare findings between disorders. This is due to conceptual and 
methodological aspects, such as a remarkable heterogeneity in 
terminology and assessments of concepts related to body 
representations. For example, we identified more than 120 different 
measures and tasks on body representations for a systematic review 
focusing on BDD, MD and BID only ( Möllmann et al., 2020a ). The 
problem is particularly evident in comparative research between 
disorders and/or disciplines, with each discipline usually preferring 
certain definitions of concepts and terms as well as different 
assessments ( Smeets, 1997 ; Keizer and Engel, 2022 ). Importantly, 
these conceptual problems not only complicate the integration of 
findings, they also hinder improvement in understanding the 
disorders and related treatment options (see e.g., Gadsby, 2021  or 
Glashouwer et al., 2019  for a comprehensive discussion). Improving 
treatment options, in turn, is highly needed, as remission rates for 
most of the disorders associated with distorted body representations 
are rather low, e.g., between 20 and 39% in BDD (e.g., Phillips et al., 
2013 ; Wilhelm et al., 2014 ; Mataix-Cols et al., 2015 ; Enander et al., 
2016 ; Fernández de la Cruz et al., 2021 ) or around 50% in anorexia 
nervosa ( Steinhausen, 2002 ).
As Gadsby (2017)  emphasizes, the understanding about normative 
functioning of body representations can be improved by studying 
malfunctioning or distortions of body representations in respective 
disorders and vice versa. This underlines the importance to consider 
research from multiple perspectives or disciplines, such as cognitive 
neurosciences, and clinical psychology. In addition, we think it is very 
fruitful to also look at the interplay between normative and 
pathological development  of body representations to further clarify if 
– and if so, how – these distorted body representations are involved in 
the development or course of the respective disorders. It is well-known 
that children face normative developmental challenges, for example 
in form of domain-specific tasks (such as learning to be prosocial) and 
that the (un-)successful completion is in turn associated with (impaired) further development in this domain with spreading effects 
to other domains as well (i.e., cascade effects; Masten and Cicchetti, 
2010 ). It is important to consider the development of body 
representation as one such domain and we  will address such 
developmental aspects in body representations below.
To better understand the role of body representations in mental 
health, we believe it is essential to provide a conceptual framework 
first. This framework should allow to (a) integrate  the terminology  
and conceptual understanding of different perspectives and (b) 
systematically review and investigate  body representations in normative 
development as well as in the development of psychopathology across 
disorders and disciplines. With this approach, we address several of 
the valuable recommendations from a comprehensive systematic 
review on body representations in anorexia nervosa ( Glashouwer 
et al., 2019 ). To this end, we propose a framework consisting of two 
interconnected models, a structural and a process model.
In the present article, we  first introduce the models in more detail, 
focusing on the structural model, which includes the integration of 
terminology and concepts from different perspectives. Second , 
we  review the literature on the normative development of body 
representations within the proposed model, identifying potential 
sensitive developmental phases that may initiate cascade effects. Third , 
we review distortions in body representation from a transdiagnostic 
perspective across several mental disorders taking into account 
developmental aspects. In this sense, we  follow a developmental 
psychopathology approach to mental disorders including distorted 
body representation. The specific role for body representations for 
these mental disorders is not always clear: while in some disorders 
certain aspects of body representations may be assumed to be a risk 
factor (e.g., anorexia nervosa), for others there has been less research 
and a lack of experimental and longitudinal studies that would help 
clarifying if distorted body representations are a feature of the 
disorder, an epiphenomenon or a (causal) risk factor. The development 
of the models we  suggest in the next section is supposed to help 
clarifying this important question.
2 Conceptual framework on body 
representations: a structural and a 
process model
Our conceptual framework on body representation includes a 
structural model (categorial approach) and a process model (dynamic 
approach). Both serve different purposes as outlined below. In 
developing this framework, we  integrated and extended 
conceptualizations, models, and empirical findings of researchers 
from different disciplines, such as cognitive (neuro)sciences, 
philosophy, experimental and clinical psychology (e.g., De Vignemont, 
2010 ; Cash and Smolak, 2011 ; Longo, 2016 ; Vocks et al., 2018 ; Gadsby, 
2021 ). The structural model  (Figure 1A ) may be especially useful to 
categorize  different types of body representations and thus to 
systematize  previous research or develop targeted new research 
questions – both from different research perspectives as well as for 
different mental (or other) disorders. Further, it may be used regarding 
both, the representation of one’s own body and the representation of 
others. In contrast, the process model  focuses on the (situational) 
development and usage of a body representation. It thus rather reflects 
a dynamic information processing model on body representation

Möllmann et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1231640
Frontiers in Psychology 03 frontiersin.org(Figure 1B ), illustrating how a body representation emerges in the 
short- and long-term. As Medina (2022)  pointed out, this kind of 
process model is highly needed in addition to more categorical 
approaches for the development in the field of body 
representation research.
In the present article, we will primarily focus on the structural 
model as it is our goal to first demonstrate how the presently available 
results from studies on body representations may be structured to 
identify and accumulate knowledge available and to inform future 
research (areas). We will re-visit the process model in the discussion 
section again to demonstrate how it may be used once the evidence 
has been successfully structured.
2.1 The three-dimensional structural model 
of body representations
As visualized in Figure 1A , the structural model considers three 
dimensions on which body representations can be differentiated:
Functions of body representations : body schema vs. body image 
(perceptual and cognitive-affective).
Sensory source : exteroception, proprioception and interoception.
Stability:  short-term vs. long-term.
Importantly, the model suggests differentiating between body 
image and body schema in contrast to synonymously use the terms, 
and it suggests separating body representations regarding the primary 
source of information. Moreover, it distinguishes between body 
representations that are short-term representing the body as it 
currently is and long-term representing the body as it usually is. 
Finally, the structural model can be used to classify representations of ones’ own body as well as representations of the bodies of others ( self-
other ). We  will outline each dimension in more detail in the 
following sections.
2.1.1 Function of body representation: body 
schema vs. body image
We named the first dimension of the structural model function  to 
underline our understanding that each body representation is needed 
and used for a specific purpose, a function, such as to execute a 
movement, perform a size estimation or answer questions about one’s 
body (see Figure 1B , Process model, output). In clinical psychology, 
unlike in other disciplines, the term body representation as an 
umbrella term is rather uncommon. Instead, researchers are usually 
familiar with a certain understanding about the body image, a concept 
that is often used and understood synonymously to the body schema 
(or perceptual body image and body schema as synonyms). The 
synonymous use of the terms body image and body schema is unusual 
in other disciplines, such as neuroscience, where the terms 
characterize different functions of body representations. As this has 
led to challenges in integrating research findings ( Glashouwer et al., 
2019 ), we suggest, to align terminology across disciplines under the 
in some areas already established umbrella term body representations 
and use specific subterms for respective functions (i.e., body image 
and body schema) or other aspects of body representations.
In the structural model, we thus differentiate on a first level  body 
image and body schema and subdivide body image further into the 
cognitive-affective versus perceptual body image on a second level . 
We define the cognitive-affective body image as feelings and attitudes 
toward one’s body, as in common models on body image (e.g., 
Gallagher, 1986 ; Cash and Smolak, 2011 ; Vocks et  al., 2018 ). It 
FIGURE 1
Conceptual framework of body representations consisting of (A) a three-dimensional structural model of body representation and (B) a process model 
of body representation. The structural model (A) considers three dimensions (function, source, stability; see text for further details) on which body 
representations can be differentiated. Moreover, the structural model can be used to classify representations of ones’ own body as well as 
representations of the bodies of others (self-other). The process model (B) depicts the dynamics during the information processing of body-related 
stimuli. Accordingly, a short-term representation emerges from (1) weighted sensory information about the body as it currently is from different 
sensory sources (exteroceptive, proprioceptive, and interoceptive) and (2) stable information stored in long-term representations about the body as it 
usually is. Short- and long-term representations are combined in the service of functions (e.g., movement, size-estimation, verbal report) which might 
lead to (3) behavior-induced modifications of sensory input.

Möllmann et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1231640
Frontiers in Psychology 04 frontiersin.orgincludes body (dis)satisfaction (i.e., the evaluation of the physical 
appearance) and the importance of the appearance for someone’s self-
evaluation. We define the perceptual body image as the representation 
of body “estimates, ” typically regarding size and shape (c.f. body 
percept, Longo, 2016 ; Gadsby, 2017 ) but also regarding the body 
composition related to other sensory sources, e.g., the intensity of 
bodily sounds or odors (see next section). In contrast to some other 
models on body image (e.g., Cash and Smolak, 2011 ; Vocks et al., 
2018 ), we did not include a behavioral component, referring to body-
related behaviors, such as body-checking in eating disorder. As 
we certainly agree that these behaviors are important in many regards, 
we would argue that they are not body representations in themselves 
but rather are informed by or result from (distorted) body 
representations – and also inform or change body representations (see 
process model). The body image, in distinction to the body schema, 
is not action-oriented but the subjective experience of one’s body (c.f., 
Longo, 2016 ).
In contrast, we  define the body schema according to De 
Vignemont (2010)  as a function of body representation that is 
necessary for body-scaled action and/or motor imagery ( Gadsby, 
2017 ). It enables spontaneous, speeded movements, action or action 
simulation while considering the dimensions of the own body and the 
environment. The body schema develops bottom-up, without higher 
cognitive processes such as feelings or attitudes toward one’s 
appearance, and it includes representations of the body both as the 
effector and as the goal of the action. Differentiating functions of body 
representations does not mean that the functions are unrelated. 
Interactions between different aspects seem very likely.
The conceptualization of body image and body schema as 
mentioned above differs from the common terminology in clinical 
psychology. However, rethinking and specifying the current 
understanding of body image might contribute to efforts of integrating 
previous research ( Glashouwer et al., 2019 ). Accordingly, we believe 
that differentiating body image and body schema can improve the 
understanding of the way body representations are distorted in mental 
disorders, such as eating disorders, BDD, MD, and BID, and eventually 
improve treatment options. For example, such a differentiation led to 
important research findings in anorexia nervosa. Engel and Keizer 
(2017)  showed that after receiving cognitive-behavioral therapy 
(CBT), individuals with anorexia nervosa still revealed a distortion of 
the body schema. As CBT usually focuses on the cognitive-affective 
component of body image, these findings motivated the authors to 
develop intervention approaches that focus specifically on other 
functions of body representations. A similar approach would 
be important for under-researched disorders, such as BDD, MD, and 
BID as well.
2.1.2 Sensory sources: exteroception, 
proprioception and interoception
We receive a continuous flow of sensory information about the 
body from various sources. These sources can be roughly parceled into 
exteroception, proprioception and interoception ( Ceunen et al., 2016 ; 
Khalsa et al., 2018 ). Exteroception refers to the perception of the body 
and the environment from the outside. This includes sensory 
information that stems from the sensory organs connecting the 
outside environment to our inside via signal transmission, such as the 
skin, eyes, ears and nose. Proprioception, on the other hand, refers to 
the perception of the position and movement of limbs and the body as a whole. This includes information about muscle contractions, joint 
angles and the position of the body in space. Finally, interoception 
refers to the perception of stimuli and information from inside the 
body, such as the physiological states of the organs, digestion, or heart 
rate. Intertwined with this proposed tripartite division is the 
somatosensory system ( De Haan and Dijkerman, 2020 ). In addition 
to exteroceptive tactile perception, the somatosensory system includes 
proprioception and interoceptive sensations of pain and temperature. 
Here, we adhere to the initial categorization of sensory sources (i.e., 
exteroception, proprioception, and interoception), as it provides a 
more comprehensive picture of sensory sources while still allowing for 
insights into the somatosensory system.
While proprioception and some prominent exteroceptive 
modalities (i.e., visual and tactile) are often taken into account in 
research and it may therefore be easy to understand why they are part 
of the model, the incorporation of interoception as well as further 
exteroceptive modalities (e.g., auditory and olfactory) might not 
be  so obvious at a first glance. However, interoception has been 
increasingly recognized as a significant factor in body representations 
and various mental health conditions including eating disorders (e.g., 
Badoud and Tsakiris, 2017 ; Khalsa et al., 2018 ; Raimo et al., 2021 ). 
Moreover, the sounds and odors emanating from our bodies are a 
further exteroceptive source that affects the way the own body is 
represented. For example, sounds (e.g., produced when breathing, 
eating or walking) have an effect on the overall body awareness 
(Murray et al., 2000 ; Azañón et al., 2016 ) and can even alter one’s own 
perceived body weight ( Tajadura-Jiménez et al., 2015a ) as well as the 
mental representation of arm length ( Tajadura-Jiménez et al., 2012 , 
2015b ). Likewise, scent stimuli can affect participants’ perception of 
body shape and weight ( Brianza et  al., 2019 ) and booster the 
embodiment of a sex mismatching body in virtual reality ( Lesur et al., 
2023 ). This research on the significance of certain sensory sources for 
body representations, such as auditory and olfactory information, is 
still in its infancy, as these sources were more difficult to control and 
record experimentally in the past. However, we  think that a 
comprehensive model on body representation should consider all 
information available about one’s own body. This evaluation is also 
supported by clinical conditions, such as misophonia and the 
olfactory reference disorder, where (the processing of) this sensory 
information is closely related to the disorder symptoms. Misophonia 
describes a reduced tolerance toward certain sounds or associated 
stimuli, most often related to eating or breathing sounds from 
individuals close to the affected person, such as a partner or parent 
(Swedo et al., 2022 ). Individuals with misophonia thus develop very 
detailed body representations regarding other people’s bodily sounds. 
In olfactory reference disorder, individuals are preoccupied about 
emitting a strong body odor which is not or only slightly noticeable 
for others ( Schmidt et al., 2021 ). This characteristic affects the body 
image, based on olfactory information.
Importantly, information from different sensory sources are often 
encoded in separate brain regions and separate spatial frames of 
reference. For example there are over a dozen distinct maps encoding 
visual and tactile information about the body spanning the parietal 
and frontal cortex ( Huang et al., 2012 ) as well as a multitude of body-
sensing brain regions including the insula and somatosensory 
cortices which form the neural basis of interoception ( Paulus et al., 
2019 ). This requires elaborate computations to combine or integrate 
these different inputs ( Ernst and Bülthoff, 2004 ; Kirsch and Kunde,

Möllmann et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1231640
Frontiers in Psychology 05 frontiersin.org2023 ). The exploration of the neural pathways and processes 
underlying these computations is constantly expanding, which is not 
surprising given the multitude of sensory sources and their potential 
interactions. Therefore, an in-depth review of the neuronal basis of 
sensory integration is beyond the scope of this article and can 
be found elsewhere (e.g., Murray and Wallace, 2012 ; Y au et al., 2015 ). 
From this research, it can be noted that multisensory integration 
occurs within a broad hierarchically organized neural network that 
involves numerous feedback loops. Of particular relevance in this 
network is the parietal cortex which is involved in reference frame 
remapping and mediating crossmodal interactions (e.g., between 
vision and touch) in sensory cortex ( Y au et al., 2015 ). Moreover, 
behavioral studies on multisensory integration have provided 
evidence that integration is task-dependently taking into account, for 
example, the relative reliabilities of the sensory input ( Ernst and 
Banks, 2002 ). As a consequence, different sensory sources are used 
in the formation of body representations ( De Vignemont, 2010 ; 
Peviani et al., 2019 ) depending on the task, reliability, and availability 
of sensory information. Although body-related distortions may 
be the result of faulty multisensory integration (e.g., Saetta et al., 
2020 ), distortions often occur at an earlier stage (i.e., before 
integration) and thus originate at the level of individual sensory 
sources (e.g., Feusner et al., 2007 ; Keizer et al., 2011 ; Longo, 2022 ). 
Identifying where and how exactly the processing of sensory 
information about the body is disturbed in mental disorders is 
challenging given the intricate recurrent processing loops underlying 
uni- and multisensory processing. However, we believe it is important 
to underline the relevance of the main  constituting sensory source for 
a specific body representation. Thus, we suggest body representations 
can (and should) be further differentiated according to their main 
constituting sensory source. Accordingly, the sensory sources serve 
as a distinct, orthogonal dimension in our structural model of 
body representations.
Referring to the other two dimensions of function (body image 
vs. body schema) and stability (short-term vs. long-term; see next 
section), some sources appear to be more central than others. For 
example, proprioceptive information is especially relevant for the 
body schema due to its close relationship to movement. However, 
actions can also be selected and controlled based on exteroceptive 
information (e.g., auditory, visual, or olfactory information Herwig 
et al., 2007 ; Smeets and Dijksterhuis, 2014 ; Herwig, 2015 ). Moreover, 
research on the rare case of deafferented patients lacking 
proprioceptive input suggests that these patients’ body schema can 
instead be based on exteroceptive visual input only ( De Vignemont, 
2010 ). Likewise, interoceptive signals have been linked to motor 
control and the subjective experience of agency ( Pezzulo et al., 2015 ; 
Marshall et al., 2018 ). Especially interoceptive signals related to itch 
and pain play an important role in actions aimed at the own body 
(Berlucchi and Aglioti, 2010 ). In case of body image, which is for 
example used for the perception of body size, exteroception (and 
especially visual information) seems to be more central than other 
modalities. However, the body image can also be  based on other 
sensory information when visual input is not reliable or available (e.g., 
to estimate the size and shape of the back of one’s head) and is known 
to be affected by tactile sensitivity ( Linkenauger et al., 2015 ), as well 
as bodily sounds and odors (e.g., Tajadura-Jiménez et al., 2015b ; Lesur 
et al., 2023 ). Disturbed interoceptive information also alters the body 
image as evident by effects of local anesthesia, pain and cutaneous stimulation on the perceived size of body parts like the thumb and lips 
(Gandevia and Phegan, 1999 ).
In the case of mental disorders, some symptoms are more related 
to specific sensory sources than others. For example, body checking 
as a frequent symptom of eating disorders or BDD mostly leads to 
visual or tactile information which might render body representations. 
On the other hand, altered visual and proprioceptive information 
seems to be more relevant when it comes to pretending behavior (e.g., 
using crushes or wheelchairs) as one symptom of BID.
2.1.3 Stability: short-term vs. long-term
Body representations can be further classified according to their 
temporal stability in short-term and long-term body representations 
(Merleau-Ponty, 1962 ; O’Shaughnessy, 1980 ; Carruthers, 2008 ). Short-
term or online body representations are dynamic representations of 
the body as it currently is. As such they are constantly updated in 
working memory by currently available sensory information (e.g., by 
a look into the mirror, or by proprioceptive information about the 
current body posture). In contrast, long-term or offline body 
representations are more stable and represent the body as it is usually 
like. Typical properties of long-term body representations are the 
spatial organization and the size of body parts as well as learned 
movement possibilities or generalized motor programs ( Berlucchi and 
Aglioti, 1997 , 2010 ; Shea and Wulf, 2005 ; Schack and Mechsner, 2006 ).
As elaborated by De Vignemont (2010) , the stability dimension 
(short-term vs. long-term) is orthogonal to the perception-action 
(body image vs. body schema) distinction. Moving the own body 
typically requires an interaction of both, short-term and long-term 
body schema representations. That is, for an arm movement, short-
term information of the current position needs to be combined with 
long-term information about its size and learned movement 
possibilities ( De Vignemont, 2010 ). The same holds true for body 
perception, which can be also conceived as an interaction between 
short-term and long-term body image representations.
It has been suggested that disturbances in body representation, as 
reported for eating disorders, are more likely due to disturbances in 
long-term representations permitting discrepant sensory input 
(Gadsby, 2017 ). Accordingly, dynamic short-term representations are 
thought to be  corrupted by distortions imported from long-term 
representations. In fact, studies on anorexia nervosa indicate that 
disturbances might result from a biased weighting of short- and long-
term information about the own body ( Case et al., 2012 ; Keizer et al., 
2013 ; Gadsby, 2017 ). For example, an oversized body representation 
of patients suffering from anorexia nervosa might be the result of a 
failed updating of long-term representations after sudden weight loss 
or of a general devaluation of current sensory short-term 
representations ( Guardia et al., 2012 ; Gadsby, 2017 ). Likewise, it has 
been suggested that a failure to integrate short-term and long-term 
body representations leads to BID ( Carruthers, 2008 ). It has to 
be noted, however, that interactions between long-term and short-
term body representations are manifold. On the one hand, long-term 
body representations affect short-term representations as information 
from long-term memory is typically combined with the actual sensory 
input in working memory. On the other hand, short-term 
representations affect long-term representations as long-term 
information itself is constructed by accumulating short-term 
information about the own body. Thus, this dimension might 
be especially interesting from a developmental perspective on body

Möllmann et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1231640
Frontiers in Psychology 06 frontiersin.orgrepresentation and due to its dynamic nature studied in the context of 
our process model.
We will now move on focusing on the normative development of 
body representation, beginning with the “function” dimension of the 
structural model, body schema and body image, from a developmental 
perspective. We  will refer to the source dimension alongside, 
differentiating the different senses where applicable. The stability 
dimension of the structural model will not be reviewed here from a 
developmental perspective as we believe the process model to be more 
suitable to investigate this dimension.
3 The normative development of body 
representations
How and when do different body representations emerge and 
develop during ontogenesis? In the following, we will first address this 
question in the course of normative development. This will help to 
better identify deviations and disturbances in the development of 
body representations that may accompany certain mental disorders as 
discussed later. Following the structural model of body representations 
outlined before, we will address these questions separately for body 
schema, and body image (including the perceptual body image and 
the cognitive-affective body image).
3.1 Body schema
The existence of a body schema, that is the body representation 
supporting body-scaled actions, can be found from very early on. An 
important discovery was the neonate’s ability to imitate facial gestures, 
requiring some sort of mapping between vision and motor response 
(e.g., Meltzoff and Moore, 1994 ; Meltzoff et al., 2013 ). Moreover, three 
to 5 months old infants already discriminate between pre-recorded 
and live videos of own leg movements ( Bahrick and Watson, 1985 ; 
Rochat and Morgan, 1995 ), thus showing early integration of visual 
and proprioceptive signals during movement execution. This has led 
to the suggestion that certain parts of the body schema (e.g., 
supporting early manual-oral behaviors) are innate (e.g., Gallagher, 
2005 ; Rochat, 2010 ), thus providing the foundation for the later 
developing body image ( Brownell et al., 2012 ; see the discussion of the 
body image in the next section). However, other authors view the 
body schema as the result of pre- or postnatal experience ( Merleau-
Ponty, 1962 ; see also Bremner, 2017 ). Innate or not, there is evidence 
that the body schema is highly plastic and further develops during 
infancy and childhood, reaching maturation not until adulthood.
For instance, studies indicate that premature birth might impact 
on the later development of the body schema and associated motor 
skills as well as sensorimotor functioning ( De Kieviet et al., 2009 ; Di 
Rosa et al., 2016 ; Butti et al., 2020 ). One of the reasons for these effects 
might be  that preterm infants are exposed to atypical handling 
routines and thus experience atypical sensory stimulation ( Peng et al., 
2009 ). Interestingly, preterm children at the age of 8 to 14 years were 
less efficient than full-term children in expressing hand-laterality 
judgments on whole body stimuli ( Butti et al., 2020 ). This finding 
provides a first tentative hint that early body-related experiences 
during the first year of life might initiate a developmental cascade 
impacting children’s developmental course. However, these difficulties were present regardless of whether the body was shown from the front 
(and thus requiring a first-person mental transformation that is 
known to involve one’s own body schema) or back (not necessarily 
involving the body schema). Further studies are needed to pinpoint 
the specific impact of premature birth on the body schema.
A further line of evidence for developmental effects on the body 
schema comes from tool use. For instance, children start using tools 
like rakes to reach a desired toy during the second year of life (e.g., 
Rat-Fischer et al., 2012 ). In adults, tool use modifies the body schema 
as indexed by a change in the kinematics of subsequent free-hand 
movements following a period of tool-use actions. More precisely, 
after using a mechanical grabber to pick up objects, adults move their 
arm as if it has become longer ( Martel et al., 2019 ). Thus, tools become 
incorporated into the body schema and this incorporation lingers on 
for a certain amount of time after the tool is no longer in use. 
Importantly, the plastic capability of updating the body schema is 
strongly affected by the pubertal status of 8–21 years old ( Martel et al., 
2021 ). During early puberty, the kinematic changes that linger after a 
period of tool-use oppose the patterns observed for adults - children 
move their arm as if it has become shorter. This pattern reverses after 
mid-puberty with the typical adult-like pattern emerging only at late 
puberty, when body size stabilizes. Comparable shaped developmental 
trajectories have also been observed for localisation performance of 
the hand during movements ( Nardini et al., 2013 ), kinaesthetic acuity 
(Visser et al., 1998 ), as well as the use of proprioceptive information 
for postural control of the upper limbs ( Viel et al., 2009 ). Together, 
these findings point to the beginning of puberty as a further sensitive 
stage in the development and maturation of the body schema. After a 
period of constant growth during childhood, the rate of body growth 
increases sharply during the growth spurt leading to critical and fast 
changes in body morphology. This might present special challenges to 
the developing body schema and may therefore also be considered a 
vulnerable phase for body representation distortions due to the 
comprehensive adaptions in mental representation of the body 
(Assaiante et al., 2014 ; but see De Haan et al., 2018 ).
In sum, the findings on the development of the body schema 
implicate that although the body schema begins to develop already 
during a prenatal stage (or might be even partly innate), it remains 
highly plastic until adulthood and is therefore vulnerable for abnormal 
developments at least until then. Premature birth is a possible risk 
factor for the later development of such abnormalities, and puberty 
appears as a particularly sensitive phase due to the comprehensive 
changes in body morphology.
3.2 Body image
3.2.1 Perceptual body image
As concerns the perceptual body image, i.e., representations of any 
body estimates (e.g., the body’s shape, size, spatial configuration, 
intensity of bodily sounds or odors), there is converging evidence that 
the abilities to represent our own bodies take significant developmental 
time to emerge (e.g., Brownell et al., 2012 ; Bremner, 2022 ). Especially 
during the first 3 years of life, different aspects of the perceptual body 
image emerge and develop at different points in time. For example, the 
ability to locate touch changes in children between 4 and 6 months of 
age, as localization performance becomes increasingly influenced by 
body shape and configuration. At the age of 4 month, children locate

Möllmann et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1231640
Frontiers in Psychology 07 frontiersin.orgtouch, as indexed by a tactile orienting response, equally well on their 
crossed and uncrossed feet. At the age of 6 month, however, children 
showed a tactile localization deficit with their feet crossed, indicating 
external spatial coding of touch ( Begum Ali et al., 2015 ). This deficit 
to locate touch on crossed limbs is also apparent in sighted (but not 
blind) adults and arises from the influence of representations of the 
canonical posture of the body in external space ( Röder et al., 2004 ; 
Badde et al., 2019 ). Body representations underlying the ability to 
locate touch are thus strongly affected by visual input during the first 
months of life.
Children in the first half of the second year initially become aware 
of individual body parts in isolation from one another. At this age, 
they can point to own body parts in response to a verbal label (i.e., 
auditory input) but have difficulties to match someone else’s body 
parts to their own using visuo-spatial information alone ( Brownell 
et al., 2012 ). Between 18 and 22 months, children become first aware 
that their bodies, like other objects, take up space and can serve as 
obstacles, which is for instance demonstrated by a decline in attempts 
to hand over a mat they are sitting on without first moving off it. Body 
size awareness emerges a little later between 22 and 26 months, as 
indexed by fewer scale errors like trying to put on doll clothes or to 
squeeze through a too-small opening ( Brownell et al., 2007 ). Only by 
the age of 30 months, children start to represent their bodies in terms 
of a more detailed topographic representation and are now able to 
correctly place stickers on unnamed body locations on themselves 
using visuo-spatial information as well as imitate meaningless gestures 
positioned at different body locations ( Brownell et al., 2010 ).
The perceptual body image develops further in childhood as 
indicated by studies investigating the rubber hand illusion ( Botvinick 
and Cohen, 1998 ). In this illusion, the sight of a fake hand being 
synchronously stroked with the real hand hidden from view, causes a 
shift in the localization of the real hand. More precisely, the real hand 
is perceived to be  closer located to the seen fake hand after 
synchronous compared to asynchronous stroking. This self-
localization without the possibility to move the real hand should 
be mainly based on the perceptual body image using visual, tactile and 
proprioceptive information. While children between 4 and 9 years are 
as sensitive as adults to visual-tactile synchrony cues for hand position, 
they perceive their hand generally (i.e., regardless of synchrony) to 
be located closer to the fake hand than 10 to 13 years olds as well as 
adult’s ( Cowie et al., 2013 , 2016 ). This might indicate two processes in 
the development of the perceptual body image during childhood. One 
process is based on the perceived temporal synchrony between visual 
and tactile stimulation which matures by at least 4 years of age and 
changes little after that. The other process is based on the integration 
of visual and proprioceptive information and matures not until 
10 years of age. The latter finding fits well to the idea that children, at 
least before they enter puberty, rely more strongly on their visual than 
proprioceptive body image for self-localization. One possible reason 
might be that children’s proprioception needs more developmental 
time than vision to provide reliable estimates.
This finding is further complemented by a study investigating the 
spatial and temporal rules for multisensory integration underlying 
body representations in a sample of 5 to 12 years old ( Greenfield et al., 
2017 ). In this study, children had to report whether they saw their 
visually displaced hand in the same position as their actual hand and 
whether they experienced a tactile stroke to their hand as synchronous 
with a temporal delayed video of their own hand. Y ounger children showed an increased probability to mistakenly integrated together 
body related information from different modalities separated in space 
or time. Such broader integration windows of multisensory 
information might also partly underly the finding of younger 
children’s tendency to locate their real hand closer to the fake hand 
even after asynchronous brushing reported by Cowie et  al. 
(2013 , 2016) .
In sum, the perceptual body image develops as the infant’s and 
child’s information about its body becomes richer and more reliable. 
A large part of the foundations is laid in early infancy and childhood, 
when visual information becomes incorporated in representations 
used to locate touch and body awareness slowly builds up. As the 
child growths and reaches puberty, the visual dominance in self 
localization decreases and integration windows of multisensory 
information narrow.
3.2.2 Cognitive-affective body image
Research on the development of the cognitive-affective body 
image during childhood and adolescence appears more strongly 
directed toward distortions (e.g., body image concerns or body 
dissatisfaction) rather than toward the normative development of 
attitudes, beliefs or feelings about one’s body ( Smolak, 2011 ; Paxton 
and Damiano, 2017 ). In comparison to the body schema and the 
perceptual body image, the cognitive-affective body image develops 
later, as the evaluation of one’s own body requires certain self-reflective 
cognitive functions.
One hypothesis is that it starts developing around the age of five, 
as comparisons with others become more important in this phase 
(Smolak, 2011 ). This hypothesis is derived from a common 
assumption, that the cognitive-affective body image in relation to 
oneself may be closely associated with the cognitive-affective body 
image in relation to others (see also the self-other aspect in our 
structural model, Figure  1A ), e.g., in the weight bias. This bias 
describes negatively biased assumptions about others, for example 
regarding their intelligence, kindness or competences, based on their 
(higher) body weight ( Puhl and Suh, 2015 ; Spiel et al., 2016 ). It is 
assumed that these negative attributions are initially only applied 
regarding others before they are also applied in relation to oneself and 
may thus lead to body dissatisfaction ( Durso and Latner, 2008 ; Latner 
et al., 2013 ). Overall, however, the differentiation self - others appears 
especially important during childhood and adolescence across the 
development of different body representations.
Deviating from the hypothesis, other studies indicate that the 
cognitive-affective body image already starts developing earlier. Body 
(dis)satisfaction and weight bias are researched in children from about 
3 years of age ( Spiel et al., 2012 ), commonly using the current-ideal 
discrepancy score from figure rating scales, in which the child is 
presented with a certain number of body silhouettes that differ in 
terms of body weight (e.g., Damiano et al., 2015a ,b). The children are 
then asked to select their current self on the one hand and their 
desired/ideal self on the other. In the case of agreement, this is 
evaluated as body satisfaction, in the case of deviation as 
dissatisfaction. These studies show that children from the age of 
around three are developmentally able to make evaluative judgments 
about their bodies. Further, a sensitive developmental phase for the 
body-related self-evaluation around the age of six to seven might 
be concluded from the studies with a kind of crossing point regarding 
body dissatisfaction ( Dohnt and Tiggemann, 2006 ). Boys and girls at

Möllmann et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1231640
Frontiers in Psychology 08 frontiersin.org4 years show very small discrepancy scores with 72 and 62% being 
satisfied with their bodies and within the groups of dissatisfied 
children, twice to three times as many desired a larger figure ( Damiano 
et al., 2015a ). With increasing age, the proportion of satisfied children 
begins to decrease, while the thinner ideal gains in importance and 
from age 6 there is a rapid increase in dissatisfaction with consistent 
findings of up to half of the children up to age 12 desiring a thinner 
ideal ( Schur et al., 2000 ; Truby and Paxton, 2002 , 2008 ; Ricciardelli 
et al., 2009 ).
A positive cognitive-affective body image has been repeatedly 
linked to higher interoceptive acuity (e.g., in a heartbeat perception 
task) in adults ( Duschek et al., 2015 ; Emanuelsen et al., 2015 ; Badoud 
and Tsakiris, 2017 ; Todd et al., 2019 ). Thus, taking a developmental 
perspective on interoception ( Murphy et al., 2017 ) might indirectly 
inform about critical phases in the development of the cognitive-
affective body image. There is very little data on interoception in early 
infancy and it is not exactly clear at which age explicit awareness of 
interoceptive signals develops. However, implicit interoception using 
cortical measurements of cardiac information has been investigated 
in children aged 3 years and older ( Immanuel et al., 2014 ). In this 
study, children with sleep disordered breathing showed reduced 
implicit interoception which correlated with problematic daytime 
behavior. The first explicit measurements of interoceptive sensitivity 
have been obtained in children aged 6 years and older ( Koch and 
Pollatos, 2014 ). Here, low explicit interoceptive sensitivity (i.e., 
heartbeat perception) has been linked to both obesity and the presence 
of disordered eating behaviors over a one-year timeframe. Likewise, 
reduced explicit interoceptive sensitivity is associated with adolescence 
obesity in a sample of 12- to 18-year-olds ( Mata et al., 2015 ). Although 
data on the normative development of interoception is not abundant, 
it has been suggested that interoceptive ability varies throughout 
development and is associated with periods of risk for the development 
of psychopathology ( Murphy et al., 2017 ). Future studies should thus 
trace the link between interoception and body representations across 
different developmental periods.
3.3 Significance of developmental 
processes for distorted body 
representation
In summary, the different functions of body representations, body 
schema, perceptual body image and cognitive-affective body image, 
start developing at different ages with the earliest development in body 
schema, followed by the perceptual body image and cognitive-affective 
body image. They reveal a different level of plasticity and therefore 
susceptibility for the development of distortions, again during 
different phases of development. Regarding the sensory sources, most 
studies focus on exteroception (mainly visual, tactile) and 
proprioception. Studies on the normative development of 
interoception are rare but could play a greater role in the future, as 
atypical interoception could be closely related to the development of 
psychopathology. The role of other exteroceptive sources (i.e., auditory 
and olfactory) in the development of body representations is mostly 
neglected. Whether (and if so, how) interferences during the 
development of a specific body representation lead to a distorted body 
representation and affect the subsequent development of other 
representations, might be an important question for future research. From a clinical perspective, these phases of increased plasticity and 
therefore susceptibility for the development of distortions might be a 
gateway for the development of mental disorders characterized by 
distortions of body representation.
4 Mental disorders and distorted body 
representations
In this section we will now turn to apply our model to a selection 
of mental disorders and examine if distorted body representations are 
a transdiagnostic relevant factor for mental disorders. While a more 
comprehensive systematic review on existing studies would 
be necessary for answering such a question, and specifically more 
longitudinal as well as experimental studies, we aim to start at this 
point with a brief and exemplar review of studies. We will first shortly 
describe the clinical features of mental disorders typically associated 
with distorted body representations. Second, following the structural 
model of body representations, we will review each function, body 
schema and body image (perceptual and cognitive-affective body 
image), regarding research findings on distortions present in the 
respective mental disorders. Third, we will synthesize these findings 
in relation to the applicability of our model.
Several mental disorders are typically  associated with distorted 
body representations, such as eating disorders, body dysmorphic 
disorder (BDD) including muscle dysmorphia (MD), and body 
integrity dysphoria (BID). It may be noted that beside these typical  
disorders, body representations as conceptualized in our framework 
may appear relevant for other (mental, neurodevelopmental) disorders 
or conditions as well, for example the olfactory reference disorder, 
pain disorders, misophonia, autism, or gender incongruence. For the 
scope of the current article, we  will limit this section to eating 
disorders, BDD, MD and BID to apply the model for the first time.
4.1 Key features of mental disorders 
typically associated with body 
representation distortions
Regarding the key features of the disorders, eating disorders, such 
as anorexia nervosa (AN), bulimia nervosa (BN), and binge eating 
disorder (BED), are characterized by the preoccupation with one’s 
body weight and shape (ICD-11; World Health Organization, 2018 ) 
with slight differences between disorders. For example, a disturbed 
way of perceiving  one’s weight or body shape is especially emphasized 
for AN (DSM-5-TR; American Psychiatric Association, 2022 ), while 
the overly importance of weight and shape for self-evaluation  can 
be found across eating disorders ( Grilo et al., 2019 ; Lydecker et al., 
2022 ). In BDD, a disorder classified in the obsessive-compulsive 
spectrum, individuals are preoccupied with at least one aspect of their 
physical appearance which they perceive as flawed, defective, or 
deformed ( American Psychiatric Association, 2022 ). They evaluate 
this or these aspect(s) of their appearance as unattractive or even ugly 
and hideous ( Veale and Neziroglu, 2010 ). The perceived flaws are not 
at all or only slightly visible for others and up to 53% of individuals 
with BDD even experience delusional beliefs regarding their perceived 
defect ( Phillips, 2004 ). MD, as a form of BDD, describes the specific 
preoccupation with one’s perceived insufficient muscularity

Möllmann et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1231640
Frontiers in Psychology 09 frontiersin.org(Cunningham et  al., 2017 ). Several authors see MD more closely 
related to anorexia nervosa than to BDD, as the main concern 
similarly involves the shape of the whole body and is weight-related 
(Pope et al., 1993 ; Phillipou et al., 2016 ). BID is different from eating 
disorders, BDD and MD on the phenomenological level. It describes 
individuals with the intense and persistent desire to become physically 
disabled for example by amputation of healthy limbs or by taking 
actions to become paraplegic, blind or deaf ( First, 2005 ; First and 
Fisher, 2011 ; Giummarra et al., 2012 ). This desire is accompanied by 
intense feelings of inappropriateness concerning the current 
non-disabled body configuration, described as “overcompleteness. ” 
Since individuals with BID experience the apparently healthy and 
functionally intact bodies or body parts as not belonging, the 
disturbed body representations might qualitatively differ from the 
distortions in the context of the other disorders.
Comparing the age of onset of the disorders, BID stands out with 
a typical begin already in early to middle childhood at an age around 
7 years ( Blom et  al., 2012 ; Brugger et  al., 2016 ). Eating disorders 
usually develop during puberty or early adulthood with some evidence 
that AN starts slightly earlier than BN ( Herpertz et al., 2019 ). An onset 
in later adulthood is less typical across eating disorders but most likely 
for BED ( Stice et al., 2021 ). A large-scale epidemiological study with 
10,123 adolescents aged between 13 and 18 years revealed median ages 
of onset of 12.3 (AN), 12.4 (BN) and 12.6 (BED; Swanson et al., 2011 ). 
The mean age of onset of BDD in adolescent samples is around the age 
of 12 to 13 years, with around 10% of the individuals experiencing a 
pre-pubertal onset ( Albertini and Phillips, 1999 ; Rautio et al., 2022 ). 
For MD, the age of onset appears to be around the age of 19 (only 
retrospective studies available), sometimes evolving from anorectic 
symptoms ( Olivardia et al., 2000 ). The later age of onset compared to 
BDD of the non-MD form and AN appears a bit surprising, given the 
similarities between the disorders. However, the known bias in 
retrospective studies estimating the age of onset to be higher than it 
actually was might have influenced these estimates.
Regarding the course of the disorders, BN and BED are rather 
variable inter- and intra-individually and reveal higher rates of 
(spontaneous and treatment supported) remission rates ( World 
Health Organization, 2018 ) than the other disorders mentioned. The 
experienced overcompleteness in BID, as well as the course of AN, 
BDD and MD usually are chronic untreated, and even with 
psychological treatment, still most of the patients do not reach 
remission ( First and Fisher, 2011 ; Hartmann et al., 2013 ; Krebs et al., 
2017 ; Waldorf et al., 2019a ; Underwood and Olivardia, 2022 ). For BID 
the situation is even worse as there are currently no effective 
(non-invasive) treatments leading to a remission or cure of BID 
(Chakraborty et  al., 2021 ), despite several suggestions (e.g., 
Ramachandran and McGeoch, 2007 ; Lenggenhager et al., 2014 ).
4.2 Body schema distortions across the 
disorders
Compared to studies on the body image, less research has focused 
on distortions of the body schema across eating disorders, BDD, MD 
and BID.
Meneguzzo et al. (2023)  report distortions in the body schema in 
individuals with versus without AN, even after weight recovery (i.e., 
atypical AN after treatment), as indicated by results from an image-word matching task. These results can be  interpreted with 
regard to the interplay between body schema and body image, or – as 
suggested by the study authors  - in the context of linguistic 
embodiment, as an integration of different sensory sources, motor 
imagery (i.e., body schema) and cognitive processes is needed for task 
processing. Other studies used a door like aperture task, measuring 
the ratio of shoulder rotation/aperture width as an indicator of the 
body schema in individuals with and without AN. The results reveal 
a body schema distortion in the clinical groups, which moved through 
the aperture as if they had a wider body than their actual body ( Keizer 
et al., 2013 ; Beckmann et al., 2021 ). For AN, these findings already 
resulted in treatment approaches including components of body-
scaled action, which reveal higher improvement rates for distortions 
in body representations compared to treatment as usual ( Keizer 
et al., 2019 ).
For BDD, no study has yet focused on the body schema. Several 
studies used paradigms that are primarily intended to assess the body 
image, yet also activate the body schema. For example, studies used 
facial stimuli – presented with or without emotional expressions, or 
upright versus inverted – to investigate gazing behavior via 
eye-tracking ( Grocholewski et  al., 2012 ) or visual processing 
abnormalities via neuroimaging ( Feusner et  al., 2010 ). The tasks 
therefore primarily capture the body image, although indirect body 
schema influences are possible, since emotion recognition probably 
involves facial mimicry ( Ponari et al., 2012 ) and inverted faces might 
induce mental rotation ( Valentine and Bruce, 1988 ). Conversely, 
however, the tasks do not allow specific conclusions to be drawn about 
potential body schema distortions in BDD. In contrast to BDD of the 
non-MD type, typical MD behaviors (e.g., excessive weight-lifting) 
appear more closely related to the body schema. However, to our 
knowledge, no study has yet investigated body schema in muscle 
dysmorphia using, for example, action-oriented behavioral tasks 
similar to the aperture tasks in AN studies mentioned above.
BID is associated with specific neurological and behavioral 
characteristics. For example, individuals with BID show structural and 
functional changes in a distributed cortical network related to body 
representation, specifically, including sensorimotor areas, and parietal 
areas as well as the premotor cortex ( Saetta et al., 2020 , 2022 ). The use 
of a paradigm for mental rotation of body parts showed no evidence 
of a possible distortion of the body schema in BID ( Stone et al., 2019 ). 
However, there are first indications that motor signals are differently 
processed in BID in the right paracentral lobule ( Gandola et al., 2021 ). 
Moreover, as a behavioral characteristic, BID is very often 
accompanied by pretending behavior, that is the habitual simulation 
of the desired body state by using crutches or wheelchairs, or binding 
up the affected limb ( First and Fisher, 2011 ; Giummarra et al., 2011 ; 
Blom et  al., 2012 ). There is still relatively little known about the 
duration and frequency of pretending behavior in individuals with 
BID. However, case reports suggest that a certain degree of 
heterogeneity can be assumed (e.g., Kasten, 2009 ; Giummarra et al., 
2011 ). Which behavior is expressed probably depends on the desired 
body configuration, that is subjects with the amputation variant  of 
BID ( Saetta et al., 2022 ) will mainly pretend by binding up the affected 
limb and using crutches, whereas the paralysis variant  (Giummarra 
et al., 2012 ) will mainly use wheelchairs. We suggest that different 
forms of pretending are carried out to modify different kind of body 
related information. For example, the primary aim of using a 
wheelchair could be to simulate motor aspects of immobility (affecting

Möllmann et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1231640
Frontiers in Psychology 10 frontiersin.orgthe body schema), whereas the aim of tying up a body part could 
be either to modify the shape of the body (affecting the body image) 
or motor aspects of immobility of the limb (affecting the body schema) 
or both. Interestingly, a recent study demonstrated a correlation of 
neurological and behavioral markers of BID ( Saetta et  al., 2020 ). 
Unfortunately, the correlational nature of the link between pretending 
and body representation does not allow inferences on causality. One 
possibility is, that a distorted body representation in BID causes 
pretending behavior. However, an alternative possibility is, that 
pretending behavior (e.g., as a reaction to specific triggering events 
like encounters with severely physically ill and disabled individuals, 
see Obernolte et  al., 2015 ) might cause a distorted body schema. 
Simulating a disabled body state severely limits and modifies the 
experience of movement of the body or body parts ( Burin et al., 2017 ). 
In line with this, research on the effect of limb immobilization with 
healthy individuals has shown that temporary immobilization, such 
as through cast or splint, can lead to alterations in body representations 
of the immobilized body part. This has been shown for different 
factettes of body representations underlying body ownership, 
sensorimotor functioning, motor simulation and motor control 
(Toussaint and Meugnot, 2013 ; Burin et al., 2017 ; Debarnot et al., 
2018 ; Scotto et al., 2020 ). Moreover, there are also first indications that 
limb immobilization might lead to changes in the brain ( Huber et al., 
2006 ; Langer et al., 2012 ). Future experimental studies are needed to 
clarify the causal role of pretending and distorted body 
representations in BID.
4.3 Body image distortions across the 
disorders
In eating disorders, many studies focus on the long-term visual 
cognitive-affective body image, often targeted with self-report 
questionnaires about one’s appearance. This research shows high body 
dissatisfaction and a high relevance of the body weight and shape for 
self-evaluation (for AN Glashouwer et al., 2019 ; across EDs Prnjak 
et al., 2022 ). Regarding the perceptual body image, individuals with 
AN show larger overestimation of their body sizes and body parts 
based on visual information (for a review, Gardner and Brown, 2014 ). 
A recent multi-center study on typical as well as atypical AN and 
weight bias, assessed with questionnaires and an experimental task 
with visual body stimuli, reported similar weight biases in individuals 
with and without (atypical) AN but higher body dissatisfaction (i.e., 
two aspects of the cognitive-affective body image) and a more 
pronounced overestimation of the own body (i.e., an aspect of the 
perceptual body image) in the clinical groups, especially in the 
individuals with atypical AN ( Behrens et  al., 2021 ). The authors 
discuss the role of cognitive-affective body image judgments as 
possibly more impactful compared to distortions in the perceptual 
body image. However, it appears challenging to disentangle the 
respective influences of specific distortions.
Other studies in AN have focused on other exteroceptive sensory 
sources, such as tactile information. For example, individuals with AN 
overestimate the size of certain body parts based on visual as well as 
tactile sensory information ( Keizer et  al., 2011 ). Similarly to the 
findings on body schema distortions in AN, these distortions of the 
perceptual body image even persist after successful weight 
rehabilitation ( Engel and Keizer, 2017 ). In addition to studies revealing distortions in body image attributed to individual sensory sources, 
there is also evidence suggesting that multisensory integration is 
impaired in eating disorders. For example, studies using the rubber 
hand illusion showed that the influence of proprioceptive signals 
during the multisensory integration of proprioceptive und visual 
information is reduced in AN compared to healthy controls ( Eshkevari 
et al., 2012 ; Zopf et al., 2016 ). Interestingly, the influence of touch is 
comparable in individuals with and without AN in the rubber hand 
illusion ( Zopf et al., 2016 ) as well as in full body illusions, in which the 
synchronous visuo-tactile stimulation is used to induce embodiment 
of a virtual body ( Keizer et al., 2016 ; Provenzano et al., 2020 ). These 
studies thus point to a weakened proprioceptive compared to 
exteroceptive influence in multisensory integration in AN. A study on 
the influence of auditory-driven signals on body weight perception in 
individuals with and without AN also revealed a weakened auditory 
influence in multisensory integration, speaking against an overreliance 
on exteroceptive information ( Tajadura-Jiménez et al., 2022 ).
Besides exteroception, interoceptive abilities have been linked to 
the subjective experience of emotion ( Paulus and Stein, 2006 ) and the 
cognitive-affective body image in particular (e.g., Duschek et al., 2015 ; 
Badoud and Tsakiris, 2017 ). Several authors propose a disturbance in 
the interoceptive system as a central mechanism of pathology in AN 
(e.g., Pollatos et al., 2008 ; Kerr et al., 2016 ; Jacquemot and Park, 2020 ). 
For example, patients with AN display significantly decreased 
interoceptive sensitivity as assessed by a heartrate perception task 
(Pollatos et  al., 2008 ) which is evident even in recovered patients 
(Fischer et al., 2016 ). The insular plays a central role in the integration 
and representation of interoceptive signals ( Craig, 2002 ) and AN 
symptoms have been associated with abnormal visceral interoceptive 
activity in the insula ( Kerr et al., 2016 ). While the role of interoception 
is predominantly explored in AN, deficits in interoception have been 
observed across other types of eating disorders (BN and BED) and 
across several interoceptive modalities, such as gastric, pain, and 
cardiac interoception ( Martin et al., 2019 ). However, the causal role of 
interoceptive body representations in eating disorders is not exactly 
clear. For example, in a recent longitudinal study with a non-clinical 
sample interoceptive accuracy did not predict body image 
dissatisfaction over a period of 8 weeks ( Drew et al., 2020 ). Therefore, 
further prospective longitudinal studies with clinical populations as 
well as experimental psychopathology studies are needed to clarify 
this important question.
Similar to research in the field of eating disorders, most BDD 
studies focused on the cognitive-affective body image derived from 
visual information. Several studies targeted interactions between 
disorder specific behaviors involving visual information and effects on 
the cognitive-affective body image. For example, BDD-like gazing at 
facial photographs negatively affects attractiveness ratings, with 
different effects depending on the gazing duration and the type of 
stimuli, own versus other face ( Möllmann et al., 2019 , 2020b ). Another 
study revealed a higher degree of negative affect, especially of sadness 
and anger, after body exposure in individuals with BDD compared to 
individuals with major depression and mentally healthy individuals 
(Kollei and Martin, 2014 ). Some studies on the perceptual body image 
in BDD investigated attentional biases during free viewing paradigms 
and reported a negative bias towards least liked areas of own and 
others face ( Grocholewski et al., 2012 ; Toh et al., 2017 ). Different from 
AN, studies on body size estimations have not yet been published 
for BDD.

Möllmann et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1231640
Frontiers in Psychology 11 frontiersin.orgFor MD, the research focus is similar. Individuals with MD show a 
negatively biased cognitive-affective body image. Regarding aspects of 
the visual perceptual body image, they show a positive bias towards 
hyper-muscular bodies of others versus a negative bias towards one’s 
own body, as assessed with eye-tracking and a mirror setup ( Waldorf 
et al., 2019b ) or an own body avatar presented in virtual-reality ( Porras-
Garcia et al., 2020 ). Other aspects of the perceptual body image, most 
typically body size estimations, have not yet been investigated in 
MD. For example, a recent systematic review on body image, muscle 
dysmorphia and eating disorders reported only two studies including a 
clinical group of individuals with MD across all body image facets, and 
these studies did not assess perceptual body image ( Prnjak et al., 2022 ). 
As individuals with MD experience their bodies as too lean (contrary 
to individuals with AN), investigating body size estimations in this 
clinical group might be an interesting future path.
Other exteroceptive sensory sources have neither yet been 
targeted in BDD nor in MD research, although for example BDD 
behaviors, such as checking certain body parts, are closely related 
to other sensory information. Regarding interoception, one study 
reported a negative association between BDD symptoms and 
cardiac interoceptive accuracy in a group with low BDD symptoms 
but they did not find a significant association in the high BDD 
symptom group ( Kunstman et al., 2016 ). In line with these findings, 
a recent longitudinal survey-based study revealed a similar 
association between MD symptoms and interoceptive sensibility, 
both cross-sectionally and longitudinally ( Grunewald et al., 2023 ). 
Studies on multisensory integration in tasks assessing the perceptual 
body image in BDD and MD are rare. One study used the rubber 
hand illusion. Individuals with BDD and mentally healthy 
individuals did not show significantly different experiences of 
illusion strength ( Kaplan et al., 2014 ), different from results on the 
rubber hand illusion effect in AN, and thus not indicating deficits 
in multisensory integration. However, the authors reported 
significant positive correlations between the illusion strength and 
body dissatisfaction ratings, indicating an interplay between the 
perceptual and cognitive-affective body image.
In the amputation variant of BID, several studies point to altered 
uni- and multisensory processing of the affected and unaffected limb 
that are probably linked to the perceptual and cognitive-affective 
body image. For example, there are indications for impaired spatial–
temporal integration of tactile stimuli ( Aoyama et al., 2012 ) as well 
as structural and functional changes in parietal areas ( Saetta et al., 
2020 , 2022 ). The parietal cortex is associated with multisensory 
integration and the phenomenal components of the bodily self as 
revealed by direct electrical brain stimulation. Stimulating the 
superior parietal lobule in particular has been shown to result in 
illusory distortions of body size and the sensation that a body part is 
absent ( Dary et al., 2023 ). Besides altered exteroceptive processing, 
individuals with BID also show altered interoceptive processing. For 
example, pain and pain anticipation ( Brang et al., 2008 ; Romano 
et al., 2015 ) as well as disgust responses to violations of the body 
envelop are differently processed ( Bottini et al., 2015 ). There are also 
first indications, that interoceptive awareness as assessed via self-
report, is reduced in BID patients ( Capodici et al., 2023 ). Together, 
these observations fit well to the observation of BID-related structural 
alterations in the insula, an area that is known to play an important 
role in the representation of interoceptive signals ( McGeoch et al., 
2011 ; Hilti et al., 2013 ).5 Discussion
We introduced a conceptual framework on body representations 
with two interconnected models, the structural and the process model 
and explored if this framework is useful in improving our 
understanding of body representation distortions in mental disorders. 
We  aimed to address inconsistencies in terminology and 
conceptualizations in the literature across different disciplines and 
shaped the potential transdiagnostic role body representation may 
contribute to understanding psychopathology.
We believe this conceptual work to be the only transdiagnostic 
framework of body representation so far which facilitates to structure 
and compare findings across research areas. The specific role of body 
representations for the selected mental disorders (BDD, MD, BID or 
eating disorders) is not always clear and it would be beneficial for 
intervention optimization if we  knew certain aspects of body 
representations were a risk factor (and also causally related to the 
disorder development) or rather a feature of the disorder. We are 
motivated by the striking clinical observation that certain mental 
disorders, which are accompanied by distortions in the way the own 
body is perceived and represented, are severe and - despite treatments - 
quite persistent. These observations raise the question whether the 
severeness and chronicity of such disorders might be connected to the 
distortions in body representation. Other authors have already raised 
this question for a specific disorder, namely anorexia nervosa 
(Glashouwer et  al., 2019 ). With the current review, however, 
we contribute three new aspects:
 (1) We proposed a conceptual framework on body representations 
allowing an interdisciplinary perspective,  as it integrates 
concepts and terminology from different disciplines. The 
framework helps to tackle problems identified in previous 
research on body representations in the context of mental 
disorders (e.g., heterogeneity in terminology and concepts 
across and within disciplines; lack of experimental research), it 
facilitates the integration of previous research and also enables 
to derive future research directions (see also Section 5.2 
Future directions).
 (2) To improve the understanding of body representations in the 
context of (mental) disorder development and maintenance, it 
appeared important to also take a developmental 
psychopathology perspective on body representations  – 
irrespective of (mental) disorders - i.e. we reviewed research 
findings on the (normative) development of body 
representations across the lifespan.
 (3) We have extended the perspective of focusing on one specific 
mental disorder to a transdiagnostic perspective on body 
representations  by comparing certain disorders that share the 
feature of distorted body representations but can be described as 
either more proximal or distal to each other regarding the 
disorder symptoms (eating disorders, body dysmorphic disorder 
including muscle dysmorphia, and body integrity dysphoria).
5.1 Synthesis and conclusions
Key differences in our model (compared to other available 
models) are that we (a) distinguish the three orthogonal dimensions

Möllmann et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1231640
Frontiers in Psychology 12 frontiersin.orgof body representations and therefore provide a structuring system of 
categories, (b) distinguish body schema from body image, as these 
different functions may also differentially relate to disorders or 
conditions (e.g., as causal risk factor versus correlate), and (c) 
emphasize the sensory source more strongly in the first place (via a 
separate dimension) to then differentiate along the sensory input.
With the focus on the structural model in the current review, 
we  may draw several conclusions about the amount of research 
activity to date. We  identified certain major areas both in basic 
research and in relation to clinical conditions. Significantly more 
studies have addressed the body image than the body schema. And 
significantly more studies have focused on (certain) exteroceptive 
than interoceptive information. We believe that this is due to not only 
the possibly higher perceived relevance, but also with the higher 
complexity associated with investigating the other aspects, especially 
for research in children. The studies that we have reviewed actually 
indicate that this research may be expanded. For example regarding 
the different functions of body representation, we found evidence for 
developmental effects, indicating certain sensitive phases potentially 
associated with an increased risk for developing distorted body 
representations and thus maybe even for the development of mental 
disorders. For body schema, for example, (at least) two phases 
appeared relevant: unusual body-related experiences at a very young 
age, such as care routines after pre-term birth, can affect body schema 
development. Further, the growth spurt during puberty demands 
major adaptations in existing body representations due to the fast 
changes in body morphology. These findings indicate that it might 
be worthwhile to investigate the body schema more intensively. Due 
to the absence of longitudinal studies, we might so far only hypothesize 
that the early single effects of unusual body-related experiences during 
infancy could initiate developmental cascades. The accumulating 
effects may unfold only during puberty, as another sensitive phase, 
and only lead to permanent changes in the developmental result at this 
point. For adult AN and weight-restored AN as well as for BID, body 
schema distortions have been shown. Especially the findings on the 
persistence of these distortions even after treatment (also present for 
the perceptual body image) in AN suggest that these aspects may not 
yet be  sufficiently targeted in the respective treatments, while 
potentially playing a role for relapse.
A similar imbalance in research activity was observed with regard 
to sensory sources. There are significantly more studies on 
exteroceptive sources (esp. visual) compared to interoception and 
proprioception. At the same time, the findings on interoception for 
distorted body representations and the clinical conditions indicate 
that the relevance of this source might currently be  still 
underestimated. For example, although interoceptive accuracy was 
found to be  associated to disordered eating in young people and 
reduced in (adult) AN, there are no or only single studies on the 
relevance of interoceptive information for BDD and MD in the 
transdiagnostic comparison. Furthermore, there are no experimental 
studies on body size estimations in BDD and MD, despite the known 
abnormalities in the AN.
5.2 Future research directions
To improve the understanding of the transdiagnostic role of body 
representations in the context of body-related (mental) disorders and to identify relevant new research questions, it seems reasonable to first 
depict the current state of research with systematic reviews and meta-
analyzes. The structural model might be helpful in stimulating this 
kind of knowledge accumulation, as it allows both, a theory-driven 
and empirically driven approach to identify relevant and/or under-
researched aspects of body representations (i.e., cells in the three-
dimensional model) for any disorders or conditions. Similarly, it can 
be used to identify which aspects of body representations are already 
targeted in existing treatments. Based on our initial overview in the 
current article, several possible research gaps emerged, which may 
be  substantiated in a-priori  designed studies (e.g., the role of 
interoception across several disorders).
The second part of our conceptual framework  - the dynamic 
process model - suggests different pathways of information processing 
and allows testing these pathways more closely in the formation, 
maintenance, or modification of distorted body representations. This 
might be especially useful from the developmental psychopathology 
perspective, if one aims to systematically investigate the “risk-factor 
status” (p. 341; Kraemer et al., 1997 ) of a body representation. For 
example, the formation  of distorted body representations might 
be mainly driven by distorted (or absent) sensory input underlying 
dynamic short-term body representations (i.e., representations about 
how the own body currently is). If these unregular experiences take 
place during potential sensitive developmental phases, they may have 
the potential to initiate cascade effects spilling over to and stabilizing 
in long-term body representations (i.e., representations about how the 
own body usually is; see pathway 1 in the process model depicted in 
part b of Figure 1 ). This is because according to the process model, 
long-term representations themselves are constructed by accumulating 
short-term information about the own body. As mentioned above, 
atypical sensory stimulation due to premature birth ( Butti et al., 2020 ) 
or the lack of visual input during the first months of life ( Röder et al., 
2004 ) might have profound effects in the development of the body 
schema and perceptual body image, respectively. In contrast, the 
maintenance  of distorted body representations might be mainly driven 
by two additional pathways depicted in the process model. The first 
pathway is independent from the actual output and relies on the 
interplay between short-term and long-term representations (see 
pathway 2 in the process model). Once established, distortions can 
be imported from long-term memory and thus affect the way the body 
is dynamically represented as information from long-term memory is 
typically combined with the actual sensory input in working memory 
(e.g., for AN, Gadsby, 2017 ). As a consequence, precisely those now 
distorted short-term representations are used to further stabilize the 
distorted long-term representations. Another pathway possibly 
involved in the maintenance of distorted body representations is more 
dependent on the actual output (see pathway 3 in the process model). 
If distortions in body representations result in changes in body-related 
behaviors, as for example pretending behavior in BID or camouflaging 
in BDD, these outputs in themselves create newly distorted input that 
may further stabilize the distorted representations. The process model 
thus provides first testable hypotheses about how (distorted) body 
representations develop and how they are maintained. To clarify 
causality, future experimental psychopathology research is needed. 
Such research might for example test, whether experimentally 
manipulating sensory input and/or behavioral output has an impact 
on psychopathology. Finally, the process model can also be used for 
developing ideas regarding the modification  of distorted body

Möllmann et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1231640
Frontiers in Psychology 13 frontiersin.orgrepresentations. This is especially relevant if one wants to proceed 
investigating a specific body representation, which has ideally already 
been identified as a risk factor. Consequently, the questions arise as to 
whether (1) this specific body representation can be modified at all 
and (2) the modifications lead to relevant changes in the disorder 
pathology ( Kraemer et al., 1997 ). If so, these findings can directly 
inform translational research regarding prevention and 
treatment approaches.
Author contributions
AM: conception, writing–original draft, and writing–review and 
editing. NH: conception, writing–original draft, writing–review and 
editing, resources, and supervision. AH: conception, writing–original 
draft, writing–review and editing, and supervision. All authors 
contributed to the article and approved the submitted version.
Funding
This work was funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft  
(DFG, German Research Foundation) – MO4224/1–1, Project 
463,145,403.Acknowledgments
We acknowledge the financial support of the German Research 
Foundation (DFG) and the Open Access Publication Fund of Bielefeld 
University for the article processing charge. The content of this article 
has appeared in a previous version online as a preprint ( Möllmann 
et al., 2023 ).
Conflict of interest
The authors declare that the research was conducted in the 
absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Publisher’s note
All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the 
authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated 
organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the 
reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or 
claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or 
endorsed by the publisher.
References
Albertini, R. S., and Phillips, K. A. (1999). Thirty-three cases of body dysmorphic 
disorder in children and adolescents. J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry  38, 453–459. 
doi: 10.1097/00004583-199904000-00019
American Psychiatric Association. (2022) Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental 
disorders . Virginia, United States: American Psychiatric Association.
Aoyama, A., Krummenacher, P ., Palla, A., Hilti, L. M., and Brugger, P . (2012). Impaired 
spatial-temporal integration of touch in xenomelia (body integrity identity disorder). 
Spat. Cogn. Comput.  12, 96–110. doi: 10.1080/13875868.2011.603773
Assaiante, C., Barlaam, F., Cignetti, F., and Vaugoyeau, M. (2014). Body schema 
building during childhood and adolescence: A neurosensory approach. Neurophysiol. 
Clin.  44, 3–12. doi: 10.1016/j.neucli.2013.10.125
Azañón, E., Tamè, L., Maravita, A., Linkenauger, S. A., Ferrè, E. R., 
Tajadura-Jiménez, A., et al. (2016). Multimodal contributions to body representation. 
Multisens. Res.  29, 635–661. doi: 10.1163/22134808-00002531
Badde, S., Röder, B., and Heed, T. (2019). Feeling a touch to the hand on the foot. Curr. 
Biol.  29, 1491–1497.e4. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2019.02.060
Badoud, D., and Tsakiris, M. (2017). From the body’s viscera to the body’s image: is 
there a link between interoception and body image concerns? Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev.  
77, 237–246. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2017.03.017
Bahrick, L. E., and Watson, J. S. (1985). Detection of intermodal proprioceptive–visual 
contingency as a potential basis of self-perception in infancy. Dev. Psychol.  21, 963–973. 
doi: 10.1037/0012-1649.21.6.963
Beckmann, N., Baumann, P ., Herpertz, S., Trojan, J., and Diers, M. (2021). How the 
unconscious mind controls body movements: body schema distortion in anorexia 
nervosa. Int. J. Eat. Disord.  54, 578–586. doi: 10.1002/eat.23451
Begum Ali, J., Spence, C., and Bremner, A. J. (2015). Human infants’ ability to perceive 
touch in external space develops postnatally. Curr. Biol.  25, R978–R979. doi: 10.1016/j.
cub.2015.08.055
Behrens, S. C., Meneguzzo, P ., Favaro, A., Teufel, M., Skoda, E.-M., Lindner, M., et al. 
(2021). Weight bias and linguistic body representation in anorexia nervosa: findings 
from the BodyTalk project. Eur. Eat. Disord. Rev.  29, 204–215. doi: 10.1002/erv.2812
Berlucchi, G., and Aglioti, S. (1997). The body in the brain: neural bases of corporeal 
awareness. Trends Neurosci.  20, 560–564. doi: 10.1016/S0166-2236(97)01136-3
Berlucchi, G., and Aglioti, S. M. (2010). The body in the brain revisited. Exp. Brain 
Res. 200, 25–35. doi: 10.1007/s00221-009-1970-7
Blom, R. M., Hennekam, R. C., and Denys, D. (2012). Body integrity identity disorder. 
PLoS One  7:e34702. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0034702
Bottini, G., Brugger, P ., and Sedda, A. (2015). Is the desire for amputation related to 
disturbed emotion processing? A multiple case study analysis in BIID. Neurocase  21, 
394–402. doi: 10.1080/13554794.2014.902969Botvinick, M., and Cohen, J. (1998). Rubber hands ‘feel’ touch that eyes see. Nature  
391:756. doi: 10.1038/35784
Brang, D., McGeoch, P . D., and Ramachandran, V . S. (2008). Apotemnophilia: A 
neurological disorder. Neuroreport  19, 1305–1306. doi: 10.1097/WNR.0b013e32830abc4d
Bremner, A. J. (2017). The origins of body representations in early life. In VignemontF. 
de and A. J. T. Alsmith The subject’s matter: Self-consciousness and the body . Cambridge, 
MA: The MIT Press, pp. 3–31.
Bremner, A. J. (2022). “Developmental origins of bodily awareness” in The Routledge 
handbook of bodily awareness . eds. A. J. T. Alsmith and M. R. Longo (Abingdon: 
Routledge), 279–297.
Brianza, G., Tajadura-Jiménez, A., Maggioni, E., Pittera, D., Bianchi-Berthouze, N., 
and Obrist, M. (2019). “ As light as your scent: effects of smell and sound on body image 
perception” in Human-computer interaction – INTERACT 2019 . eds. D. Lamas, F. 
Loizides, L. Nacke, H. Petrie, M. Winckler and P . Zaphiris (Berlin: Springer International 
Publishing), 179–202.
Brownell, C. A., Nichols, S. R., Svetlova, M., Zerwas, S., and Ramani, G. (2010). The 
head bone’s connected to the neck bone: when do toddlers represent their own body 
topography? Child Dev.  81, 797–810. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-8624.2010.01434.x
Brownell, C. A., Svetlova, M., and Nichols, S. R. (2012). “Emergence and early 
development of the body image” in Early development of body representations . eds. C. A. 
Brownell and V . Slaughter (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press), 37–58.
Brownell, C. A., Zerwas, S., and Ramani, G. B. (2007). “So big”: the development of 
body self-awareness in toddlers. Child Dev.  78, 1426–1440. doi: 10.1111/j.14  
67-8624.2007.01075.x
Brugger, P ., Christen, M., Jellestad, L., and Hänggi, J. (2016). Limb amputation and 
other disability desires as a medical condition. Lancet Psychiatry  3, 1176–1186. doi: 
10.1016/S2215-0366(16)30265-6
Burin, D., Garbarini, F., Bruno, V ., Fossataro, C., Destefanis, C., Berti, A., et al. (2017). 
Movements and body ownership: evidence from the rubber hand illusion after 
mechanical limb immobilization. Neuropsychologia  107, 41–47. doi: 10.1016/j.
neuropsychologia.2017.11.004
Butti, N., Montirosso, R., Giusti, L., Borgatti, R., and Urgesi, C. (2020). Premature 
birth affects visual body representation and body schema in preterm children. Brain 
Cogn.  145:105612. doi: 10.1016/j.bandc.2020.105612
Capodici, A., Pennisi, A., Rizzo, G., Falzone, A., and Vicario, C. M. (2023). 
Interoceptive and affective alterations in body integrity dysphoria: an online self-
reporting study. Psychopathology  1–9, 1–9. doi: 10.1159/000532076
Carruthers, G. (2008). Types of body representation and the sense of embodiment. 
Conscious. Cogn.  17, 1302–1316. doi: 10.1016/j.concog.2008.02.001

Möllmann et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1231640
Frontiers in Psychology 14 frontiersin.orgCase, L. K., Wilson, R. C., and Ramachandran, V . S. (2012). Diminished size–weight 
illusion in anorexia nervosa: evidence for visuo-proprioceptive integration deficit. Exp. 
Brain Res.  217, 79–87. doi: 10.1007/s00221-011-2974-7
Cash, T. F., and Smolak, L. (2011). Body image: A handbook of science, practice, and 
prevention . 2nd Edn . New Y ork: Guilford Press.
Ceunen, E., Vlaeyen, J. W . S., and Van Diest, I. (2016). On the origin of Interoception. 
Front. Psychol.  7:743. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00743
Chakraborty, S., Saetta, G., Simon, C., Lenggenhager, B., and Ruddy, K. (2021). Could 
brain–computer Interface be a new therapeutic approach for body integrity dysphoria? 
Front. Hum. Neurosci.  15:830. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2021.699830
Cowie, D., Makin, T. R., and Bremner, A. J. (2013). Children’s responses to the rubber-
hand illusion reveal dissociable pathways in body representation. Psychol. Sci.  24, 
762–769. doi: 10.1177/0956797612462902
Cowie, D., Sterling, S., and Bremner, A. J. (2016). The development of multisensory 
body representation and awareness continues to 10 years of age: evidence from the 
rubber hand illusion. J. Exp. Child Psychol.  142, 230–238. doi: 10.1016/j.jecp.2015.10.003
Craig, A. D. (2002). How do you feel? Interoception: the sense of the physiological 
condition of the body. Nat. Rev. Neurosci.  3, Article 8., 655–666. doi: 10.1038/nrn894
Cunningham, M. L., Griffiths, S., Mitchison, D., Mond, J. M., Castle, D., and 
Murray, S. B. (2017). Muscle dysmorphia: an overview of clinical features and treatment 
options. J. Cogn. Psychother.  31, 255–271. doi: 10.1891/0889-8391.31.4.255
Damiano, S. R., Gregg, K. J., Spiel, E. C., McLean, S. A., Wertheim, E. H., and 
Paxton, S. J. (2015a). Relationships between body size attitudes and body image of 
4-year-old boys and girls, and attitudes of their fathers and mothers. Journal of. Eat. 
Disord.  3:16. doi: 10.1186/s40337-015-0048-0
Damiano, S. R., Paxton, S. J., Wertheim, E. H., McLean, S. A., and Gregg, K. J. (2015b). 
Dietary restraint of 5-year-old girls: associations with internalization of the thin ideal 
and maternal, media, and peer influences. Int. J. Eat. Disord.  48, 1166–1169. doi: 
10.1002/eat.22432
Dary, Z., Lenggenhager, B., Lagarde, S., Medina Villalon, S., Bartolomei, F., and 
Lopez, C. (2023). Neural bases of the bodily self as revealed by electrical brain 
stimulation: A systematic review. Hum. Brain Mapp.  44, 2936–2959. doi: 10.1002/
hbm.26253
De Haan, E. H. F., and Dijkerman, H. C. (2020). Somatosensation in the brain: A 
theoretical re-evaluation and a new model. Trends Cogn. Sci.  24, 529–541. doi: 10.1016/j.
tics.2020.04.003
de Haan, A. M., Smit, M., Van der Stigchel, S., Keyner, S. A., and Dijkerman, H. C. 
(2018). Body representation does not lag behind in updating for the pubertal growth 
spurt. J. Exp. Child Psychol.  175, 48–66. doi: 10.1016/j.jecp.2018.05.002
De Kieviet, J. F., Piek, J. P ., Aarnoudse-Moens, C. S., and Oosterlaan, J. (2009). Motor 
development in very preterm and very low-birth-weight children from birth to 
adolescence: A meta-analysis. JAMA  302, 2235–2242. doi: 10.1001/jama.2009.1708
De Vignemont, F. (2010). Body schema and body image–pros and cons. 
Neuropsychologia  48, 669–680. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2009.09.022
Debarnot, U., Huber, C., Guillot, A., and Schwartz, S. (2018). Sensorimotor 
representation and functional motor changes following short-term arm immobilization. 
Behav. Neurosci.  132, 595–603. doi: 10.1037/bne0000274
Di Rosa, G., Cavallaro, T., Alibrandi, A., Marseglia, L., Lamberti, M., Giaimo, E., et al. 
(2016). Predictive role of early milestones-related psychomotor profiles and long-term 
neurodevelopmental pitfalls in preterm infants. Early Hum. Dev.  101, 49–55. doi: 
10.1016/j.earlhumdev.2016.04.012
Dohnt, H., and Tiggemann, M. (2006). The contribution of peer and media influences 
to the development of body satisfaction and self-esteem in young girls: A prospective 
study. Dev. Psychol.  42, 929–936. doi: 10.1037/0012-1649.42.5.929
Drew, R. E., Ferentzi, E., Tihanyi, B. T., and Köteles, F. (2020). There are no short-term 
longitudinal associations among interoceptive accuracy, external body orientation, and 
body image dissatisfaction. Clin. Psychol. Europe  2:e2701. doi: 10.32872/cpe.v2i2.2701
Durso, L. E., and Latner, J. D. (2008). Understanding self-directed stigma: development 
of the weight Bias internalization scale. Obesity  16 Suppl 2, S80–S86. doi: 10.1038/
oby.2008.448
Duschek, S., Werner, N. S., Reyes del Paso, G. A., and Schandry, R. (2015). The 
contributions of interoceptive awareness to cognitive and affective facets of body 
experience. J. Individ. Differ.  36, 110–118. doi: 10.1027/1614-0001/a000165
Emanuelsen, L., Drew, R., and Köteles, F. (2015). Interoceptive sensitivity, body image 
dissatisfaction, and body awareness in healthy individuals. Scand. J. Psychol.  56, 167–174. 
doi: 10.1111/sjop.12183
Enander, J., Andersson, E., Mataix-Cols, D., Lichtenstein, L., Alström, K., 
Andersson, G., et al. (2016). Therapist guided internet based cognitive behavioural 
therapy for body dysmorphic disorder: single blind randomised controlled trial. BMJ  
352:i241. doi: 10.1136/bmj.i241
Engel, M. M., and Keizer, A. (2017). Body representation disturbances in visual 
perception and affordance perception persist in eating disorder patients after completing 
treatment. Sci. Rep.  7:16184. doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-16362-w
Ernst, M. O., and Banks, M. S. (2002). Humans integrate visual and haptic information 
in a statistically optimal fashion. Nature  415, 429–433. doi: 10.1038/415429aErnst, M. O., and Bülthoff, H. H. (2004). Merging the senses into a robust percept. 
Trends Cogn. Sci.  8, 162–169. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2004.02.002
Eshkevari, E., Rieger, E., Longo, M. R., Haggard, P ., and Treasure, J. (2012). Increased 
plasticity of the bodily self in eating disorders. Psychol. Med.  42, 819–828. doi: 10.1017/
S0033291711002091
Fernández de la Cruz, L., Enander, J., Rück, C., Wilhelm, S., Phillips, K. A., Steketee, G., 
et al. (2021). Empirically defining treatment response and remission in body dysmorphic 
disorder. Psychol. Med.  51, 83–89. doi: 10.1017/S0033291719003003
Feusner, J. D., Moody, T., Hembacher, E., Townsend, J., McKinley, M., Moller, H., et al. 
(2010). Abnormalities of visual processing and frontostriatal systems in body dysmorphic 
disorder. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry  67, 197–205. doi: 10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2009.190
Feusner, J. D., Townsend, J., Bystritsky, A., and Bookheimer, S. (2007). Visual 
information processing of faces in body dysmorphic disorder. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry  64, 
1417–1425. doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.64.12.1417
First, M. B. (2005). Desire for amputation of a limb: paraphilia, psychosis, or a new 
type of identity disorder. Psychol. Med.  35, 919–928. doi: 10.1017/S0033291704003320
First, M. B., and Fisher, C. E. (2011). Body integrity identity disorder: the persistent 
desire to acquire a physical disability. Psychopathology  45, 3–14. doi: 10.1159/000330503
Fischer, D., Berberich, G., Zaudig, M., Krauseneck, T., Weiss, S., and Pollatos, O. 
(2016). Interoceptive processes in anorexia nervosa in the time course of cognitive-
behavioral therapy: A pilot study. Front. Psych.  7:199. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2016.00199
Gadsby, S. (2017). Distorted body representations in anorexia nervosa. Conscious. 
Cogn.  51, 17–33. doi: 10.1016/j.concog.2017.02.015
Gadsby, S. (2021). Visual self-misperception in eating disorders. Perception  50, 
933–949. doi: 10.1177/03010066211056808
Gallagher, S. (1986). Body image and body schema: A conceptual clarification. J. Mind 
Behav.  7, 541–554.
Gallagher, S. (2005). How the body shapes the mind . Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gandevia, S. C., and Phegan, C. M. L. (1999). Perceptual distortions of the human 
body image produced by local anaesthesia, pain and cutaneous stimulation. J. Physiol.  
514, 609–616. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-7793.1999.609ae.x
Gandola, M., Zapparoli, L., Saetta, G., Reverberi, C., Salvato, G., Squarza, S. A. C., et al. 
(2021). Brain abnormalities in individuals with a desire for a healthy limb amputation: 
Somatosensory, motoric or both? A task-based fMRI verdict. Brain Sci.  11:Article 9. doi: 
10.3390/brainsci11091248
Gardner, R. M., and Brown, D. L. (2014). Body size estimation in anorexia nervosa: A 
brief review of findings from 2003 through 2013. Psychiatry Res.  219, 407–410. doi: 
10.1016/j.psychres.2014.06.029
Giummarra, M. J., Bradshaw, J. L., Hilti, L. M., Nicholls, M. E. R., and Brugger, P . 
(2012). Paralyzed by desire: A new type of body integrity identity disorder. Cogn. Behav. 
Neurol.  25, 34–41. doi: 10.1097/WNN.0b013e318249865a
Giummarra, M. J., Bradshaw, J. L., Nicholls, M. E. R., Hilti, L. M., and Brugger, P . 
(2011). Body integrity identity disorder: deranged body processing, right Fronto-parietal 
dysfunction, and phenomenological experience of body incongruity. Neuropsychol. Rev.  
21, 320–333. doi: 10.1007/s11065-011-9184-8
Glashouwer, K. A., Van der Veer, R. M. L., Adipatria, F., De Jong, P . J., and Vocks, S. (2019). 
The role of body image disturbance in the onset, maintenance, and relapse of anorexia 
nervosa: A systematic review. Clin. Psychol. Rev.  74:101771. doi: 10.1016/j.cpr.2019.101771
Greenfield, K., Ropar, D., Themelis, K., Ratcliffe, N., and Newport, R. (2017). 
Developmental changes in sensitivity to spatial and temporal properties of sensory 
integration underlying body representation. Multisens. Res.  30, 467–484. doi: 
10.1163/22134808-00002591
Grilo, C. M., Crosby, R. D., and Machado, P . P . P . (2019). Examining the distinctiveness 
of body image concerns in patients with anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa. Int. J. 
Eat. Disord.  52, 1229–1236. doi: 10.1002/eat.23161
Grocholewski, A., Kliem, S., and Heinrichs, N. (2012). Selective attention to imagined 
facial ugliness is specific to body dysmorphic disorder. Body Image  9, 261–269. doi: 
10.1016/j.bodyim.2012.01.002
Grunewald, W ., Fogelberg, S., Ferguson, W ., Hines, S., Fortenberry, B., and Smith, A. R. 
(2023). Longitudinal relationships between specific domains of interoception and 
muscle dysmorphia symptoms. Eat. Behav.  48:101686. doi: 10.1016/j.eatbeh.2022.101686
Guardia, D., Conversy, L., Jardri, R., Lafargue, G., Thomas, P ., Dodin, V ., et al. (2012). 
Imagining One’s own and someone Else’s body actions: dissociation in anorexia nervosa. 
PLoS One  7:e43241. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0043241
Hartmann, A. S., Greenberg, J. L., and Wilhelm, S. (2013). The relationship between 
anorexia nervosa and body dysmorphic disorder. Clin. Psychol. Rev.  33, 675–685. doi: 
10.1016/j.cpr.2013.04.002
Herpertz, S., Fichter, M., Herpertz-Dahlmann, B., Hilbert, A., Tuschen-Caffier, B., 
Vocks, S., et al. (2019). S3-Leitlinie Diagnostik und Behandlung der Essstörungen . Berlin: 
Springer.
Herwig, A. (2015). Linking perception and action by structure or process? Toward an 
integrative perspective. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev.  52, 105–116. doi: 10.1016/j.
neubiorev.2015.02.013

Möllmann et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1231640
Frontiers in Psychology 15 frontiersin.orgHerwig, A., Prinz, W ., and Waszak, F. (2007). Two modes of sensorimotor integration 
in intention-based and stimulus-based actions. Q. J. Exp. Psychol.  60, 1540–1554. doi: 
10.1080/17470210601119134
Hilti, L. M., Hänggi, J., Vitacco, D. A., Kraemer, B., Palla, A., Luechinger, R., et al. 
(2013). The desire for healthy limb amputation: structural brain correlates and clinical 
features of xenomelia. Brain  136, 318–329. doi: 10.1093/brain/aws316
Holmes, N. P ., and Spence, C. (2004). The body schema and multisensory 
representation(s) of peripersonal space. Cogn. Process.  5, 94–105. doi: 10.1007/
s10339-004-0013-3
Huang, R.-S., Chen, C., Tran, A. T., Holstein, K. L., and Sereno, M. I. (2012). Mapping 
multisensory parietal face and body areas in humans. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.  109, 
18114–18119. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1207946109
Huber, R., Ghilardi, M. F., Massimini, M., Ferrarelli, F., Riedner, B. A., Peterson, M. J., 
et al. (2006). Arm immobilization causes cortical plastic changes and locally decreases 
sleep slow wave activity. Nat. Neurosci.  9, 1169–1176. doi: 10.1038/nn1758
Immanuel, S. A., Pamula, Y ., Kohler, M., Martin, J., Kennedy, D., Nalivaiko, E., et al. 
(2014). Heartbeat evoked potentials during sleep and daytime behavior in children with 
sleep-disordered breathing. Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med.  190, 1149–1157. doi: 10.1164/
rccm.201405-0920OC
Jacquemot, A. M. M., and Park, R. (2020). The role of Interoception in the 
pathogenesis and treatment of anorexia nervosa: A narrative review. Front. Psych.  11:281. 
doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2020.00281
Kaplan, R. A., Enticott, P . G., Hohwy, J., Castle, D. J., and Rossell, S. L. (2014). Is body 
dysmorphic disorder associated with abnormal bodily self-awareness? A study using the 
rubber hand illusion. PLoS One  9:e99981. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0099981
Kasten, E. (2009). Body Integrity Identity Disorder (BIID): Befragung von Betroffenen 
und Erklärungsansätze. Fortschr. Neurol.  77, 16–24. doi: 10.1055/s-0028-1100837
Keizer, A., and Engel, M. (2022). “Body representation in anorexia nervosa” in The 
Routledge handbook of bodily awareness . eds. A. J. T. Alsmith and M. R. Longo 
(Abingdon: Routledge)
Keizer, A., Engel, M. M., Bonekamp, J., and Van Elburg, A. (2019). Hoop training: A pilot 
study assessing the effectiveness of a multisensory approach to treatment of body image 
disturbance in anorexia nervosa. Eat. Weight.  24, 953–958. doi: 10.1007/s40519-018-0585-z
Keizer, A., Smeets, M. A. M., Dijkerman, H. C., Uzunbajakau, S. A., Van Elburg, A., 
and Postma, A. (2013). Too fat to fit through the door: First evidence for disturbed 
body-scaled action in anorexia nervosa during locomotion. PLoS One  8:e64602. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pone.0064602
Keizer, A., Smeets, M. A. M., Dijkerman, H. C., Van den Hout, M., Klugkist, I., Van 
Elburg, A., et al. (2011). Tactile body image disturbance in anorexia nervosa. Psychiatry 
Res. 190, 115–120. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2011.04.031
Keizer, A., Elburg, A.Van, Helms, R., and Dijkerman, H. C. (2016). A virtual reality 
full body illusion improves body image disturbance in anorexia nervosa. PLoS One , 
11:e0163921. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0163921
Kerr, K. L., Moseman, S. E., Avery, J. A., Bodurka, J., Zucker, N. L., and Simmons, W . K. 
(2016). Altered insula activity during visceral Interoception in weight-restored patients 
with anorexia nervosa. Neuropsychopharmacology  41, 521–528. doi: 10.1038/
npp.2015.174
Khalsa, S. S., Adolphs, R., Cameron, O. G., Critchley, H. D., Davenport, P . W ., 
Feinstein, J. S., et al. (2018). Interoception and mental health: A roadmap. Biol. Psychiatry  
3, 501–513. doi: 10.1016/j.bpsc.2017.12.004
Kirsch, W ., and Kunde, W . (2023). On the role of Interoception in body and object 
perception: A multisensory-integration account. Perspect. Psychol. Sci.  18, 321–339. doi: 
10.1177/17456916221096138
Koch, A., and Pollatos, O. (2014). Interoceptive sensitivity, body weight and eating 
behavior in children: A prospective study. Front. Psychol.  5:1003. doi: 10.3389/
fpsyg.2014.01003
Kollei, I., and Martin, A. (2014). Body-related cognitions, affect and post-event 
processing in body dysmorphic disorder. J. Behav. Ther. Exp. Psychiatry  45, 144–151. doi: 
10.1016/j.jbtep.2013.09.005
Kraemer, H. C., Kazdin, A. E., Offord, D. R., Kessler, R. C., Jensen, P . S., and 
Kupfer, D. J. (1997). Coming to terms with the terms of risk. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry  54, 
337–343. doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.1997.01830160065009
Krebs, G., Fernández de la Cruz, L., Monzani, B., Bowyer, L., Anson, M., Cadman, J., 
et al. (2017). Long-term outcomes of cognitive-behavioral therapy for adolescent body 
dysmorphic disorder. Behav. Ther.  48, 462–473. doi: 10.1016/j.beth.2017.01.001
Kunstman, J. W ., Clerkin, E. M., Palmer, K., Peters, M. T., Dodd, D. R., and Smith, A. R. 
(2016). The power within: the experimental manipulation of power interacts with trait 
BDD symptoms to predict interoceptive accuracy. J. Behav. Ther. Exp. Psychiatry  50, 
178–186. doi: 10.1016/j.jbtep.2015.08.003
Langer, N., Hänggi, J., Müller, N. A., Simmen, H. P ., and Jäncke, L. (2012). Effects of 
limb immobilization on brain plasticity. Neurology  78, 182–188. doi: 10.1212/
WNL.0b013e31823fcd9c
Latner, J. D., Durso, L. E., and Mond, J. M. (2013). Health and health-related quality 
of life among treatment-seeking overweight and obese adults: associations with 
internalized weight bias. Journal of. Eat. Disord.  1:3. doi: 10.1186/2050-2974-1-3Lenggenhager, B., Hilti, L., Palla, A., Macauda, G., and Brugger, P . (2014). Vestibular 
stimulation does not diminish the desire for amputation. Cortex  54, 210–212. doi: 
10.1016/j.cortex.2014.02.004
Lesur, M. R., Stussi, Y ., Bertrand, P ., Delplanque, S., and Lenggenhager, B. (2023). 
Different armpits under my new nose: olfactory sex but not gender affects implicit 
measures of embodiment. Biol. Psychol.  176:108477. doi: 10.1016/j.
biopsycho.2022.108477
Linkenauger, S. A., Wong, H. Y ., Geuss, M., Stefanucci, J. K., McCulloch, K. C., 
Bülthoff, H. H., et al. (2015). The perceptual homunculus: the perception of the relative 
proportions of the human body. J. Exp. Psychol. Gen.  144, 103–113. doi: 10.1037/
xge0000028
Longo, M. R. (2016). “Types of body representation” in Foundations of embodied 
cognition: Perceptual and emotional embodiment . eds. Y . Coello and M. H. Fischer 
(Abingdon: Routledge/Taylor & Francis Group), 117–134.
Longo, M. R. (2022). Distortion of mental body representations. Trends Cogn. Sci.  26, 
241–254. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2021.11.005
Lydecker, J. A., Simpson, L., Smith, S. R., White, M. A., and Grilo, C. M. (2022). 
Preoccupation in bulimia nervosa, binge-eating disorder, anorexia nervosa, and higher 
weight. Int. J. Eat. Disord.  55, 76–84. doi: 10.1002/eat.23630
Marshall, A. C., Gentsch, A., and Schütz-Bosbach, S. (2018). The interaction between 
interoceptive and action states within a framework of predictive coding. Front. Psychol.  
9:180. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.00180
Martel, M., Cardinali, L., Bertonati, G., Jouffrais, C., Finos, L., Farnè, A., et al. (2019). 
Somatosensory-guided tool use modifies arm representation for action. Sci. Rep.  9:5517. 
doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-41928-1
Martel, M., Finos, L., Koun, E., Farnè, A., and Roy, A. C. (2021). The long 
developmental trajectory of body representation plasticity following tool use. Sci. Rep.  
11:559. doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-79476-8
Martin, E., Dourish, C. T., Rotshtein, P ., Spetter, M. S., and Higgs, S. (2019). 
Interoception and disordered eating: A systematic review. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev.  107, 
166–191. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2019.08.020
Masten, A. S., and Cicchetti, D. (2010). Developmental cascades. Dev. Psychopathol.  
22, 491–495. doi: 10.1017/S0954579410000222
Mata, F., Verdejo-Roman, J., Soriano-Mas, C., and Verdejo-Garcia, A. (2015). Insula 
tuning towards external eating versus interoceptive input in adolescents with overweight 
and obesity. Appetite  93, 24–30. doi: 10.1016/j.appet.2015.03.024
Mataix-Cols, D., Fernández de la Cruz, L., Isomura, K., Anson, M., Turner, C., 
Monzani, B., et al. (2015). A pilot randomized controlled trial of cognitive-behavioral 
therapy for adolescents with body dysmorphic disorder. J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. 
Psychiatry  54, 895–904. doi: 10.1016/j.jaac.2015.08.011
McGeoch, P . D., Brang, D., Song, T., Lee, R. R., Huang, M., and Ramachandran, V . S. 
(2011). Xenomelia: A new right parietal lobe syndrome. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry  
82, 1314–1319. doi: 10.1136/jnnp-2011-300224
Medina, J. (2022). “Distinguishing body representations” in The Routledge handbook 
of bodily awareness . eds. A. J. T. Alsmith and M. R. Longo (Abingdon: Routledge)
Meltzoff, A. N., and Moore, M. (1994). Imitation, memory, and the representation of 
persons. Infant Behav. Dev.  17, 83–99. doi: 10.1016/0163-6383(94)90024-8
Meltzoff, A. N., Williamson, R. A., and Marshall, P . J. (2013). “Developmental 
perspectives on action science: lessons from infant imitation and cognitive neuroscience” 
in Action science: Foundations of an emerging discipline . eds. W . Prinz, M. Beisert and A. 
Herwig (Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press), 281–306.
Meneguzzo, P ., Dal Brun, D., Collantoni, E., Meregalli, V ., Todisco, P ., Favaro, A., et al. 
(2023). Linguistic embodiment in typical and atypical anorexia nervosa: evidence from 
an image-word matching task. Eur. Eat. Disord. Rev.  31, 837–849. doi: 10.1002/erv.3008
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1962). Phenomenology of perception (C. Smith, trans.) . Abingdon: 
Routledge & Kegan Paul Ltd.
Möllmann, A., Heinrichs, N., and Herwig, A. (2020a). Body representation in body 
dysmorphic disorder and body integrity dysphoria – a conceptual framework and 
systematic review. PROSPERO  2020:CRD42020220303
Möllmann, A., Heinrichs, N., and Herwig, A. (2023). A conceptual framework on 
body representations and their relevance for mental disorders. PsyArXiv  2023:234. doi: 
10.31234/osf.io/gsepz
Möllmann, A., Hunger, A., Dusend, C., van den Hout, M., and Buhlmann, U. (2019). 
Gazing at facial features increases dissociation and decreases attractiveness ratings in 
non-clinical females – A potential explanation for a common ritual in body dysmorphic 
disorder. PLoS One  14:e0219791. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0219791
Möllmann, A., Hunger, A., Schulz, C., Wilhelm, S., and Buhlmann, U. (2020b). Gazing 
rituals in body dysmorphic disorder. J. Behav. Ther. Exp. Psychiatry  68:101522. doi: 
10.1016/j.jbtep.2019.101522
Murphy, J., Brewer, R., Catmur, C., and Bird, G. (2017). Interoception and 
psychopathology: A developmental neuroscience perspective. Dev. Cogn. Neurosci.  23, 
45–56. doi: 10.1016/j.dcn.2016.12.006
Murray, C. D., Arnold, P ., and Thornton, B. (2000). Presence accompanying induced 
hearing loss: implications for immersive virtual environments. Presence  9, 137–148. doi: 
10.1162/105474600566682

Möllmann et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1231640
Frontiers in Psychology 16 frontiersin.orgMurray, M. M., and Wallace, M. T. (2012). The neural bases of multisensory processes . 
Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press/Taylor & Francis.
Nardini, M., Begus, K., and Mareschal, D. (2013). Multisensory uncertainty reduction 
for hand localization in children and adults. J. Exp. Psychol. Hum. Percept. Perform.  39, 
773–787. doi: 10.1037/a0030719
O’Shaughnessy, B. (1980). The will: A dual aspect theory . Available at: https://
philpapers.org/rec/oshtwa .
Obernolte, C., Schnell, T., and Kasten, E. (2015). The role of specific experiences in 
childhood and youth in the development of body integrity identity disorder (BIID). Am. 
J. Appl. Psychol.  4:1. doi: 10.11648/j.ajap.20150401.11
Olivardia, R., Pope, H. G. Jr., and Hudson, J. I. (2000). Muscle dysmorphia in male 
weightlifters: A case-control study. Am. J. Psychiatry  157, 1291–1296. doi: 10.1176/appi.
ajp.157.8.1291
Paulus, M. P ., Feinstein, J. S., and Khalsa, S. S. (2019). An active inference approach to 
interoceptive psychopathology. Annu. Rev. Clin. Psychol.  15, 97–122. doi: 10.1146/
annurev-clinpsy-050718-095617
Paulus, M. P ., and Stein, M. B. (2006). An insular view of anxiety. Biol. Psychiatry  60, 
383–387. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2006.03.042
Paxton, S. J., and Damiano, S. R. (2017). The development of body image and weight 
bias in childhood. Adv. Child Dev. Behav.  52, 269–298. doi: 10.1016/bs.acdb.2016.10.006
Peng, N.-H., Bachman, J., Jenkins, R., Chen, C.-H., Chang, Y .-C., Chang, Y .-S., et al. 
(2009). Relationships between environmental stressors and stress biobehavioral 
responses of preterm infants in NICU. J. Perinat. Neonatal Nurs.  23, 363–371. doi: 
10.1097/JPN.0b013e3181bdd3fd
Peviani, V ., Melloni, L., and Bottini, G. (2019). Visual and somatosensory information 
contribute to distortions of the body model. Sci. Rep.  9:1. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-49979-0
Pezzulo, G., Rigoli, F., and Friston, K. (2015). Active inference, homeostatic regulation 
and adaptive behavioural control. Prog. Neurobiol.  134, 17–35. doi: 10.1016/j.
pneurobio.2015.09.001
Phillipou, A., Blomeley, D., and Castle, D. J. (2016). Muscling in on body image 
disorders: what is the nosological status of muscle dysmorphia? Aust. N. Z. J. Psychiatry  
50, 380–381. doi: 10.1177/0004867415615951
Phillips, K. A. (2004). Psychosis in body dysmorphic disorder. J. Psychiatr. Res.  38, 
63–72. doi: 10.1016/S0022-3956(03)00098-0
Phillips, K. A., Menard, W ., Quinn, E., Didie, E. R., and Stout, R. L. (2013). A 4-year 
prospective observational follow-up study of course and predictors of course in body 
dysmorphic disorder. Psychol. Med.  43, 1109–1117. doi: 10.1017/S0033291712001730
Pollatos, O., Kurz, A.-L., Albrecht, J., Schreder, T., Kleemann, A. M., Schöpf, V ., et al. 
(2008). Reduced perception of bodily signals in anorexia nervosa. Eat. Behav.  9, 
381–388. doi: 10.1016/j.eatbeh.2008.02.001
Ponari, M., Conson, M., D’ Amico, N. P ., Grossi, D., and Trojano, L. (2012). Mapping 
correspondence between facial mimicry and emotion recognition in healthy subjects. 
Emotion  12, 1398–1403. doi: 10.1037/a0028588
Pope, H. G., Katz, D. L., and Hudson, J. I. (1993). Anorexia nervosa and “reverse 
anorexia” among 108 male bodybuilders. Compr. Psychiatry  34, 406–409. doi: 
10.1016/0010-440X(93)90066-D
Porras-Garcia, B., Exposito-Sanz, E., Ferrer-Garcia, M., Castillero-Mimenza, O., and 
Gutiérrez-Maldonado, J. (2020). Body-related attentional Bias among men with high 
and low muscularity dissatisfaction. J. Clin. Med.  9:1736. doi: 10.3390/jcm9061736
Prinz, W ., Beisert, M., and Herwig, A. (2013). Action science: Foundations of an 
emerging discipline . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Prnjak, K., Jukic, I., Mitchison, D., Griffiths, S., and Hay, P . (2022). Body image as a 
multidimensional concept: A systematic review of body image facets in eating disorders 
and muscle dysmorphia. Body Image  42, 347–360. doi: 10.1016/j.bodyim.2022.07.006
Provenzano, L., Porciello, G., Ciccarone, S., Lenggenhager, B., Tieri, G., Marucci, M., 
et al. (2020). Characterizing body image distortion and bodily self-plasticity in anorexia 
nervosa via Visuo-tactile stimulation in virtual reality. J. Clin. Med.  9:98. doi: 10.3390/
jcm9010098
Puhl, R., and Suh, Y . (2015). Health consequences of weight stigma: implications for obesity 
prevention and treatment. Curr. Obes. Rep.  4, 182–190. doi: 10.1007/s13679-015-0153-z
Raimo, S., Boccia, M., Di Vita, A., Cropano, M., Guariglia, C., Grossi, D., et al. (2021). 
The body across adulthood: on the relation between Interoception and body 
representations. Front. Neurosci.  15:684. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2021.586684
Ramachandran, V . S., and McGeoch, P . (2007). Can vestibular caloric stimulation 
be  used to treat apotemnophilia? Med. Hypotheses  69, 250–252. doi: 10.1016/j.
mehy.2006.12.013
Rat-Fischer, L., O’Regan, J. K., and Fagard, J. (2012). The emergence of tool use during 
the second year of life. J. Exp. Child Psychol.  113, 440–446. doi: 10.1016/j.jecp.2012.06.001
Rautio, D., Jassi, A., Krebs, G., Andrén, P ., Monzani, B., Gumpert, M., et al. (2022). 
Clinical characteristics of 172 children and adolescents with body dysmorphic disorder. 
Eur. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry  31, 133–144. doi: 10.1007/s00787-020-01677-3
Ricciardelli, L. A., McCabe, M. P ., Mussap, A. J., and Holt, K. E. (2009). “Body image 
in preadolescent boys” in Body image, eating disorders, and obesity in youth: Assessment, prevention, and treatment . eds. L. Smolak and J. K. Thompson. 2nd ed (Washington, DC: 
American Psychological Association), 77–96.
Rochat, P . (2010). The innate sense of the body develops to become a public affair by 
2–3 years. Neuropsychologia  48, 738–745. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2009.11.021
Rochat, P ., and Morgan, R. (1995). Spatial determinants in the perception of self-
produced leg movements in 3- to 5-month-old infants. Dev. Psychol.  31, 626–636. doi: 
10.1037/0012-1649.31.4.626
Röder, B., Rösler, F., and Spence, C. (2004). Early vision impairs tactile perception in 
the blind. Curr. Biol.  14, 121–124. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2003.12.054
Romano, D., Sedda, A., Brugger, P ., and Bottini, G. (2015). Body ownership: when 
feeling and knowing diverge. Conscious. Cogn.  34, 140–148. doi: 10.1016/j.
concog.2015.04.008
Saetta, G., Hänggi, J., Gandola, M., Zapparoli, L., Salvato, G., Berlingeri, M., et al. 
(2020). Neural correlates of body integrity dysphoria. Curr. Biol.  30, 2191–2195.e3. doi: 
10.1016/j.cub.2020.04.001
Saetta, G., Ruddy, K., Zapparoli, L., Gandola, M., Salvato, G., Sberna, M., et al. (2022). 
White matter abnormalities in the amputation variant of body integrity dysphoria. 
Cortex  151, 272–280. doi: 10.1016/j.cortex.2022.03.011
Schack, T., and Mechsner, F. (2006). Representation of motor skills in human long-
term memory. Neurosci. Lett.  391, 77–81. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2005.10.009
Schmidt, V . R. L., Behrens, C., Luckhof, M., Eggert, F., Heinrichs, N., and 
Grocholewski, A. (2021). Is there a perceptual basis to olfactory reference disorder? J. 
Obsess.  31:100692. doi: 10.1016/j.jocrd.2021.100692
Schur, E. A., Sanders, M., and Steiner, H. (2000). Body dissatisfaction and dieting in 
young children. Int. J. Eat. Disord.  27, 74–82. doi: 10.1002/(SICI)1098-108X(200001)27
:1<74::AID-EAT8>3.0.CO;2-K
Scotto, C. R., Meugnot, A., Casiez, G., and Toussaint, L. (2020). Short-term 
sensorimotor deprivation impacts feedforward and feedback processes of motor control. 
Front. Neurosci.  14:696. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2020.00696
Shea, C. H., and Wulf, G. (2005). Schema theory: A critical appraisal and reevaluation. 
J. Mot. Behav.  37, 85–102. doi: 10.3200/JMBR.37.2.85-102
Slaughter, V ., and Brownell, C. A. (2011). Early development of body representations . 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Smeets, M. A. M. (1997). The rise and fall of body size estimation research in anorexia 
nervosa: A review and reconceptualization. Eur. Eat. Disord. Rev.  5, 75–95. doi: 10.1002/
(SICI)1099-0968(199706)5:2<75::AID-ERV190>3.0.CO;2-A
Smeets, M. A. M., and Dijksterhuis, G. (2014). Smelly primes – when olfactory primes 
do or do not work. Front. Psychol.  5:96. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00096
Smolak, L. (2011). Body image: A handbook of science, practice, and prevention . 2. New 
Y ork: The Guilford Press.
Spiel, E. C., Paxton, S. J., and Y ager, Z. (2012). Weight attitudes in 3- to 5-year-old 
children: age differences and cross-sectional predictors. Body Image  9, 524–527. doi: 
10.1016/j.bodyim.2012.07.006
Spiel, E. C., Rodgers, R. F., Paxton, S. J., Wertheim, E. H., Damiano, S. R., Gregg, K. J., 
et al. (2016). ‘He’s got his father’s bias’: parental influence on weight bias in young 
children. Br. J. Dev. Psychol.  34, 198–211. doi: 10.1111/bjdp.12123
Steinhausen, H.-C. (2002). The outcome of anorexia nervosa in the 20th century. Am. 
J. Psychiatr.  159, 1284–1293. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.159.8.1284
Stice, E., Desjardins, C. D., Rohde, P ., and Shaw, H. (2021). Sequencing of symptom 
emergence in anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, binge eating disorder, and purging 
disorder and relations of prodromal symptoms to future onset of these disorders. J. 
Abnorm. Psychol.  130, 377–387. doi: 10.1037/abn0000666
Stone, K. D., Dijkerman, H. C., Bekrater-Bodmann, R., and Keizer, A. (2019). Mental 
rotation of feet in individuals with body integrity identity disorder, lower-limb amputees, 
and normally-limbed controls. PLoS One  14:e0221105. doi: 10.1371/journal.
pone.0221105
Swanson, S. A., Crow, S. J., Grange, D. L., Swendsen, J., and Merikangas, K. R. (2011). 
Prevalence and correlates of eating disorders in adolescents: results from the National 
Comorbidity Survey Replication Adolescent Supplement. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry  68, 
714–723. doi: 10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2011.22
Swedo, S. E., Baguley, D. M., Denys, D., Dixon, L. J., Erfanian, M., Fioretti, A., et al. 
(2022). Consensus definition of Misophonia: A Delphi study. Front. Neurosci.  16:816. 
doi: 10.3389/fnins.2022.841816
Tajadura-Jiménez, A., Basia, M., Deroy, O., Fairhurst, M., Marquardt, N., and 
Bianchi-Berthouze, N. (2015a). As light as your footsteps: altering walking sounds to 
change perceived body weight, emotional state and gait . Proceedings of the 33rd Annual 
ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 2943–2952.
Tajadura-Jiménez, A., Crucianelli, L., Zheng, R., Cheng, C., Ley-Flores, J., 
Borda-Más, M., et al. (2022). Body weight distortions in an auditory-driven body 
illusion in subclinical and clinical eating disorders. Sci. Rep.  12:20031. doi: 10.1038/
s41598-022-24452-7
Tajadura-Jiménez, A., Tsakiris, M., Marquardt, T., and Bianchi-Berthouze, N. (2015b). 
Action sounds update the mental representation of arm dimension: contributions of 
kinaesthesia and agency. Front. Psychol.  6:689. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00689

Möllmann et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1231640
Frontiers in Psychology 17 frontiersin.orgTajadura-Jiménez, A., Väljamäe, A., Toshima, I., Kimura, T., Tsakiris, M., and 
Kitagawa, N. (2012). Action sounds recalibrate perceived tactile distance. Curr. Biol.  22, 
R516–R517. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2012.04.028
Todd, J., Aspell, J. E., Barron, D., and Swami, V . (2019). An exploration of the 
associations between facets of interoceptive awareness and body image in adolescents. 
Body Image  31, 171–180. doi: 10.1016/j.bodyim.2019.10.004
Toh, W ., Castle, D. J., and Rossell, S. L. (2017). Attentional biases in body dysmorphic 
disorder (BDD): eye-tracking using the emotional Stroop task. Compr. Psychiatry  74, 
151–161. doi: 10.1016/j.comppsych.2017.01.014
Toussaint, L., and Meugnot, A. (2013). Short-term limb immobilization affects cognitive 
motor processes. J. Exp. Psychol. Learn. Mem. Cogn.  39, 623–632. doi: 10.1037/a0028942
Truby, H., and Paxton, S. J. (2002). Development of the Children’s body image scale. 
Br. J. Clin. Psychol.  41, 185–203. doi: 10.1348/014466502163967
Truby, H., and Paxton, S. J. (2008). The Children’s body image scale: reliability and use 
with international standards for body mass index. Br. J. Clin. Psychol.  47, 119–124. doi: 
10.1348/014466507X251261
Underwood, M., and Olivardia, R. (2022). ‘The day you  start lifting is the day 
you  become forever small’: bodybuilders explain muscle dysmorphia. Health  27, 
998–1018. doi: 10.1177/13634593221093494
Valentine, T., and Bruce, V . (1988). Mental rotation of faces. Mem. Cogn.  16, 556–566. 
doi: 10.3758/BF03197057
Veale, D., and Neziroglu, F. (2010). Body dysmorphic disorder: A treatment manual . 
New Y ork: John Wiley & Sons.
Viel, S., Vaugoyeau, M., and Assaiante, C. (2009). Adolescence: A transient period of 
proprioceptive neglect in sensory integration of postural control. Mot. Control.  13, 
25–42. doi: 10.1123/mcj.13.1.25Visser, J., Geuze, R. H., and Kalverboer, A. F. (1998). The relationship between physical 
growth, the level of activity and the development of motor skills in adolescence: 
differences between children with DCD and controls. Hum. Mov. Sci.  17, 573–608. doi: 
10.1016/S0167-9457(98)00014-1
Vocks, S., Bauer, A., and Legenbauer, T. (2018). Körperbildtherapie bei Anorexia und 
Bulimia nervosa—Ein kognitiv-verhaltenstherapeutisches Behandlungsprogramm  3rd Edn.  
Göttingen, Germany: Hogrefe Verlag.
Waldorf, M., Cordes, M., Taube, C., Trunk, J., and Vocks, S. (2019a). 
“Muskeldysmorphie [muscle dysmorphia]” in Handbuch Klinische Psychologie . eds. T. 
Schnell and K. Schnell (Berlin: Springer), 1–13.
Waldorf, M., Vocks, S., Düsing, R., Bauer, A., and Cordes, M. (2019b). Body-oriented 
gaze behaviors in men with muscle dysmorphia diagnoses. J. Abnorm. Psychol.  128, 
140–150. doi: 10.1037/abn0000403
Wilhelm, S., Phillips, K. A., Didie, E., Buhlmann, U., Greenberg, J. L., Fama, J. M., 
et al. (2014). Modular cognitive-behavioral therapy for body dysmorphic disorder: 
A randomized controlled trial. Behav. Ther.  45, 314–327. doi: 10.1016/j.
beth.2013.12.007
World Health Organization. (2018). International statistical classification of disease 
and related health problems, eleventh revision (ICD-11) . Geneva: World 
Health Organization.
Y au, J. M., DeAngelis, G. C., and Angelaki, D. E. (2015). Dissecting neural circuits for 
multisensory integration and crossmodal processing. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci.  
370:20140203. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2014.0203
Zopf, R., Contini, E., Fowler, C., Mondraty, N., and Williams, M. A. (2016). Body 
distortions in anorexia nervosa: evidence for changed processing of multisensory bodily 
signals. Psychiatry Res.  245, 473–481. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2016.09.003