## Notes  towards a description of Social Representations'

## SERGE MOSCOVlCl

Ecole des hautes, etudes en sciences sociales, Laboratoire de Psychologie Sociale, 44 rue de la Tour, 75 1 16 Paris, France

Abstract

The theory o f social representations  occupies a place apart in social  psychology both by the problems it raises and  the scale of  the phenomena with which it deals.  This provokes many a criticism and misunderstanding. Such a theory may not correspond with the model o f socialpsychology as it is defined at present. One attempts however to show that it answers important social and scientijk  questions, in what it differs from  the  classical  conception o f collective  representations and, from  the  very beginning, adopts a constructivist  perspective which has spread in social psychology since.  Several trends of  research have confirmed its vision of  the relations between social and cognitive  phenomena, communication  and thought. More detailed remarks aim  at  outlining  the  nature  of  social  representations,  their  capacity  to  create information, their  function which is to  familiarize us with the  strange,  according to the categories o f our culture. Going  farther, one insists on the diversity of methodological approaches. If  the experimental method is useful to understand how people should think, higher mental and social processes must be approached by different methods, including linguistic analysis and observation o f how people think. No doubt, social representations have a relation with the more recent field  of social cognition. But inasmuch as the  former depend on content and context, i.e. subjectivity  andsociability of people, they approach the  phenomena differently  from the latter. Referring to child psychology and anthropology, one can contend, despite appearances, that it is also a more scientijk  approach. There is however much to be learned  from criticisms and there is still a long way to  go before we arrive at a satisfactory  theory o f social thinking and communication.

'I gratefully acknowledge Willem Dose's comments and Denise Jodelet's  insightful discussion  of this paper as a whole and detailed points of it.

0046-2772/88/0302114$20.00

Received 22 January 1988

Sons, Ltd.

8 1988 by John Wiley &amp;

Accepted 13 May 1988

## I A MISUNDERSTANDING ABOUT SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY

Before we set out on this lengthy exploratory voyage, let us agree on a straightforward and  undeniable  point  of  departure. The phenomenon  of  social  representations  was introduced into social psychology as an innovation some years ago. It later became the unifying  component  of  cognitive  psychology  and  is  now  spreading  among  other sciences as well.  That alone  is  sufficient justification  for  its existence.  Our field  of science should be eager to stake its claim to the phenomenon rather than express more and  more  reservations  towards  it.  But  the  fact  that  Gustav  Jahoda  devotes  such virulent  comment  to  it  today  demonstrates  that  the  theory  of  this  phenomenon touches  upon  points  that  are  so fundamental  to social  psychology  that  it  thereby acquires  an  almost  subversive character.  The friendship  between  us enables him  to express himself with great frankness.  I will rely on this same friendship in trying for my part to explain the undertaking which has been a good part of my life's work. My sole aim is to make the discussion move ahead, not to convince anyone.

I  might  begin  by  recalling  the  fact  that  the  concepts  of  representation  and  of collective representation stand out as landmarks in the scholarly relationships between the two sides of the Channel since the nineteenth century. The British first rejected the concept which  seemed too abstruse and vague to them. 'These modes or patterns  of thought',  Evans-Pritchard  wrote,  'which  in  their  totality  make  up  the  minds  or mentality of a  people  are  what Ltvy-Bruhl calls collective  representations, an expression in common use among French sociologists of the time, and a translation, I think,  of  the  German Vorstellung. It  suggests  something very  abstruse,  whereas  he means by it little more than what we call an idea, or a notion, or a belief; and when he says that a representation is collective, he means no more than that it is common to all, or most members of a society'(Evans-Pritchard, 1981, p.  124).

This 'little more' undoubtedly  was  not  altogether  unsignificant,  since the  British came to  realize  the  value  of  the  concept  and  to  see  in  it  a  great  stimulus  to  the formulation  of  new  problems.  As a result,  the  concept  took  root  in  anthropology, sociology,  social  psychology  (Bartlett,  1932) and  even  in  the  history  of  philosophy (Cornford, 1964). There is no escaping the fact that my discussion with Gustav Jahoda cannot be dissociated from a context with a long, complex history, to which we owe more than we realize. Not that there is nothing new under the sun. But, whether old or new, there  has  always  been  a sun,  I mean this  problem  of the relationship  between mental and material elements in social life.

Ever since the theory of social representations  has moved out of the shadows and spread here and there and everywhere, I have encountered two types of criticisms. On the one hand, I have been blamed for the use to which my work has been put, and for this I cannot help but feel some responsibility. If I were to shrug it off, I would deserve not  to  be  taken  seriously,  as  people  would  think  that  I  did  not  attribute  much importance  to the theory.  On the other hand,  I  have  been  faced  with  substantive criticism which at the same time challenges the possibility for the theory to serve as a focus  of  common,  cohesive  scientific  research.  These  criticisms  are  not  wholly unfounded  and  raise the possibility  that the theory  of  social  representations results from a misunderstanding  and that it might not belong to social psychology. We must admit  that  it  was  conceived  outside  the  sphere  of influence  of  American  social psychology,  which  has  dominated the thinking  and  scientific  style  of  most  of  our colleagues. It is a direct product of the classical tradition, according to which a theory

is both an approach, a way of looking at social phenomena, and a system describing and explaining them. Weber's theory, for instance, includes both a view of  modern society and  an  attempt  to  shed light on  its underlying ethical  and political mechanisms. In the same way the theory of social representations, on its own modest level, encompasses both a view of communication and everyday thinking in the world of  today  and  an  analysis  of  the  anonymous  facts  that  are  their  counterpart.  By insisting  on keeping  the two aspects separate, one would  deprive it of  all genuine significance and convert it into a topic that would be of interest only to a small group of specialists.

I  can  see  three  reasons  for  this  misunderstanding.  First  there  is  the  fact  that, adopting the classical approach, I viewed social psychology as a social science, along with anthropology, history, sociology, etc. I therefore believed that it should follow an analogous  strategy with  respect  to theories and  facts. In these fields, one does not strive to emulate the perfection of physics and no one feels compelled to verify a series of hypotheses one at a time, no matter how trivial they might be. And even less to give an  unambiguous  definition  of  each  of  its  concepts.  Does  anyone  know  such  a definition for general concepts like collective consciousness, charisma,  social class, myth -to mention just a few. When  I refused  to be  more  specific in  defining the phenomenon of social representation, I took  these precedents  into  account.  People then expected -they still do -me to open up a field research as if I knew in advance how things would turn out. But I had  an additional reason for taking this stance. I wanted to voice my opposition to a requirement that social psychologists think they can satisfy by using the right words and whose general effect is a certain sterility. In the words of an American methodologist, 'The demand for exactness of meaning and for precise definition of terms can have a pernicious effect, as I believe it often has had in behavioral science'  (Kaplan,  1964, p. 70).

There has been a disregard for the infinitely varied nature of the things with which we  have been dealing,  a blind  faith that condensing them in a formula is  all that is needed to bring them under control. In any case, it seems to me that the only criterion for judging  a theory  was to determine  whether  it  was meaningful  or meaningless, whether or not it helped to see things in a new light. Just as a study of  meaningless syllables is  not  a  way  to  understand  language,  stringing  together  well-defined  but meaningless notions is not a way to build a science.

In the second place, keeping in mind the religious, political and cultural phenomena that social psychology was supposed to explain, I  looked  at it  as a major  field of science.  After  all,  there  was  a  time  when  men  as  different  as  Simmel  and  Freud, Ltvy-Bruhl  and  Halbwachs, Marc Bloch and Bartlett all identified themselves with this field. The problems that these men raised and passed on to us deal with the most immediate and down-to-earth  events of daily life, physical and symbolic exchanges between  individuals. As  these  exchanges are repeated and  eventually  become routinized, they assume an objective character as institutionalized practices and beliefs and  even  as  collective  movements.  It  was  to  be  the  task  of  social  psychology  to discover  the  principles  underlying  the  chain  of  metamorphoses  from  subjective to objective elements and vice versa. As a major field of science -obviously -it has to set its sights on a general theory identifying and eventually describing the phenomenon common to all these metamorphoses, just as the market phenomenon is the common ground  of all our economic exchanges and power is the explanatory principle  of  a large  number  of  human  relationships.  How  could  a  science hope  to  make  useful

contributions and particularly contributions of a general, theoretical nature, without such a phenomenon?  Though  some may think  otherwise, my  idea was that social representations might play this role for social psychology. Not only because they are at the core of collective memory (Elias, 1981; Markova, 1982) and of the links men forge together, but because they are the prerequisite for action in general. This is accepted in Durkheim's sociology as well as in  Weber's.  The latter  states, in  the preface to his major work that 'these  concepts of collective entities which are found both in common sense and in juristic  and other technical forms of thought are representations in the minds, partly as of something existing, partly as something with normative authority. This is true not only of judges and officials, but of ordinary private individuals as well. Actors thus  in  part  orient  their  action to them,  and  in  this  role  such ideas  have a powerful, often a decisive, causal influence on the course of action of real individuals. This is  above  all  true where  the  representations  involve  normative  prescription  or prohibition' (Weber, 1978,  v.1, p. 14).

Let us move a little -but not much -farther afield and look at historical research. As anyone can see, new insights were gained as soon as one began to study mentalities. To understand the patterns of thought and the imaginary side of life as it took shape in the past, the values and crises of  a period, which find their reflection in documents, must  be  scrutinized  attentively.  As  Le  Goff  noted,  'The history  not  of  'objective' phenomena but of the representation of  these phenomena, the history of  mentalities, has its natural source material in the realms of the imaginary' (Le Goff,  1974, p. 86). My purpose is not to inventorize the concept. I merely want to stress this point: the concept  of  representation,  taken  over from philosophy, has  found  its  place, in  one form or another, in a number of sciences of man.

Historical factors are not sufficient for making us pick out a particular phenomenon or for justifying this choice. Even so they allow us to evaluate its importance and the range  of  questions  associated  with  it.  Social  representations,  as I have  already mentioned, concern the contents of everyday thinking and the stock of ideas that gives coherence to our religious  beliefs, political ideas and  the connections  we  create as spontaneously  as we  breathe.  They  make  it possible  for  us  to classify persons  and objects,  to compare  and explain  behaviours  and  to objectify them  as parts  of  our social setting. While representations are often to be located in the minds of men and women,  they  can just  as  often  be  found  'in  the  world',  and  as  such  examined separately. Representations can be preserved on parchment or stone in some forgotten places without having left a trace as such in anyone's mind for thousands of years. We meet them in both guises, as the example of money in our culture shows (Moscovici, 1988).  Money is the most common objectification of values of all sorts and of rational arguments. It is a good illustration of what Hume called 'the mind's property to spread itself on external objects'. There is no doubt that what we know about ourselves, about our minds, becomes an integral part of  ourselves, or how this mind  works, whereas this  knowledge  would  not  affect  a star  or  a  bird.  Representations  that  shape  our relations  with  society  are  in  turn a  component  of  social  organization.  And  we  all realize how much social reality, f,i.  drug use, differs depending on whether it is viewed and represented as a genetic defect, a sign of family breakdown, a cultural tradition or a substance required for a group ritual. The long and short of it is that all behaviour appears at the same time as a given and a product of our way of representing it. Here we  are  reminded  of  the  legend  of  the  Chinese  painter  who,  after  painting  his masterpiece, stepped into the landscape, walked along the path and disappeared in the

fogbound  mountains, in the presence of the imperial spectator who felt the urge of following in his footsteps.

There  is  no  question  that  I  might  have  picked  on  a  neighbouring  and  more manageable concept such as the concept of scheme. Without getting into any further detail on this point, suffice it to say that it refers to a simplified representation  and is less rooted  in  the  social world.  But  I  was  impressed by  Bartlett's argument.  While making use of it, he 'strongly  disliked it', thinking the concept was 'at once too definite and too sketchy'  (Bartlett,  1932, p. 201). The results tend to confirm his opinion.

The problem that I thought -and still think -should be solved by this theory has bothered many generations of philosophers and has become a social problem in our time. The multitudinous forms of knowledge and beliefs with which we deal every day are the outgrowth of  a long chain of  transformations.  One could carp endlessly on their lack of  logic or their absurdity, but this would lead nowhere. The only way to understand them is to reimmerse them in the actual social laboratory where they take shape, namely the social setting of  communication. For the mass media, there is no question but that messages that are passed on by them need to be altered to reach a large audience. The grammar must be altered, the logical trajectory shortened, words changed  into  images,  ideas  into  metaphors,  if  the  content  is  to  be  grasped  and understood  (Wade and  Schram,  1969). The  same thing  happens when  a specialist speaks to an audience of non-specialists, a professor to his students or a doctor to his patients. In the same way, the text of an article is elaborated and written differently for a lecture, an interview, or a topic of talk with colleagues.  The style is altered, as well as the reasoning, the examples, the nature of the conclusions to be drawn.

We derive only a small fraction of our knowledge and information from  the simple  interaction between ourselves and the facts we encounter in the  world. Most knowledge  is supplied to us by communication which affects our way of thinking and creates new contents. The philsopher Hannah Arendt rightly referred to common sense as a quintessential human attribute. Without it, we could not communicate, we could not even talk (Arendt, 1982). We reexperience this truth every time a new content takes shape in equally new words which belong solely to the language of  representations. The four scientific  terms 'acquired  immune  deficiency  syndrome', f.i. merge into  a  single  word, the terrifying AIDS, which carries a tremendous symbolic and imaginary meaning with it.

One could  argue,  for purposes  of  simplification, that,  under  certain  conditions, especially when we are alone, we think for the sake of thinking, just with our heads. But Hannah Arendt righly objected that 'thinking is a practice that takes place among men rather than as the performance of a single person' (Arendt, 1987, p. 21). Among other persons, therefore, we think in order to talk; we think, as I dared to write, with our mouths (Moscovici,  1984). Or, to put  it  more  abstractly,  thinking  and  arguing amount to the same thing. The metaphor I was using is confirmed by the observations of British psychologists who stress that one acquires concepts altogether differently in daily l i e  than in  a  laboratory experiment.  In daily life, they  wrote,  'concepts tend either to be picked up willy-nilly without conscious effort  or else to be acquired by word of mouth' (Wason and Johnson-Laird,  1972, p. 72).

Most knowledge and ideas circulating in the mass media and by word of mouth are actually of more or less scientific origin. This is considered a degradation since any idea that is exposed to contact with the mass of humanity is bound to be altered in the process and will perforce rub against other ideas in brains of a different calibre than those from which it originated. The betrayal of science,  vulgarization, mass culture, all

these are terms with which this practice is denounced.  It is as though knowledge fell into an abyss of ignorance, from the heights of science into the bogs of common sense. When we refer to the intellectual life of the majority,  we speak of bias, irrationalism, prejudices  and  a web  of  incoherent  preconceptions.  The conclusion  is that  this  life could  be  disregarded  since,  according  to  Gramsci,  it  amounts  to  a  'fragmented, confused,  inconsistent  view  of  things,  as  befits  the  social  position  of  the  masses' (Gramsci,  1978, p.  195).

In my eagerness to get rid of this mistaken view of the intellectual life of the majority and the low esteem in which it is held as a bric-a-brac of words, I set out to investigate the place where social representations were generated, not where scientific knowledge was  corrupted and distorted. The  place where  they linked together to form communication networks vitalizing society. Each of us, to a different extent and from his own niche, contributes to this shared knowledge which is transmitted, evolves and spreads by means of  representations, becoming as ubiquitous as a rumour.

The epistemological problem raised by this process becomes a social problem in the world of today, with its permanent scientific and technological revolutions.  This can be seen in an everyday paradox. It is correctly assumed that there is a sharp difference between  scientific knowledge  in  the  fields  of  physics,  medicine,  biology,  economics and ordinary knowledge. Beyond differences in intellectual processes and terminological incompatibilities, there is a further obstacle, the difficulty of  visualizing the phenomena  in question.  Practical  experience  tells us what  Newton's  prism  or a pulley are like, but can we visualize the genetic code, black holes, the unconscious,  or monetary parity? Can we understand the implications of a medical exam checking the chromosomal status of a woman who is above the normal child-bearing age'?  And yet people seem to understand. They make sense of  esoteric words and look for the best way  to  understand  inflation,  why  children  worry,  how  to  keep  healthy,  why  the universe is the way it is, and  hundreds  of  other intellectual or practical  questions of this sort. Most specialized knowledge will eventually be assimilated by non-specialists -something that is considered, strictly speaking, impossible. And yet such knowledge keeps being exchanged  at work, in schools, in doctors' offices, at the dinner table at home, over cocktails. It offers a topic of  conversation and makes it possible to reach decisions about vital matters.

So  here  is  the  paradox:  how  do  people  get  so  much  mileage  out  of  so  little knowledge? How can they understand  things about which they have neither firsthand knowledge nor experience?  They succeed by generating their own body of representations  fit for everyday use, and these representations  which shape ordinary behaviour  are derived from science but  linked  to it by tenuous threads.  And  by  this modality the ever-changing world  of  nature  becomes their human world  (Roqueplo, 1974; Herzlich,  1969, 1982; Moscovici and Hewstone,  1983; Jodelet,  1983, 1987).

Once representations  have taken shape, as we know, theories about personality, the brain, the economy, the atom, the computer, etc. are integrated into everyday ways of doing  things  and  shape  the  social  setting  in  which  we  interrelate.  They  form  the substratum of common sense and the shape that myths assume in our time. Scientific myths that are derived from psycho-analysis  or Marxism, from cosmology or neuroscience,  and  to  which  we  give  full  credence.  We  accomplish  this  by  a  process  of decoding and  transference  from one context  to another.  What in science generally appears  as  a system of concepts  and  facts  is  converted in the  corresponding representations  into a network by which a greater  or smaller range of concepts  and facts of various sorts is held together coherently. The same observation  was made by

the  physicist  Duhem  who  defined  common  sense  as  a  capital  which  is  constantly 'transformed  and  increased.  Theoretical  science contributes  its  very  great  share  to these transformations and to this increase of wealth: this science is constantly diffused by instruction, by conversation, by books and periodicals; it penetrates the bottom of common sense knowledge; it awakens its attention to phenomena hitherto neglected; it teaches it to analyze motions which had remained confused' (Duhem,  1962, p. 261).

The problem is highlighted even more effectively in terms of the contrast it reveals between social psychology on the one hand and anthropology and child psychology on the other. The latter fields trace the genealogy of mythic thought to scientific thought or operational and concrete thinking to abstract and rational thinking. The former seeks to understand the inverse movement which leads from science to representations under the impact of communication and the masses. This movement may be more or less pronounced  in  the  different disciplines (Semin et al., 1984), but  its direction is undeniable. I  am confining myself to social representations insofar as they relate to this epistemological and social problem. But social representations are not limited to this area. Society is constantly producing new representations to motivate action and make sense of  human interactions that spring from people's everyday problems. And social representations can lead us to a social psychology of knowledge enabling us to compare groups and cultures. The field keeps widening around the pivotal problem. Without  such  a pivotal problem,  neither  a  theory  nor  a  scientific discipline can be conceived. Perhaps the indistinctness of social psychology stems to some extent from this  fact,  for,  as  Bartlett  stated,  'It  may  be  possible  for  the  sociologist  to  be  no psychologist,  but  the  social  psychologist  must  be  alert  to  sociological  problems' (Bartlett, 1932,  p. 243).

It is  apparent that the misunderstanding arose from the gap between the classical view  of  social  psychology -whose  contribution  was  thought  to  be  of  greater importance for the social sciences  than as a supplement to psychology -dealing with a highly significant phenomenon and seeking to solve an epistemological problem that had  acquired social dimensions, and the view  of  social psychology prevailing today. As a result, the theory of social representations lacks a proper  niche, especially in a discipline where phenomena of this kind are nominally (Landman and Manis, 1983) but not genuinely treated  as social phenomena.  The explanation for this misunderstanding has led me to what may seem like a long digression, but was it not justified by Gustav Jahoda's initial quotation? And even if the idea that there is an era of social representations  has  gained  some  ground  and  is  even  taken  up  in  this  journal (McGuire, 1986) -alas, without any mention of research having been done along these lines over the past twenty years -the reasons for this misunderstanding have nonetheless  persisted.  For us  representations  came as a  big  discovery,  a  discovery that received its impetus from the naive enthusiasm of all new passions. Yet our naiveness did not affect the lucidity with which we viewed our progress and judged what remains to be accomplished.

## I1  COLLECTIVE AND/OR SOCIAL REPRESENTATIONS

Travellers who ventured as far as the frozen regions of the Arctic already described, centuries ago, these sudden apparitions of gigantic mountains rising out of a calm sea

in places where there were none. These apparitions we call fata morgana create the illusion that something exists where there is nothing and lure the unwary explorer to set off towards a constantly receding, ultimately unattainable goal. In Gustav Jahoda's eyes, there is a certain similarity between these fata morgana and the elusive social representations which escape our grasp as soon as we come close to them and think that we have them in our grip. This is why he is disturbed by the transition from the concept  of  a collective to  that  of  a social representation.  He  raises  the  question whether the two are really separate entities, rather than meaningless terminological distinctions.  He  need  not  worry,  the  change  of  words  is  intended  to denote  a  real change of perspective.

Durkheim, as is well-known, aligns representations  within a dichotomy opposing individual  and collective, person and society, stable and unstable (Durkheim, 1898). He assigns facts to these two different universes, the one requiring a psychological and the other a sociological explanation. This separation  may have been unavoidable to affirm the autonomy of the new social science. But when social psychology makes this distinction,  it is prevented  from looking at the  relationship between the individuals and the collectivity and their common ground. The point is to extricate ourselves  from a dichotomy where we  have to choose between a social entity that is more than the sum  of  its  parts  and  an  individual  consisting  entirely  of internal  psychological attributes and reacting to a set of external stimuli.

This is not the main point however. In Durkheim's view, the concept of representation refers above all to a vast class of intellectual forms: science, religion, myths, categories of space and time. It is actually tantamount to the concept of ideas or system, without any effort to spell out its cognitive characteristics in greater detail (Ansart,  1987). It has furthermore a certain degree of invariance and determines the variable perceptions and feelings of individuals. The concept of representation therefore presupposes what we  would call today a trickle-down  intellectual  process. It is collective, on the other hand, insofar as it is grounded in the community where it is shared homogeneously by all members.  It is communal, furthermore, to the extent that it has been shared by several generations of individuals and therefore exerts a coercion over them, as is true of all social situations. Whether in the guise of religion, myths or language, it exerts an influence on individuals and reinforces their reciprocal ties in a uniform way. Representation is thus equated with collectivity and in this conception there is a single representation and it is related to a group where no other representation prevails. This leads to its having a static character and to  its being linked to a closed society (Berson, 1932).

One comment before we proceed any further. Specifically  we must at least recognize that  representations  are  in  one  fashion  or  another  generated  and  modified.  In Durkheim's conception, this occurs only exceptionally, under unusual circumstances, outside the customary social interactions. We are dealing here with effervescent states, under the impetus of a ritual, in which the society joins together in producing new ideas and feelings. These then are embedded in collective memory and inculcated by education  as  stable  frameworks  of  communal  life.  Representations  also  become 'partially  autonomous',  with  the  'power  of  reinforcing  and  repelling  each  other, forming all kinds of syntheses among them determined by mutual affinities and not by the social setting within which they evolve'  (Durkheim, 1967, p. 34). I am simplifying, of  course, but these points are well-known.

There is no denying that this way of looking at things is in keeping with a certain reality.  An  anthropologist  like  Horton,  f.i.  can  make  use  of  it  to  understand  a

tradition-dominated  community in which information is provided by a single one of its members. Surely at one  time whole  societies  shared one and the same representation, gave it credence, and celebrated it by  rites and sacrifices. One might add  that  this  remains  true  for  a  certain  number  of sects  and  one-party  states (Deconchy,  1984) which believe that they are the upholders of an unfallible doctrine around which a unanimous consensus prevails. This view does not match or no longer matches the historical  reality with which we  are familiar. It is unlikely that even in communities where tradition is still dominant, there would be as much uniformity and invariability  as anthropologists formerly expected  to find  (Barth,  1987). Sects and one-party  regimes abound  today,  to be sure,  but  they  constitute only one form of political  and  religious association  among  others.  In  our  days,  therefore,  collective representation as it used to be defined no longer is a general category but a special kind  of representation  among  many  with  different  characteristics.  It  seems  an aberration,  in  any case, to consider representations as homogeneous and  shared as such  by  a  whole  society.  What  we  wished  to  emphasize  by  giving up  the word 'collective'  was this plurality of representations and their diversity within a group. But I shall revert to this point shortly.

Other reasons for the change in terminology are to be found in the theory's intrinsic problems. As was my original intention, we at once focused on creative processes, on the  generation  o f new,  meaningful  contents  arising  during  the  transformation  o f mental and social configurations (Jodelet, 1984;  Farr, 1987). In effect, what we had in mind were representations  that  were  always in  the  making, in the context of  interrelations  and  actions  that  were  themselves  always  in  the  making.  That  was  a prerequisite for linking them with important phenomena in the modern world. And these phenomena, it must be remembered, belong to the realm of social psychology, for, to quote Weber, 'nevertheless the sociologist cannot  for his purposes  afford  to ignore these collective concepts derived from other disciplines'  (Weber,  1978, p. 13). Ours, for instance, since he names among these forms of thoughts communal concepts such as the family, the state, the nation, or the representation of what ought to be done or not to be done in a given society. Now for Durkheim and his school, any of these representations  is inherently  collective, irrespective almost  of  the interrelations  and exchanges concerning it. Each group members already finds it pre-established without his  intervention,  which  gives  rise  to  its  coercive character,  and  he  conforms to  it without restriction.  In that case, one must exclude the possibility of  a procedure,  a normal  mechanism whereby something communal takes  shape and  is transformed with the participation of all concerned.

Clearly, if one wanted to study how a representation takes shape or how and why a scientific or medical theory is converted into a representation, one needs had to revise the concept. A certain original diversity had to be taken into account and the emphasis shifted to communication, which enables individual thoughts and feelings to converge and allows something individual to become something social. 'It is not so much the individual or group contribution to these representation that allows us to call them social representations;  it is the fact that they have been shaped by an exchange and interaction  process'  (Codol, 1982,  p.  2). In  fact,  it was  the  need  to  turn  the representation into a bridge between the individual and the social worlds and to link it with  a view of  a changing society that led to the terminological  shift about which Jahoda inquires. It was our purpose to understand innovation rather than tradition, a social life in the making rather than a preestablished one. The failure to make such a

shift earlier explains in part why the concept lay neglected for half a century after its spectacular take-off.

I may  be  mistaken,  but we  are probably  the first  to have  taken  it  up  again  and updated  it as a contemporary phenomenon.  For collective, because inculcated by an authority (communality,  religious institution, etc.) and almost invariable representations we have substituted social representations: such as were created and communicated  by  the  people,  the  makers  of  theories  about  AIDS,  black  holes, Marxism, etc.; side by side with those of scientists, doctors, politicians or churchmen, and adjusted to  the circumstances. We were also the first to look for them inside human behaviour and realities, as a living trend imbedded  in what appears lifeless and even physical. This state of affairs is strikingly illustrated  by the tale of Sinbad the Sailor. Travellers land on an island and marvel at the pure spring water and the abundance of fruit in the orchards. Some drink their fill, others bathe. Others again light a fire and prepare their meal.  They do not realize that this island  is a huge fish that has been asleep for so long in the ocean that trees have grown on its back. Feeling the sting of the fire lit by the travellers, it suddenly rises up and dives down, pulling down everyone with it towards the abyss.  Here we have a powerful image suggesting representations that  have  objectified  for so long  that  we no longer  notice  them.  But  that  does  not prevent their being almost ubiquitously the substratum of everything that we conceive as materially independent and given in social life. Under the impetus of some event or change, these representations resurface. And as everything today is in flux, they make themselves felt even before crystallizing in a specific action or reality.

Let us not make too much of a case about this type of weakness in our forerunners. Still, in order to solve problems that could not have been foreseen by them, we had to rethink representation as a network of interacting concepts and images whose contents evolve continously  over time  and  space.  How the  network  evolves depends  on the complexity and speed  of  communication as well as on the available communication media.  And  its  social  characteristics  are  determined  by  the  interactions  between individuals and/ or groups, and the effect that they have on each other as a function of the link that binds  them (Farr and  Moscovici,  1984; Billig,  1987). By  de-emphasizing  each  person's  distinctive  features  and  internal  details,  we  can  bring  out  the social  characteristics  of  the  total  operation,  from  both  the  intellectual  and  the emotional  points  of  view.  By  analogy,  we  could  think  of  social representations  as being produced  by  a collective decision  committee.  Its members cast their votes and can express a broad range of opinions. Each one knows how the others have voted so that he can change his mind, combine opinions. The final decision is the joint effort of the participants  and expresses a sense of the meeting. There is no need to reach  an explicit consensus or to submit to a rite; as long as the individual initiatives are in line with the social flow, nothing more is needed.  Each individual proposition is thus tied in  with  the action  of  the group,  which  can  give it  a shape that  is  acceptable  and comprehensible for all concerned.  In these exchanges,  all representations  are at the interface of two realities: psychic reality, in the connection it has with the realm of the imagination and feelings, and external reality which has its place in a collectivity and is subject  to  group  rules.  The  link  between  them  is  similar  to  the  one  observed  by Obereysekere  between  the public  meaning  of  cultural  symbols and  the  reasons  for which people use them for private ends. By studying in detail cases of mysticism and the way people experience their religion,  he showed that it was possible  to infuse  a strong personal  meaning  into  shared  symbols which  continue to be  approved  by a

large part of society. As he observes, 'cultural patterns and symbols are put back into the melting pot of conscious uses and refashioned to create a  culturally tolerated set of images that I  designated  as subjective imagery' (Obereysekere, 1981, p. 169). This observation based on a different culture confirms the findings of  Claudine Herzlich (1969,1982) in her work on representations about health and illness. It is confirmed in greater  detail  by  Denise Jodelet's research  on the mentally ill sheltered in  a village community (1983).

But  irrespective o f   the  mental  form  in  question -and  the  range  in  our  culture extends from science to everyday representations -certain generally accepted contents seem to keep  the  individual  anchored  in  the  collective element.  Contents that  are shared by a whole society lead each mind to draw its categories from them and these categories impose themselves on everyone. Our society f.i. favours economic contents with respect to social relations or biological contents with respect to the body or illness in general. We rely on these contents in many cases, even at times when they have no connection  with  the context  in which the  contents apply.  From this  viewpoint the content exerts a decisive pressure on our thinking and on the way we represent events and behaviours, because it makes us eliminate certain alternatives by branding them as implausible  or  uninformative.  The  British  anthropologist  Hocart  remarks:  'It  is because savages interpret our customs psychologically that they think us wicked, or daft,  or  both'  (Hocart, 1987, p. 46). Mutatis  mutandis, one  might  say  that  our attributing economic, utilitarian explanations to many things makes their explanations sound  naive, absurd  or irrational to us  by  comparison.  In truth, the determinant  aspect  of  the content  tends  to be disregarded  in intellectual processes, though  it  deserves the  greatest  attention.  From  our  perspective, a  representation always links a cpgnitive form with a content widely accepted by the group.

There  is a last point. According  to  the  classical  point of view,  collective representations are defined by  their  opposition to individual representations.  From our  perspective, this  opposition  is  irrelevant.  There  are  presumably  three  ways  in which representations  can become social, depending on the relations between group members. Representations can be shared by  all the members of  a highly structured group -a party,  city or nation -without their  having been produced by  the group. These hegemonic representations  prevail  implicitly  in  all  symbolic  or  affective practices. They seem to be uniform and coercive. They reflect the homogeneity and stability that French sociologists had in mind when they called these representations collective. Other representations  are the  outgrowth of the circulation  of  knowledge and  ideas  belonging  to  subgroups  that  are  in  more  or  less  close  contact.  Each subgroup creates its own version and shares it with the others. These are emancipated representations  with  a  certain  degree  of  autonomy  with  respect  to  the  interacting segments of  society. They  have a complementary  function inasmuch  as they result from exchanging and sharing a set of  interpretations or symbols. They are social by virtue  of the  division  of functions  and  the  information  brought  together and coordinated  by  their  means.  Representations  about  mental  illness  (Jodelet, 1983; Herzlich, 1982) fall in  this  category: here  the  concepts  and  experiences of  doctors, paramedical  professionals  and  laymen  are  brought  together  with  those  of the population at large. Last, there are representations  generated in the course of  social conflict,  social controversy,  and  society as  a whole does not  share them.  They  are determined  by  the  antagonistic  relations  between  its  members  and  intended  to  be mutually exclusive. These polemical representations must be viewed in the context of

an  opposition  or struggle  between  groups  and  are  often  expressed  in  terms  of  a dialogue  with  an  imaginary  interlocutor.  The  social  representation  of  Marxism  in France, f.i., circulates in several versions, each of them shaped by the social polemic between believers and non-believers, communists and liberals, etc.

These  distinctions emphasize the  transition from  the concept of collective representation  as a  uniform  view to a  differentiated view  of  social  representations, which is closer to our reality. The contrasts between several kinds of social relations are more significant than the one between the social and individual element. That is precisely  what I wanted to stress by my choice of words. A representation undoubtedly shifts  from  one realm  to the  other  as it  takes  shape,  and  the  point  of  view  of  the observer plays an important part. But these transformations are a crucial symptom of the state of a society.

(2)

When we speak of social representations, we have in mind a network of concepts and images tied together in various ways according to the interconnections between the persons and media that serve to establish communication (Markova, 1987). Such a network  of  concepts  exists  today  with  respect  to  the  computer,  which  is  now a dominant image, or what we might call the figurative nucleus of certain representations. Here is what one can read in the Scientific American: 'Modern digital computers are late-comers to the world of computation. Bioiogical computers -the brain and nervous system of  animals and human beings -have existed for millions of years,  and  they  are  marvelously  effective  in  processing  sensory  information  and controlling the interactions of animals with their environments. Tasks such as reaching for a sandwich, recognizing a face or remembering things associated with the taste of madeleines  are computations just as multiplications  and  running video  games are' (Tank and  Hopfield, 1987, p. 104). The authors are  obviously  associating familiar elements, such as reaching for a sandwich, with less familiar ones, like running video games.  They  present  computation  both  as  a  visible  behaviour  and  an  abstract operation.  They fuse the two elements by  a  reference  to a  memory shared  by  the readers, that is, Proust's madeleine in his Remembrance o f mings Past. Here we have a  special  cognitive  structure  which  constitutes  a  representation.  But  it  derives  its meaning from the fact that the concept of the computer is one shared by our culture and can thus be converted from a specific device to a general model for the brain and nervous system. The computer is referred to as the endproduct of a sort of biological evolution that began with organic computers and led up to inorganic computers. You might object that this is a matter of scientific evidence, and that the manner in which we represent it and share this representation makes no difference. The best answer to this  objection  is  Hocart's:  'Everyone  agrees  that  savages do not  believe  in  ghosts because they see them, but they see them because they believe in them. But it occurs to few to say that we do not believe in our principle of intertia because it is self-evident, but that it is self-evident because we believe in it; or that our economic law of supply and demand is to a great extent created by our belief in it, and not our belief created by the law' (Hocart, 1987, p. 42).

This  is  true  all  the  more  when  our  brains  and  nervous  systems  are  viewed  as biological  computers,  while  technical  computers  tend  to  reproduce  only  a  small fraction of the brain's capacity. And our faith in something, in the last analysis, is a

representation buttressed by the confidence and practice of some human group. From that  perspective,  believing in  ghosts  or believing in  machines  has  the  same roots. Donning momentarily the  black robe  of  a judge,  Gustav Jahoda warns me in his comments that I repeatedly contradict myself when I give representations this specific cognitive meaning and a more general significance. I might be tempted to  reply with a Spanish philosopher's dictum: 'If a person never contradicts himself, this means that he has not said anything'. And this holds true all the more for a theory. But I believe he is mistaken about where the contradictions manifest themselves, and I fail to see their bearings in the question that concerns us here. Anyone patient enough to look through my writings will note that their guiding thread is the enigma of change and creativity. Am  I contradicting  myself  when  I stress the weight of  memory  and the inertia  of feelings and concepts in the genesis of representations? I do not think that this is the case, inasmuch as they always bear the imprint of this tension between the tendency to maintain and the tendency to create new things. The protective layers of images and language act as filters for all the incisions we make in the present and often convert our most powerful revolutions into superficial alterations. We are fond of separating what should be kept together: conformity and innovation, resistance  to change and change, relationships within and between the groups.  On the contrary, the two terms of  an opposition can be understood only in relation to each other. Recognizing this allows us  to  gain  a  better  understanding  of  the  strength  with  which  archaic  ideas  and emotions,  which keep coming back  and dominating us,  make us draw back  from innovations.  The  very  fact  that  we  keep  inventing fictitious  pasts  and  chimerical recollections to sidetrack an innovation  is  an indication  of  this tension inherent in social life.

But Jahoda stresses another contradiction which I find astonishing. This involves a rather elementary epistemological question, about which I probably failed to make myself clear. I must therefore repeat my arguments for the sake of clarification. In the sociology of Durkheim and his school, representations serve to explain social phenomena. This is a well-known fact, and they have been blamed for their idealism. Generally speaking, explanatory concepts are likely  to  be abstract and illdefined, as was true of  the gravitational force in mechanics, the atom in physics, the gene in biology and social classes in Marxism. Their existence was assumed to be proven and then many things were explained by  their  intervention,  although they themselves remained  as obscure as ever. Let us say that they were  figments  of thought rather than real entities,  to use a rather antiquated phrase. It was known what each of them did, and nobody cared what  each  of  them was. But  once  something  is  conceived  and  endowed with  an explanatory power, one must try to advance  further and grasp the reality of the force or the phenomenon in question. Progress can be made no other way.

To the best of my knowledge, we have not fathomed the exact nature of gravity or of social classes even today. The gene and atom, on the other hand, have yielded a large part  of  their  physico-chemical  enigma.  We  are  therefore  not  'departing  from Durkheim' or 'by contrast' to him when we set out to unscramble the structure and internal dynamics of social representations, once we have recognized their impact on society. I insisted that social psychology was responsible  for this task, just as quantum physics had the task to unravel the structure and dynamics of the atom which, for twenty-five centuries, had remained an abstract entity.

Once this point  is clarified, there is nothing  odd  about  assigning an explanatory function to social representations in our discipline. Nothing odder than attributing

such a function to elementary particles in nuclear  physics or to genes in  molecular biology. Contrary to what Jahoda claims, there are not two contradictory versions of the explanation.  In actuality,  discontinuity on the theoretical level never precludes continuity  on the research  level, which  is  intended  to gain  a  deeper  insight  into  a phenomenon.

Everyone  keeps  saying  that  we  must  take  the  social  dimension  of  psychological phenomena into account  and grasp them in that context.  But there  is many  a slip between the cup and the lip, between the principles one upholds and the realities that one investigates. In  short,  it is easier said than done. And anyone who attempts to carry out this programme exposes himself to being blamed for the very mistakes that he has tried so hard to avoid. I can only say 'just so' about nearly everything Jahoda writes about the 'group mind'. In any case, I do no feel under attack on that score. The term 'thinking society'  that I used refers to something much more modest and empirical. On the one hand, the term was intended  as a protest against the widespread view of  an 'unthinking society'. For many  believe that only individuals think  and  that  groups think  badly, if  at all. There is a tendency to say that the majority of  society merely reproduces and imitates the thought of  its elites, its avant-gardes,  and nothing more. 'Strangely  enough',  a  French  sociologist  writes,  'the  Marxist and  functionalist elements  in  sociology,  by  trying  to  give  prominence  to  economic  developments, minimized or abandoned the category of  representations .  .  . The masses as a whole were naturally infantile or ignorant, so that truth could come only from the outside' (Maffesoli, 1985, p. 81). But there is no point in repeating what I said earlier.

On the other hand, to simplify, this concept means that one should view society as a thinking system,  just as one can view it as an economic or political system. Just as one visits  laboratories  to  investigate  how  the  scientific community  produces  facts  and theories, one might visit these other kinds of laboratories, namely factories, hospitals, etc. to understand how other communities produce their facts and representations. In other words, the question social psychology is asked to resolve is: 'What is the nature of a thinking society?'  while general psychology must determine: 'What is the nature of a thinking individual?' In the former case, we must add other organs to brains, that is, means and institutions of communication, the material repositories of knowledge, and the rules of exchange and consensus.

The birth  of  philosophy  is  always exemplified by  Socrates wandering  about the market  places  of  Athens,  engaging  in  discussion  with  craftsmen,  merchants  or strangers in transit. In its early days, the Royal Society was a club that met regularly in pubs before becoming an official institution.  But we  know many kinds of  meetingplaces, cafks, pubs, parish halls, drawing-rooms,  etc., where individuals express their sociability by talking together.  In these special places, thinking is not a mere luxury but a shared effort, in which political, religious, personal or psychological topics are scrutinized.  The  outcome  of  all  these  exchanges  then  circulates  in  the  adjoining chambers  of  a  city  or  country.  We  are  dealing  here  with  more  or less  successful versions of  what  used  to be  called  'thinking societies'. These are the settings where social  representations  take  shape  and from  which  they  spread  like  rumours.  For society  at  large  they  have  an  analogous  function  as  paradigms  in  the  scientific community. Why not investigate them on the spot, as one studies the production of

objects in  a factory,  or research techniques in  a research centre? I  cannot  go into details here, but  social psychology must take into account these ways  and means of producing knowledge, all the more so because social representations involve a division of labour that grants them a certain autonomy. We know that a category of persons exists whose profession it is, so to speak, to manufacture them. In their ranks one must include all those  who have the  task  o f   spreading scientific and  artistic knowledge, doctors  and social  workers, media  and political  marketing specialists.  These professionals are in many respects the modern equivalents  of the myth makers of older societies.

The reason representations are social is not only that they have a common object or that they are shared. It is also that in our society they have a certain autonomy and are the  outgrowth  of  a  codified  know-how  that  enjoys  an  undeniable  authority.  This know-how deserves more attention than it receives, for these specialists use methods that  presuppose  a very valuable knowledge  about the way the  mind  works  and  a coherent view  of  the collective aspect of  society. The long and short of  it is that my term 'thinking society'  is empirical and modest and has nothing to do with the group mind fallacy that lives in symbiosis with the corresponding individual mind fallacy.

Nothing should surprise us in this kind of  criticism. And if  Gustav Jahoda, who knows better,  leaves the  impression that  there  is  a  simple solution  to the  tension between tradition and innovation, or a black and white answer to the question of the group mind, that has to be accepted. To grapple with such problems and commit a few sins,  as  Geertz,  Harrt  or I have  done,  makes  science  exciting.  The  only  proper response to the group mind fallacy is to forget about it. In short, to let it die of old age, as most questions do when they have lost their fecundity.

## 1 1 1 ON THE COMPARISON WITH OTHER NOTIONS OR THEORIES

The main aim of the theory of social representations is clear. By focusing on everyday communication  and  thinking,  it  hopes  to  determine  the  link  between  human psychology  and modern social and cultural trends.  It  has begun  to arouse interest, stimulating research in a number of places, with the notorious exception of the United States. What explains this interest? The theory undoubtedly legitimates concern for social aspects and enriches the phenomenology of  our discipline, which had become extremely meagre. It is  better  suited for dealing with  specific situations than  other theories that  were conceived for more abstract  and  on the whole artificial set-ups. Because of  this extension, in all likelihood, people are beginning to notice numerous points  of  convergence  between  this  theory  and  various  currents  such  as  ethnomethodology, symbolic interactionism, etc. Since Jahoda insists on my explaining  this convergence and justifying my  use of  this or that concept, I should like to make a general  statement,  both  on  the  tone  and  substance  of  his  criticisms.  He  briefly comments on the weak response to my work in  1961 beyond the small circle of  researchers in  Aix-en-Provence  and  Paris with  whom  collaboration  has  been  maintained  ever since. The notes that  I published in the Annual Review of  PsychoIogy in 1963  met the same fate. 'Few would have guessed at that time that it was a seminal work', he admits.

The thought  occurs to me  that part  of  his  arguments rest  on the feeling that  he missed out the potentialities of the theory at that time and failed to benefit from it. It seems rather  odd to me that I am blamed for not looking to models postdating my contribution  for  validation, when  others  relied  on  my  contribution  to  liberate themselves from the dominant models that I criticized. I have trouble understanding how the development of research and theories in the field of cognitions, attitudes and the analysis of common sense can buttress arguments against my positions -which  in fact are not only mine -when these developments merely catch up with them. Instead of asking  me  to  be  more  modest,  should  not  Gustav  Jahoda,  on  the  contrary, vouchsafe me the right to fair comments, even if they are critical, by virtue of my prior claim to this approach? The cognition models had to undergo the transformation  of the new look and the so-called cognitivist revolution,  as Markus and Zajonc (1985) point out. Just to get back to what? To the framework that was proposed in 1961! Our two American colleagues show how the behaviourist S -R model grew increasingly complex as it went through the S -0 -R schema, where the organism occupies a variable mediating position between the stimulus and the response, to end up with the 0  S --0  R schema, where the subject, who is designated as organism (much could -be  said  about  this  terminology)  is  expected  to  define  the  S  and  the  R  by  his constructive  activity.  Which  is  precisely  what  the SR &lt; model  proposed  at  that time, thereby asserting the constructive role of social representations that we share as active subjects and makers of our society. To the best of my knowledge, the concept of construction itself was not yet recognized in social psychology at that time!

The same comments apply with respect to attitudes, for which it is said that social representations  are analogues and substitutes, in short not to be differentiated from them  in  a  system.  Even  if  this  were  true,  that  would  imply  a  broadening  of  the definition of attitudes to the point where they have the same characteristics as social representations.  To  reach this point  required  an evolution  (McGuire,  1986; Fraser, 1986) resulting in a definition of  attitudes as (1) socially shared, (2) endowed with a content,  and  (3)  forming  a  system.  I  am quite  willing  to  admit  the  resemblance, provided that this resemblance is ascribed to a realignment of the analysis of attitudes in the course of this research. I was therefore surprised when Colin Fraser wondered: 'But why should the bold new enterprise of social representation research wish to tie itself  to such familiar and perhaps tired  notions? What will be learned  about social representations by conceiving of them as a set of attitudes?' (Fraser, 1986, p. 9).

Well, perhaps nothing will be learned from it. On the other hand, to a certain extent, social representations made their entrance on the scene of social psychology to breathe new life into this tired notion and broaden it. There can be no uncertainty about this point: the interconnections between them have been stressed repeatedly (Doise, 1982; Farr,  1984; Jaspar  and  Fraser, 1984).  And  attitudes  have  become  an  essential dimension for anyone who attempts to define a social object. When we represent an object, we take a stand towards it at the same time. The most harmless object, a glass of  water,  a  tree,  will  be  imagined  and  described  from  the  standpoint  of  at  least favourable  or  unfavourable  reactions  to  it.  As  a  matter  of  fact, this  is  inevitable, inasmuch as the language we use in daily life as well as in philosophy is never neutral. When Bergson tried to represent two kinds of society, describing one as closed and the other as open, he immediately induced a reserved attitude towards the former and a congenial one towards the latter.

It is not at all surprising therefore that  attitudes and social representations  are so closely  knit.  The  former  have  the  latter  as  their  precondition. We  can  become

favourable  or  unfavourable  towards  something  only  after  we  have  perceived  and evaluated it in a different way. This concluding observation means that we are in no position  to choose between  attitudes  and  representations, since we  cannot use the former without the latter (Fodor, 1981). Beyond that, it is is a matter of mere words and a misplaced striving for originality. To  end the matter,  I believe that Deutscher (1984) or Harrt (1984), whose concerns are very  similar to mine, disentangled these questions of the relatedness of  the various approaches in an excellent way.

(2)

Although Jahoda's comments are short, they call for detailed replies. He piles up a large number  of  questions that  are quickly raised  and no less  quickly settled in an off-hand way.  How could I have proceeded to show the underlying connection of so many concepts, among them ideology? In the vast literature that deals  with ideology, it is treated exclusively as a system of representations (Althusser, 1972, Dumont, 1972; Doise, 1982).  As to the self-contradiction with which I am charged, it is more a matter of  words than of  substance. The analytic framework of the chapter in question was general. Why did I not mention ideology in connection with Marxism? Was it because 'it would not readily be fitted into the scheme?'  On the contrary, it would have fitted it only too easily. I considered it more fruitful, of  greater scientific and even political interest, to look at Marxism as a social representation. In other words, in terms of its having become in a few countries (France, Italy, probably Spain) a part of the culture, of  the ways of thinking and acting of  a large number of people in their everyday life. Or at least a shared reference point for interpreting events and relationships in their society.

Berger and Luckmann's work is one of those that cannot be treated in an off-hand way. The reproach that I treated it in this manner is undeserved. I limited my remarks about  it  to  noting  that  the  principle  of  social  reality  construction  takes  on  an arbitrary meaning and has no empirical  prospects, as long as the representations of the members of  a society are left out of  account.  I  stressed particularly that  what the authors identifiy as a field of  research to be opened up by sociologists had already been widely investigated by French social psychologists before the publication of their work. In truth it is a matter of pointing out possibilities  for a common ground between our disciplines,  which have been out of touch for many years. But nowhere do I claim that  the  theory  of  social representations  is  already tested  or that  it  is  empirically well-founded. As to Schutz, he is a 'forerunner'  who has been resurrected only recently and  whose  role it is  to validate a posteriori the  anti-functionalist consensus in the social sciences.

I must admit that I am struck by the animosity with which my critic goes about robbing this theory of its distinctiveness. Of course he is neither the first nor the only one to take this stand. I was already familiar with people's  mentioning it and then referring back at once to Durkheim, to demonstrate that there was no need to look at our research. As though referring back to Democritus dispensed one from looking at subsequent atomic theories and especially at the work of  atomic theorists since his time. As if, I  might add, adopting the concept of social  representations  were equivalent to adopting Durkheim's  sociology and sharing his views  on it. Gustav Jahoda has taken another tack. It consists in charging me with having thought up and opened a field of research ahead of other social science research currents and independently of them.  Instead  of admitting  that  this  convergence  validates  and sanctions  the

distinctiveness  of  the theory  of  social representations,  he considers it  a  sign  of  its redundancy  and uselessness. In his  opinion, perhaps everything that bears its label could be 'reported without the label of  social representation  and its absence would have made little, if  any difference'.

Jahoda is free to think what he wants, but it is a  fact that the label was there prior to other labels and that its presence made and continues to make a difference. Jahoda's stance, which has nothing to do with either knowledge or criticism, will not stop me from continuing to build up a theory whose approaches are already 'taken for granted and  commonly  shared'.  Nor  will  it  prevent  me  from  wishing  to  keep  intact  its distinctiveness  in  the  common  research  effort  that  tends  to  confirm  rather  than invalidate the orientation it has followed from the start. A family resemblance is not the same as an identity, as seems to have escaped our critic -and not him alone. But let us  forget about these polemics and finally come to the point which might be the beginning of  a dialogue.  For Gustav Jahoda, notwithstanding his exaggerations,  is concerned with the same questions as we and realizes what difficulties  stand in the way of their solution.

## IV GETTING FAMILIARIZED WITH STRANGENESS

(1)

Representations meet  a great variety  of  social needs. Some of  these needs  are of  a purely  intellectual  or  cognitive  (to use  the  consecrated  term)  order.  They  can  be envisaged as Vorstelfungen, substitutes  or  reflections  of  what  is  in  people's minds. Others, of a practical sort, involve rituals and actions carried out in common. These are Darstellungen, wholly public performances and stagings of matters of a social sort. Just  as  a  play  performed  on  the  stage  of a  theatre  or  a  ceremony  supplies  a representation  in  which the group can recognize itself  or a  power  manifests itself. Either way, representations shape what is loosely termed  a social consciousness, the consciousness of  a period, a class or a nation  as a whole.  Awakening consciousness about a problem,  an historical situation, does not mean revealing something hidden but creating representations that make this revelation possible Yet this consciousness has not, to my  knowledge, been deciphered adequately. Even so, it makes us  realize the extent to which we must change our perspective. As a French physicist said, scale is what creates the phenomenon. There is a world of difference between representations envisaged at the person-to-person level and at the level of the relations between individuals and group, or at the level of a society's common consciousness. At each level, representations have a completely different meaning. The phenomena are related but different.

To the question: 'Why  did Mary eat her steaks?'  the two explanations 'because  they were  delicious' and  'because they  were too raw' supply causes that  lie outside the thoughts of the person who ate. One can disregard the fact that this judgment implies rules  of  gastronomy,  that  Mary  is  a  young  woman,  and  what  her  reasons  are for answering in this  way.  This is a  private matter which concerns  only  a few people, among them a logician and an experimenter. But the case is entirely different when we investigate a phenomenon that has collective implications.  Here we  have a hospital patient who is being interviewed by a journalist  and replying to a question of general concern.  The patient  says: 'Listen, I've  got  this  theory  about  AIDS.  The disease is

man-made. It's  a world-wide government plot to exterminate the undesirable. They want to commit genocide on us' (New  York, Nov. 30. 1987). Here too we  have an explanation  that  relies  on an external cause. However, it  immediately registers the relationship  between individual and  society and  the  state.  It  is  determined by  the context in which the patient, a veteran of the Vietnam War, is perceived, a context in which he seems to be an undesirable. His reply presupposes a content that was left unstated, the representation of  a society in which undesirables are put away and then eliminated by whatever methods are convenient. Disease is one such method, hence its 'man-made'  character. It thereby acquires a political rather than an organic character; and a person struck by such a disease appears then as a victim, not a patient. In fact, the  interviewee  started  out  with:  'I've  got  this  theory'.  He  has  thus  elaborated  a representation, which has actually been circulating for some time as a rumour. In this sense, it  is  a  social representation,  and  the  interview unintentionally  amplifies this social character.

There is no need to amplify this point to stress the fact that on the scale where we usually encounter representations,  mental  and social aspects take on a different air (Moscovici, 1987) than they do on the level of  one or two individuals. It is obvious why the problem-solving model is inadequate for studying these aspects. It is common practice in social psychology to look at cognitive phenomena in daily life from this angle, this  is,  as  puzzles  and  pragmatics  (Turnbull,  1986).  The  scientific model  is transposed  to  the  study  of  'lay'  theories.  But  the  carry-over  is  incomplete  since scientists solve their  enigmas in the  context  of  a paradigm  shared by  the  scientific community, whose equivalent for us would be a social representation.

Anyhow, in this light, individuals are expected to solve problems, spurred by  the urge to 'seek the truth'and make correct  judgments on facts (Higgins  and Bargh, 1987). With the rectification, however, that people perceive and think about the social world in a different way than they would if they relied exclusively on observation and rules o f logic. In short, they think less correctly about the stock market than about ocean tides, about the signs of power than about the signs of rain. But actually, when we move to a different  scale,  we  also  move  to  a  different  model.  When  we  are  talking  about individuals, it is possible to make a clearcut distinction between what is correct and what is incorrect, what is normal and what is abnormal. This is true because a society or scientific  community has legitimate definitions for the criterion according to which something can  be  considered true,  normal  or real.  The  same cannot  be  done  for groups,  societies or  cultures.  When  a war  is  said  to have  begun  through  a miscalculation or the concentration camps are called an error of Stalin's with respect to socialism, that is  a misuse of  language. It presumes that  one knows the true path of history, just as one knows the true trajectory of planets. The motive for this misuse is to  create  the  impression  that  these  events  were  mere  accidents.  They  could  be corrected, as one corrects an experimental error or an equation in a theory.

As I stressed at the very beginning: we are dealing  with knowledge  whose objective  it is  to 'create a reality'.  Communication is not  an expression of  thoughts and feelings secondary  to  these  thoughts and feelings. The  action underlying  them  is a communicative action,  even though it may  be instrumental  or purely ritualistic. It modifies or creates a reality and is converted into a practice which objectifies  thoughts and  feelings as soon  as they  are  communicated  and  shared.  Our  everyday life  is interwoven with that of  other people who act on us. The reason we know our life is that we create it day by day.

We  must therefore rid ourselves of the idea that representing something consists in imitating by thoughts or language facts and things that have a meaning outside the communication that expresses them. There is no social or psychological reality 'as such', no transparent  image of events or persons unconnected with the person who creates the image. For this very reason, the person who represents them at the same time represents himself or herself in and by them. It therefore seems difficult to claim that their knowledge results from the solving of a problem or from a recognition. This paradigm does not apply to everyday situations and exchanges. The Russian literary critic Bakhtin uses the dichotomy: 'thought about the world and thought in the world' (Bakhtin, 1987,  p.  162). When we move from representations as means of recognizing things to representations  as means of  constructing  reality, we  move from  thought about the world to thought in the world. In these dimensions, a representation leaves its mark both on language and practices. This mark does not constitute a sideeffect of mental and social functioning. The act of  acquiring knowledge never takes place in a vacuum;  it  exists  and  can  be  recognized  only  by  its  outcome,  in  what  is  directed towards others and preserved. Mental  states that are shared do not  remain  mental states, they are communicated, take shape, tend to materialize, to become objects. In that light, they acquire power. There is a'power of ideas'(Moscovici, 1988)  that makes itself felt in its highest form when representations acquire the intensity of  a belief.

In short, what is represented and how it is represented is given a meaning in terms of the position of the person who enunciates it. When someone takes clearcut positions and has firm values, the role of concepts and images constituting a representation is truly  crucial.  Rather  than  using  them as symbols, as means  of  interpreting  real observations,  people  see  elements  of  reality  in  them,  and  their  conceptual  and figurative components become secondary in relation to the main concern: acting and communicating. They see nothing but the object or being that they have in mind and they discuss it as though it made one with the concepts and words. By  stating that representations  must be viewed from  this perspective of an almost  material effectiveness, I  am restating  something that has  already been  pointed  out without receiving enough attention:  'It is time',  Hocart wrote, 'that those feelings and ideas which,  never  embodied  in  metal  or  stone,  live  in  the  mind  alone,  should  be acknowledged as realities as real as those that can be touched and capable of  being treated with the same  rigor as anything that falls  under our senses'(Hocart, 1987, p. 60).

There are two ways in which a representation can constitute something real. On the one hand, like language or symbols, it is performative; by virtue of  being shared, it defines a given situation. We behave towards a charismatic leader as though he had a definite  quality. This puts him under the obligation of presenting  himself and speaking as is prescribed for him. On the other hand, a representation is constructive to the extent  that  it  selects  and  relates  persons,  objects  in  such  a  way as to  meet  the stipulation o f   the group, enabling it to communicate and act in keeping with shared concepts and  images. The representer is  thus  present  in  the  thing  represented,  as money is present in the object that is bought and sold and to which it attributes a value.

It was shown that one's representations determine the cause one attributes to a given illness and  the  treatment  to  be  applied. A clinician trained  in  psychoanalysis will localize the patient's problem in his life history; a psychiatrist will see it as a genetic disorder or the result of the patient's current situation. In the former case, the tendency

will be to change the patient and protect society. In the latter, the inverse  tendency  will assert  itself an  effort  will  be  made  to protect  the  patient  and  change the  social situation (Batson, 1975). All of this presumes a selection and creation of information, which in turn determine  the reality in which people live.

When a theory  is disseminated and  changed into social representations, it  has analogous effects. It generates situations and informations that confer a man-made reality to  it. The theory of the split brain was popularized and caught the imagination to such an extent that it not only served as a way of interpreting facts but also became a source of  daily practices. Two American authors summarize its evolution in these terms: 'Thus the perennial  tug-of-war between emotion and reason, 'heart'  and 'mind', Freud's 'primary process' (primitive, mythic thought, as in dreams) and 'secondary process'  (rational analysis)  seemed to have a real embodiment  in the twin hemispheres. Joseph Bogen was among the first to hail the dual brain as a fundamental human dichotomy .  . . A widespread cult of the right brain ensued, and the duplex house that Sperry built grew into the K. Mart of brain science. Today our hairdresser lectures us about the Two Hemispheres of the Brain and mail order pop-psych urges us to awake the latent creativity of  our neglected right hemisphere. We even met a psychologist who runs a workshop for people who  are sloppy or neat because of  right- or lefthemisphere  dominance and who are mated to a person with the opposite tendency. Is any of this true? Well, some of it'  (Hooper and Teresi, 1986, p. 224).

This  example  illustrates  how  people  transform  a  piece  of  knowledge,  create information  that  confirms  it,  and  simultaneously  objectify  it  in  their  everyday practices. We  have clarified this phenomenon in several of  our studies (Moscovici, 1961; Herzlich, 1969; Jodelet,  1984; Mugny and Carrugati, 1985). What we took as premises for our research appears as the conclusion of a set of experiments  carried out independently:  'More crucial attention', the authors write, 'must clearly be paid to the ways in which perceivers create and construct the information in addition to the ways they process that information. When individuals are processing  a piece of information that they have created as a group, what happens 'out there' may well be as much the effects of  our  perception of  those  events as they  are causes of  these  perceptions' (Snyder et al., 1977, p.  664). The term perception is inadequate in this context and makes sense only because these facts were considered outside the social context.

All  this  leads  us  to  believe  that  'creating' a  reality  means  that  we  generally experience and think in terms of 'potential'  worlds which are set in 'real'  worlds. What I  mean is that our worlds, such as they are or such as we think they are, are partly constituted by  recollections of  what  they  used  to  be,  mixed  in  with  anticipations, calculations, and alternatives  that bring us together and make us act. The greater the extent to which a representation of  this world is shared with other people, the more this world which is of our making, 'in here',  seems to be autonomous, existing on its own, 'out there'.

In  effect,  social  representations,  to  rephrase  a  common  expression,  are  ways of world making. There is nothing arbitrary in this process, since the regularities of  thought, language and life in society all act together to delimit the possibilities.  That is why the concept of construction, once it is trivialized, loses its exact,  emancipating  character,  if it is envisaged as a simple product of talking and of consensus among individuals. It anything goes, then the act of constructing is less a creative liberty of reality than an illusion about the conditions of this liberty.

2

We still have a long way to go before we understand the psychology of cognition, in which creating reality is more important than testing reality. This view of what goes on in  the  world  entails  setting up provisional  concepts  to apprehend  the  phenomena. Jahoda is aware of this need. He presents the ones I have suggested as though I had done nothing but jot them down, without rhyme or reason. The opposition between a consensual  and  a  reified  universe  may  seem  odd  or  disturbing.  Or  it  might  be assimilated to  such opposites as spontaneous and organized, formal and informal, etc. But does it fill any intrinsic need? When we adopt the model in which thinking creates reality, we must spell out the categories defining  this thinking. Every representation, to be sure, takes shape in a culture that divides persons from things and that imposes a framework on all thinking and behaviour in a set of societies. For a long period of time, this was the case with  respect  to the framework defining  the  sacred  and  the profane, the supernatural and the natural. The framework was reinforced by human actions and interrelations,  which submitted to  certain imperatives of the mind and feelings that went along with it. In modern society, the representations that have taken the place of myths and popular knowledge constitute our world in a different framework.

Under the lead  of  science, one might imagine that the categories of  rational and irrational have taken over some of the functions and even of the prestige of the sacred and the profane. They encourage a model of human nature as a mechanism that solves problems and then tests the solutions against reality. But these categories apply mainly to the individual. As to those that we  shape in  common, we  might  say what  LkviStrauss asserted about myths: 'To be elevated into a myth, a creation must be more than an individual creation'(L6vi-Strauss, 1971, p. 56). They still bear the mark of an antagonism between human and non-human meanings, between what belongs to us as human beings and what seems to come from outside us, what seems to be objectified. More generally,  there is  a  certain  antagonism between  the  consensual category to which the former belongs and the reified category to which the latter belongs. And representations reflect the gap which separates these two categories.

Let  us  come back  to the  case of  the  split brain.  Moving  beyond  the  findings  of biology  and genetics,  people  have  ventured  to consign the  right-hand  brain  to the category of the consensual, and the left-hand  brain to the reified category. I am not saying that  this  is erroneous,  but  the representations  contains a  dichotomy  whose content can be expressed in tabular form:

This may all sound like ajust-so story. Yet, in view of its wide dissemination, which has made it become part of our common view of things, the question arises what made

it fall into place in this way.  We  are then confronted  again by  the above-mentioned framework and the categories that define it, exerting their compelling influence on thinking and images with the force of evidence.

One often wonders why people are so cavalier about validating their judgments, so forgetful of  statistical rules, and so unconcerned about correcting their mistakes. It would seem less peculiar if one looked at people not only as biological organisms but also as social organisms. The question arises in what sort of  universe dilemmas are formulated and what is the position in this universe of the people who must resolve them.  In  a  consensual universe,  the  communicative function  of  thought  is  highly important,  since  it  contributes  to  the  exchanges  that  are  constantly  taking  place between people about  events that  influence their  lives or arouse their  curiosity. It allows a continuous flow of deliberations between persons whose opinions and moods are always in flux. Conversation gives a human meaning to what matters to them, preferably outside the social hierarchy. 'In familiar speech, since speech constraints and  conventions  have  fallen  away,  one  can  take  a  special, unofficial,  volitional approach to reality' (Bakhtin,  1986, p. 97).  Under these conditions, representations assume a configuration where concepts and images can coexist without any attempt at uniformity,  where  uncertainty  as  well  as  misunderstandings are tolerated,  so  that discussion can go on and thoughts circulate.

People are producers and users of representations all in one. There is a crucial  factor underlying their relations, namely confidence. The same holds true  in political  and economic life.  Paper money, checks, or other symbols are passed on freely, under a thin fictitious cover. Intrinsically valueless paper derives its value from something  else which is intangible. Similarly,  we do not check on the information given by a  colleague or friend, the main thing is  that it sounds correct. In the consensual universe, these representations  have  a fiduciary truth,  which  is  generated by  the trust  we  place in information and judgments when we share them with other people.

In the reified universe, we  must supply a definite structure and consistency to our knowledge of  people and social events. Thinking, in this context, means organizing and incorporating each special example into a more comprehensive framework. This calls for  a hierarchy and  specific communication rules which  organize information into a unified or even a unique representation. This representation becomes a base of operations and shapes official reality, from which irrelevant features and troublesome alternatives have been banished. The brain may be described as a computer, but it is impossible to reify  thinking  as such,  nor  can  it  be  defined  by  operations  that  are basically mechanical. In this universe, all truth is regal truth in that it is confirmed by its  conformity  to  prescribed  procedures  and  terminology.  Rules  are  trusted,  not persons, even if the conditions for applying the rules are not fulfilled.

The theory of social representations has adopted in large part the perspective of the consensual universe, which means that the reified universe is also taken into account. Both  universes  act  simultaneously to  shape  our  reality.  When  we  speak  of  the alienation  of man,  of  bureaucratic  abuses,  we  have  in  mind  a  reified  universe confronting  a  human  being  living  in  the  consensual  universe.  And  the  contrast between these two universes finds an expression in the distinction between soft and organic  medicines,  clinical  and  experimental  psychology,  soft  and  hard  sciences, narrative  and paradigmatic thought (Zukier,  1986). For a purportedly culture-blind social  psychology (Pepitone,  1986), our  categories are  superfluous. The  biological equipment of human beings, which is its reference point, does not vary from culture to

culture. But representations are envisaged on a scale where cultural differences do matter in shaping  the human family and its world. Once these differences  in categories have been recognized, the question arises; what purpose is served by representions in general?

(3)

To answer this question, I proposed the hypothesis that all representations arise from our  need  to turn  the  strange into  something familiar. Our  attention  is  caught by oddities,  incongruous  things,  fascinated  by  the  monstrous,  the  unusual,  natural catastrophes, miracles of science or the creations of artists and novelists. Science  itself rejects the trivial in its theories and  experiments. Realizing how deeply rooted this tendency is and how it  is  reinforced by  the customary demands for novelty,  I  was hesitant to advance the above hypothesis. I was led to do so recently, in the light of  a set of  studies addressing questions such a s : What grip do representations  have on our feelings?  What affective  urge must they fulfil?  What satisfaction  can be expected from them?

To  cope with this  kind  of  material,  one does not turn to books for  answers or concepts. In fact, one avoids them, to keep an open mind, a freshness of  thought in looking for a solution. Despite Jahoda's remonstrances, I therefore have no qualms about my failure to read Schutz's work or about not having referred to Bartlett, in whose  work  I  subsequently found  much  that  supported  my  conclusions. Jahoda admits that he finds my  hypothesis interesting, but this step forward is followed by another step backward. He insists that I do not give sufficient evidence to show that the unfamiliar is disturbing, if  not threatening. I agree with him there, but I do not think  one  needs  to  list  all  the  known  facts  when  stating  a  proposition.  Some indications seemed adequate to me. To confine myself to his example: I do not think that children's fear of  unfamiliar persons or objects can be separated from the 'idea' that they have of them. The magic power of strangeness and night, the fear of the dark undoubtedly originate  just as much from an imaginary  abandonment by a beloved and protective mother as from stories  told to the child.

What disturbs him is not really the lack of evidence  but the nature of the hypothesis. To  wit,  the  affective  motivational  basis  of social  representations.  Though  these emotions are as numerous and varied as the representations themselves, they all have in common the feeling of  strangeness, which has the same import for the life of  the mind  that  guilt feelings have for  moral life.  Following Piaget's  footsteps, Jahoda reformulates the hypothesis in purely cognitive terms in order to dispose of it. From the social  point of view, a cognition  is inseparable  from its affective basis; that was my initial observation. Secondly, how do we differentiate  the strange from the unknown, the  obscure  or the  contradictory? The  reason  why  hypnosis seems strange is  not because its causes are unknown or  because its effects  fly in the face of common sense, but because of its unfamiliar, unusual, slightly  magic aspects. Gustav Jahoda assumes that  the  non-familiar  originates in  intellectual  uncertainties  and  can  be  defined objectively, without taking the feelings of  those who experience it into account. He identifies  it with the novel, the original, and that does not make much sense.

The presumption of strangeness or unfamiliarity  expresses  something  quite different than a contradiction or dissonance between two cognitions. It refers to a failure of communication with the world in which a person or object is situated and an overflow

of  meaningfulness which imbues the idea one has o f   him, her or it with illdefined, hence disturbing emotions. There occurs a short-circuit in the current of exchanges, a shock to familiar meanings, which startles us out of a passive state, out of self-evident convictions.  Irrespective  of how detailed and down-to-earth our knowledge  of certain sexual practices,  homosexuality, f.i.,  may  be,  it  always maintains its  strangeness, because of  its  forbidden character.  In the  same way, certain types  of  knowledge, scientific  knowledge among them, are always considered  more or less esoteric. But let Heider have the privilege of describing the effects of the feeling of unfamiliarity: 'An unfamiliar situation is full of  possibilities that may be sufficiently  threatening to an insecure  person  to  turn  him  against  it.  An  unfamiliar  situation  is  cognitively unstructured,  that  is,  the  sequence of  steps necessary to reach  an  objective is  not clearly known. On the basis of  the consequences of  cognitive unclarity, the unstable behavior and  the  conflicts of  such groups  as the  following have  been  explained: adolescents (Lewin,  1939), minority  groups,  (Lewin,  1935 a),  autocratic  groups (Lippitt,  1940), young  children in  unfamiliar  surroundings (Arsenian,  1943),  and persons with disabilities (Barker et  al., 1953) .   . . The strange is  experienced as not fitting the structure of  the matrix of  the life space, as not fitting one's  expectations. The adaptation of change in expectation which is required by meeting the unfamiliar demands energy'  (Heider, 1958, p.  194).

To cope with a 'strange'  idea or perception, we begin by anchoring it to an existing social representation.  The whole entity acquires an everyday meaning in the process. A nice illustration is offered by a study of  the representation of  radioactivity by Italian children after the Chernobyl accident (Nigro et al., 1986).  The unfamiliar phenomena that took place (explosion, evacuation  of the population, food contamination) are first absorbed with the help of religious, science-fiction  or medical  images that the children already have. The familiar  concepts and images  contribute first their own descriptions and later their explanations. In the end, the unfamiliar is assimilated and the whole thing is unified in a representation of  the new object in the process.

An important but often neglected feature of anchoring is the transfer of  a network of concepts and images from one sphere  to another, where it then serves  as model. The extreme Right in France, f.i.,  recently formulated a representation of  AIDS copied from  that  of  tuberculosis and  proposed  comparable  remedies.  It  even  created  a suitable  terminology:  the  patients,  under  the  designation  of  'sidafques' (from the French abbreviation  for AIDS) were to be quarantined from the rest of the population in a 'sidatorium'. On a more spontaneous level, the same sort of process is at work in large American cities.  Although it appears that  the disease is propagated generally from male to female, the representations  formed as a result of word of mouth rumours follow the traditional model and assume that contagion takes place from female to male  (Fine,  1987). The  rules applied to anchorage are indeed the  ones noted  by Bartlett:  'As has  been  pointed  out  before,'  he  writes, 'whenever material visually presented purports to be representative of some common object, but contains certain features which are unfamiliar in the community to which the material is introduced, these  features  invariably  suffer  transformation  in  the  direction  of the  familiar' (Bartlett, 1932,  p.  178).

In conclusion, a decoding operation calls for the transformation of  'strange'  into 'familiar'  symbols, without ever meeting complete success. At last one stops paying attention to them, because they have become self-evident or trivial. Concepts and images become objectified and turn into things that are self-contained. Words turn

into clichts, meanings that are contradictory can coexist without cancelling each other out and acquire an impersonal character. They now are everybody's  and nobody's and repeated in daily exchanges. We reach the point where we no longer differentiate the objects about which we  have concepts, and we no longer see them, just as we  pay no attention to our relatives, because they are about all the time, not because they are indifferent to us.  'They have eyes and  see not' is the phrase in the  Old Testament. 'Implicit'  or 'lay'  theories are representations in that state. Tension with the unfamiliar has the merit of preventing mental habituation from taking over completely. It averts the complete repression of  what is under  our eyes, the familiar. The prejudices that enable us to  judge remain in a state of arousal, perceptions are maintained in a state of alertness.  This  tension  can  be  seen  at  work  when  psychology  gives  theoretical expression to informations on the individual or society which already were part of the representations  shared  by  society.  There  they  act  upon  and are  objectified  in relationships  and  behaviours without  our  realizing  it.  They  are  reinvigorated  and brought to the surface in a new guise by the scientific  theories, whose terminology and methods differ from the ones applied in our daily life (Semin, 1987).

I do not mean to imply that I have proved the hypothesis and even less that it should not be refined in the light of observations (Mugny and Carrugati, 1985; Jodelet, 1983), in order to deserve our full confidence. But it opens up a way of thinking about the genesis of social representations and about human communications in general.

(4)

Having reached this point, I feel like a hurdler who, having cleared a certain number of  hurdles, is told that he might as well save his trouble, there is no point to the race itself.  Having  explained  myself  on  the  consensual  and  reified  categories,  on  the underlying dynamics or representations, I am sent back to my schoolbench. Nobody any longer thinks of  perception  as a copy or reproduction of  what we  see, Jahoda informs me. The concepts themselves, furthermore, are fragments of social representations.  I  must  be either  ignorant  or naive  to see something distinctive in them, ajunction point between percepts and concepts. To be sure, I have been familiar with these arguments for ages, and I keep up with all that is going on in these fields. Let us  turn instead to the dose of  the imaginary contained to a certain extent in all representations.  In a study of  social representations  about  mental illness, de  Rosa (1987)  showed  and  in  fact  discovered  that  the  figurative  component  develops independently of the intellectual component. It seems to be rooted in an archaic state of social  memory.  The  same  is  true  of  representations  in  a  group.  Kaes  (1976) describes how they emerge from a certain number of very early images of the family and  the  parents'  bodies.  Only  later  are  they  incorporated  in  these  concepts  and associated with  a  vocabulary  to express  them.  The two  studies  indicate  that  the figurative  component  is stabler  and more  directly  social  than the intellectual component. Images have the advantage of  linking us to the past and of  anticipating the shape of things to come, of the real in the making.

In the process of  communication, a cognitive structure is generated which differs from the 'classical'  structure, irrespective  of the individuals'  degree of education or the degree of  formality in the field of  knowledge. Ideas and information not intended to remain the exclusive property of a small minority must be transformed radically when they are propagated in society and become a subject of everyday conversation. When

men have other minds in their minds, they process information and ideas at a certain level to communicate them and  form a shared reality.  Anyone who disregards this need and limits himself to the 'conceptual'or 'scientific'level  will never be able to reach more  than  a  tiny  minority,  Our  current  research  on  the  social representation  o f Marxism reveals this 'unwanted'consequence. For all these reasons, I have opted for a definition of  representation that includes both abstract and iconic features. It enables us  to understand  an idea with  the  same vividness as  a perception,  and  vice versa (Moscovici, 1985).

One consequence of  all this at least becomes clear: representations have a social character  because  of  a  special  isomorphism  of  the  cognitive  structure  and  of  the functions to acting and communicating it fulfils in society. This is how the historian Duby describes the dissemination of  Christian doctrines in the masses of the people: 'Where it was a matter of making conversions,'  he writes 'and of educating in order to convert, it is obvious that the workshops of cultural creation, which were situated in the  upper  levels  of the  social  edifice,  among  the  avant-garde  of  the  ecclesiastic dignitaries, but  always at work to fill the needs of  the people, voluntarily accepted vague tendencies, schemata, and mental images prevailing at lower levels of culture, to be able  to  domesticate  them,  incorporate  them  in  the construction of their propaganda. By this propaganda, clothed in more familiar features, Christian doctrine had less difficulty in penetrating the masses' (Duby, 1988, p.  196).

In recombining cognitive  elements,  an image is particularly apt to 'make  one see'and render familiar things that remain remote, strange. Things appear more ordinary and more interesting. Social representations are shaped and communicated to make the everyday world more exciting. Beyond this finding, there emerges a tendency in the psychosocial development of  an idea or piece of  information.  While energy  always moves  from  a  hot  to  a  cold  state,  it  is  a  social  law,  on  the  contrary,  that  causes cognitions to move from a cold to a hot state.

We are led on by a lively, repeated image from what we perceive to a  judgment whose logic  appears  as  the  most  accurate,  the  simplest expression of  the  way  things  are (Piaget and Inhelder, 1966; Johnson-Laird  and Steedman, 1978).  Our reactions to the sight of a crowd run amok are the same whether we have 'seen'it on television or in a stadium, and either way we  will be  sure of  them. By  this means we  can skip several logical steps and make something familiar. Ideas we have conceived are transformed into perceived objects -think of  collective  hallucinations and illusions! -and become so vivid that their internal content assumes the character of an external reality. Mead was ahead of me in making this observation: 'We must recognize not only a corporeal individual, but  a social and  logical individual, each of  whom would  answer to the translation of the social and logical and psychological sciences  into terms of psychical environment'. And he adds, recognizing that the only psychological term appropriate here is that of image, in spite of all its implications: 'There  is no other expression that answers to such an organisation  of  a subjective state that it may become objective' (Mead, 1981, p. 57).

Through its instrumentality, ideas turn into things, thoughts into acts, and names are attached to persons. But while realizing the truth of this, we must admit that social representations have both an iconic and an intellectual aspect that is characteristic of them,  and  the  variable  extent  to  which  each  aspect  manifests  itself  depends  on circumstances,  the degree of literacy,  beliefs. At the present time we see a predominant tendency to convert ideas and events into figurative thought which depicts instead of

describing, shows instead of  explaining, thus reinforcing the daydreaming, wishful thinking  and  dream  worlds that  are  relentlessly churned  out  in  public media  and conversation places.

Is a representation  in fact a distinctive psychic phenomenon? The answer to this question is decidedly yes.  We  must first recognize that there are two universes, two categories, the consensual and the reified. These categories shape our thoughts and views  which  are  then  activated  so  as  to  familiarize  us  with  the  strange.  All  this intensifies to some extent the figurative character of  representations and their specific nature, confirming Wittgenstein's comment: 'The act of thinking is quite comparable to drawing pictures'  (Wittgenstein, 1980,  p.  172). Hence the importance of the stylistic qualities and the aesthetic value of  social representations,  as well  as the fascination they arouse.

I am once more laying myself open to Jahoda's gibes about my allusions, metaphors and similar vices. But the point is that the phenomenon  with which we  are dealing falls within the range of  several social sciences, and we  are compelled to use  a more personal phrasing. These vices are not intended as a way  of  embellishing the text or giving me greater pleasure in writing it. They are devices for allowing several forms of analysis and modes of discourse to converge and yet remain as close as possible to the matter at hand. The main point is to glimpse something we had not glimpsed before and to glimpse it in a new way. I am too well acquainted with the devices of a virtuous style of writing, having published in all the journals that require it, but I am not sure that we owe it any special advances or that it has contributed to making our research known outside a narrow circle. Virtue is not always rewarded, even if vice is sometimes punished by the moral majority.

## V THE SCIENCE OF PRIVATE LIFE VERSUS THE SCIENCE OF PUBLIC LIFE

(1)

Has Gustav Jahoda really considered the ethical and intellectual implications of  his conclusions? I appreciate his granting me the merit of  having originated a label and done  some research, unworthy  of  science, to be  sure,  but  which  nevertheless has aroused some interest. Whereupon he dispossesses me of these very things and advises me  to  let  serious-minded  people  take  over,  hand  the  task  to  persons  who  can reconstruct systematically  what I tinkered together and who will replace my 'soft'  by a 'hard' approach. I find these metaphors  borrowed from pornography  distasteful. It might  have  been  better  to refer  to  'non-linear' and  'linear' thinking,  or  a 'broadminded' and a 'narrow-minded'  view, and he would have made his point more clearly.

If  I understand rightly, he proposed three remedies: 1) giving a rigorous definition of  representations, 2) adopting more rigorous research methods, and 3) returning to the well-established framework of social cognition. At first sight, these are reasonable propositions, but they are very broad and carry us a long way. Our strategy has always been to combine the soft and hard  approaches as fitted the case, making sure that concern  for  rigour  did  not  overwhelm  our  heuristic  concern.  There  are  so  many still-born babies in science that we had better reduce than increase  mortality. As far as definitions  go,  they  have  a  moot  value.  Concepts  have  not  just  one  but  many

definitions, as is true for such concepts as self, schema, attitude, etc. And if  there are many, then  there  is  none.  So we  are left  with  descriptions and  intuitions,  some of which meet with everyone's approval and others not. While I have been reticent about defining social representations,  others have done so boldly (Doise,  1985; Flament, 1986; Jodelet, 1983; Codol,  1969 b) and successfully. The first remedy has thus been discovered already.

What can be said about the method? We are concerned with two types of theories which should not be confused. Some are conceptual frameworks which enable us to discover a new, fruitful aspect of the facts, interpret them and discuss them, which is not  a  negligible  contribution.  Other  theories  are  a  system  of  hypotheses that  are derived from the facts and can be verified or falsified. Most theories in the behavioural sciences  and  social  psychology  are  of  the  former  type:  field  theory,  information processing, attribution theory, social representations, of  course. One cannot  expect great precision from them nor subject them to an exhaustive factual test.

Our reservations  about rigorous methods are  motivated by the need to  take the  growth potential  of  the conceptual framework into account. Being comparatively new, our theory certainly still has a long way  to go before being verifiable or falsifiable -on condition  it  remains fruitful.  The only reasonable scientific attitude is  therefore to respect these requirements rather than subject it to criteria that it will be able to meet only later, if at all. Here is what the physicist Bohm wrote about the slow germination of  ideas: 'But a new idea which has broad implications may require a long period of gestation before falsifiable inferences can be drawn from it. For example, the atomic hypothesis, first suggested by Democritus twenty-five centuries ago, had no falsifiable inference for at least two thousand  years. New  theories are like growing plants that need to be nurtured and cultured for a time before they are exposed to the risks of the elements'  (Bohm and Prat, 1987, p. 59).

Our idea still needs  to  be  nurtured  and  cultured, there  is  nothing illogical about admitting it. Convinced as we  are of  all its implications, our primary concern is to enrich its contents and refine its theoretical framework. In short, to fill it out, to give it shape, if the purpose is to come up with an original domain of knowledge  that helps us to understand  what people do in real life and in significant situations. To reach this goal, we must undoubtedly rely more on the creativity of researchers  than on tried and proven procedures. Jahoda is  of  a different opinion, since he  blames the theory  of social representations for having depended on a more or less qualitative, shall we say, cavalier approach. Because of which he proposes that the label be dropped and that I be left to my bird-watching and pseudo-explanations. To make way for minds that are more concerned with proofs and rigorous methods.

He should have looked at the question not in terms of persons but in terms of the nature of  the phenomenon. My reservations about the methods he proposes are not due to a lack of know-how, an aversion to laboratory experiments or scaling, as can be seen from the fact that I willingly use them in other fields. They are motivated by the desire to avert any kind of premature exactness which, as Festinger reminds us, results in the stillbirth of capital ideas and leads to 'barren'  research (Festinger, 1980, p. 252). The need to push investigations  in the various possible directions to the limit is critical. We have therefore followed several 'hard'  and 'soft' tracks, not to bend with the wind but to use  the approach that was most appropriate for the content, We  always used scaling  to uncover the structure of questionnaire material, as was true of the similarity analysis by  Flament (1962). We  often apply hierarchic analysis (Moscovici, 1961) or

factorial  analysis  (Mugny  and  Carrugati,  1985). Several  researchers  (Di  Giacomo, 1986;  Le  Bouedec,  1986) have  recently  come  up  with  a  statistically  sound  word association technique, which reveals the network of concepts and images constituting a representation, and evaluates quantitatively the link that holds them together.

All these methods nevertheless raise the problem of what the structures defined in this  way  actually  mean.  The anthropologist  d'Andrade  refers  to  the  same  sort  of problem: 'A major drawback of this research is that multidimensional scaling does not yield results which fit a cognitive processing model. That is, one cannot, from scaling results, construct a computer program which even roughly simulates human thinking processes. But then, how are ordinary people able to fill out large matrices of the type used  in  this  research?  Perhaps  attention  to  how  people  actually  process  cultural information  can  yield  more  effective  and  general  models  than  multidimensional scaling'(D'Andrade, 1986 b, p. 45). The problem here is to make thought accessible  to scientific measurements.

There  is  nothing  difficult  about  using  the  experimental  method,  and  in  fact whenever a hypothesis lent itself to it, numerous experiments were performed. Selfesteem (Faucheux  and  Moscovici,  1968), creativity (Abric,  1971; Abric and  Kahn, 1972), conflict  resolution  (Abric,  1976;  Apfelbaum,  1967;  Codol,  1968 and  1969; Flament,  1967), group and intergroup relations  (Doise,  1972 and  1984; Hewstone er al., 1982; Plon, 1968; Rossignol et Flament,  1977): each taught  us  a great deal and showed how much this approach can contribute to social psychology. Nevertheless, we felt the need to set broader goals, in line with Neisser's view: 'The actual development of cognitive  psychology  in  the  last  few  years  has  been  disappointingly  narrow, focusing  inward  on  the  analysis  of  specific  experimental  situations  rather  than outward toward the world beyond the laboratory' (Neisser, 1976, p. XI).

Since it is obvious that words are not the same as the things to which they refer and are  nonetheless  understood  by  a  community  of  speakers,  representations  must  be involved in  this  situation.  Certain  words  have  a  way  of  concentrating  images and meanings  that  galvanize  conversation  and  thinking.  Others,  though  rather  empty themselves,  act  as  a  bridge  between  one  universe  and  another  and  enable  us  to communicate  about what  we  do not  understand.  Some are  pure  emblems (AIDS, charisma, computer, Oedipus complex), others are quasi-metaphors (black holes, the unconscious,  genetic  code). These  two types  constitute  the  web  of a whole set  of combinations underlying the language of a representation.  We  have made a serious effort all along to study this language by  means of rigorous methods that would give us  access to certain cognitive  processes.  Beginning with  studies by  Ackerman  and Zygouris (1974) who used syntol and ending with studies along more logical lines by Grise et  al. (1987) and Vergks (1987), a series of analyses of the spoken word  have enriched our methodological stock. I am in no position to  judge, but I know (Gardin, 1974) that this  solution is  not the last word in the problem  of  relating theories  and facts. This problem will arise as long as the analysis of speech has no specific status of its own, since it remains vulnerable to philosophical controversies about the relations between language and thought.

In my eyes, observation retains a privileged position in the study of the phenomena of  thinking and communication. Through it the big break-throughs that allow us to understand the life of the mind were made, from Ltvy-Bruhl to Piaget, from Freud to Vigotsky, from Lewin to Marc Bloch. And when I look back on the research we did along these  lines (Moscovici,  1961; Herzlich,  1969; Palmonari,  1981; Jodelet,  1983;

Emler  and  Dickenson,  1985), I  find  that it  allowed  us to grasp  the  phenomena  in

question  in  depth. Observation  has  a  preeminent  role  in  the  study  of  social representations. It frees us from premature qualification and experimentation, which chop up facts into tiny pieces and lead to meaningless findings. At times it may be a sort of bird-watching, to be sure, but it may result in great strides. Even if it does not yield  equally significant  insights, this approach  may  occupy  a  place  in  social psychology (von Cranach, 1980)  comparable to the position secured by the ethological approach in biology, and for very much the same reasons. With reference to the latter, Medawar has written the following passage to which we should give some thought; 'In the  'thirties',  it  did  not  seem  to  us  that  there was a  way  of  studying  behaviour 'scientifically' except  through  some kind  of  experimental intervention -except  by confronting the subject of our observation with a 'situation' or with a nicely contrived stimulus and then recording what an animal did. The situation would then be varied in some way that seemed appropriate,  whereupon  the animal's behaviour would  also vary. Even poking an animal would surely be better than just looking at it; that would lead  to  anecdotalism:  that  was  what  bird-watchers  did.  Yet  it  was  also  what  the pioneers of ethology did. They studied natural behaviour and were thus able for the first  time  to discern  natural behaviour  structures or episodes -a  style  of  analysis helped very greatly by the comparative approach, for the same or similar behavioural sequences in numbers of related  species reinforced  the idea that there was a certain natural connectedness between its various terms, as if they represented the playing out of  a certain instinctual programme' (Medawar, 1965, p.  109).

For many years to come observation stimulated by theory and armed with subtle analytical  methods  will  still  give  us  the  means  of  understanding  the  genesis  and structure  of  social  representations in  situ. In  any  case,  we  are  at  this  moment witnessing a  blossoming  of  research  and  original methodological  efforts (especially those  carrying  on  Flament's  work)  which  will  bear  fruit.  It  is  easy  to  make  pat judgments from a distance, but looking at things from close up, one would see that we probably  constitute  the  most  active group  in  this field, and  each  of  us  is aware of participating in a movement that is reaching out in several directions.

(2)

Would all requirements be met if we applied the criteria of definition and rigour? No, not even then. According to Jahoda, 'it would be more realistic to tie this up with the growing body of work on social cognition rather than claim the unverified existence of special domains'. As though social cognition was not an amalgam of special domains. We keep up with this research and assimilate some of its results. But what we are asked to  do  is to take over principles that are relevant on the individual scale and apply them without modification to phenomena on a group or societal scale. This has been done, to be sure, but the experience anthropology has had with this transposition alerts us to its limitations. After examining the hypotheses and postulates  which 'allow only for the intervention  of mechanisms of the individud human mind', Ltvy-Bruhl listed all the arguments militating against their transposition to collective representations.  His objection was that they are 'social facts, like the institutions that they reflect'  and, on this account, 'have their own laws, laws that the analysis of individuals as individuals can never reveal'(Ltvy-Bruhl,  1951, p. 14).

To  eliminate this 'special domain',  one would  actually have to give up the  social character of representations  and a social psychology genuinely based on knowledge derived from them. It is widely recognized that most of the research does not involve

the social context  or refer to group products (Nisbett and Ross,  1980). The body of work on social cognition studies cognition as a non-social process. This leads it to a one-sided link with cognitive psychology, to the point where researchers themselves become uneasy: 'When one notes the massive borrowing from cognitive psychology by investigators of social cognition, the question arises: is it valid for social cognition to import theories derived from the study of  non-social phenomena? Do people know about one another as they know about sounds, geometric shapes, chairs or animals?' (Landman and Manis, 1983, p.  109). Borrowing is inevitable, undoubtedly. However, in view of  the phenomena with which we  are concerned  and their context (Zajonc, 1980),  it  would be  legitimate  to  draw  more  extensively  on  child  psychology, anthropology  and even psychoanalysis. This would be more heuristic  borrowing, if one wished  to understand  how  people  create  information  and  not  only  how  they process it.

For reasons that I will leave to others to explain, social cognition focuses on bias, slip-ups in thinking, reasoning errors of ordinary human beings. This cognitive malfunctioning  of  the  ordinary  mind  appears  to  be  intrinsic,  rather  than  instigated, provoked by  extraneous emotions or needs. From this the conclusion is drawn that there is an abyss between logical and natural thinking, social thinking included. Social thinking  would  seem  to  consist  of  stereotypes  and  incongruities,  in  short  to  be irrational.  In  truth,  there  is  something  naive,  pre-scientific in  seeing these  biases, errors,  illusory  correlations,  etc.  as  the  distinctive  feature  of  ordinary  and  social thinking. This amounts to making the naive assumption that there exists a norm for thinking  to  which  one  must  conform  and  which  takes  logical  reasoning  and probability as its standards. For many judgments, however, 'neither normative models nor direct verifications seem to be available. Here the investigators' own judgment as to  what  would  constitute  a  valid  inference  is  frequently  used  as  a  standard  of veridicality; and deviations from this standard are considered erroneous' (Kruglansky and Ajzen, 1983, p.  3).

It might as well be admitted that one uses an arbitrary standard for defining what is held  up  as  absurd  or deviant. There surely were times when the  mentality  ill  were believed to talk nonsense, children's errors on tests were interpreted as signs of  lesser intelligence, and  primitive  religions  were  taken  to  be  superstitions  due  to  faulty associations.  Just  as many  studies on social  cognition consider lay  thinking to be characterized  by  inference 'troubles'. This leaves them open to the sort of  comment Wittgenstein expressed about the Golden Bough: 'The way in which Frazer states the magic and religious conceptions of men is not satisfactory: it makes these conceptions look like errors' (Wittgenstein, 1982,  p.  13).

Now  a  scientific  approach  to  these  phenomena  in  pathological  psychology, anthropology or child psychology actually became possible only when it was observed that  this  nonsense  does  have  its  own  meaning  and  that  errors  reflect  a  different representation  of  reality.  It  was  Piaget's  discovery, to give just  one  example,  that children subjected to a test gave wrong answers to the questions, but their ways of reasoning were also qualitatively different. A younger child is neither more stupid than an  elder  child,  nor  is  he  in  any  way  retarded.  His  way  of  thinking  is  completely different. So is his representation of the world. By asking the right questions, one can observe that the child applies his reasoning power to every object. The results of this extension of Lkvy-Bruhl's discovery are well-known.

In this light, the fundamental errors of attributing an event to a person rather than to a situation is in fact not an error. It is an integral part of  a moral and legal view of

things that makes a person responsible for his or her actions. Generally speaking, all these  slip-ups make  sense if  viewed  in  the  light  of  representations shared  by  many people (Otway and Thamas, 1982). In the same way, incongruous or abnormal results may  be  attributable  not  to  researchers' flawed  thinking  but  to  a  paradigm  of  the scientific community. We  do not  wish to shock anyone, but  it could  well be that, contrary to what is claimed, by introducing the concept which concerns us into social cognition,  one  might  give  it  a  more  scientific character  and  account  for  all  these inference slips.

Many  problems  come  up  in  the  relations  between  different  groups  such  as physicians and  patients,  parents  and  children, the  media  and  the public.  They  are caused neither by a lack of information -on the contrary, information is plentiful -nor by a lack of logical skill. But they do reflect a lack of social representations or a flaw in the  representations that are exchanged  and communicated  in daily life. By giving  them  the  attention  they  deserve,  one  could  build  a  bridge  between  mental functioning  and  social content,  as  d'Andrade  demonstrated  very  straightforwardly (1986). Once they are viewed as symptoms of a certain representation of society or of relations with the external world (Flament,  1986; Moscovici, 1988), all these alleged slip-ups will cease to seem illogical. Certain false problems would no longer trouble us (Moscovici and  Hewstone,  1984; Douglas,  1985; Doise and  Palmonari,  1986) and rationality would be seen in a different light. This should be stressed without pretence at originality; what matters is being aware of the issues to be known and understood.

There is no question that social recognitions are representations in a general way. This is the case when they describe how individuals pick out what they need from the available information, facts and rules. They use only what is relevant, without having to examine and reject what is not. In what manner do they organize information so as to extract at once whatever the current situation demands? They always have the right word,  object,  and feeling. It is actually  past  experience that  enables them  to build forms, construct concepts and connect the diversity confronting them with schemata or frameworks already present in their minds (Higgins and Bargh, 1987). We are thus dealing with forms of  thought  shaped  by  contents that  are already available in the brain, that is, stereotypes of the situation or the self. Every new object is reduced to an old  object  in  this  way,  and  the  unprecedented  case  is  subsumed  under  a  general category. The unstable world is stabilized, and recovers its routine appearance for the individual. Schemata, scripts and prototypes may be specific and concrete -f.i.  what is the prototype  of  a hamburger? How does one eat in a restaurant? -or they can be abstract -how is a correct equation put together? They all provide a stock of learned behaviour  or ideas with which to face the needs of  daily life.  These categorization processes are of  great  interest,  especially those involving prototypes  (Semin,  1987), because  they  reformulate  in  terms  of  information  theory  processes  that  are  very familiar  to  social  psychology,  first  and  foremost  the  process  of  categorization  or stereotyping (Billig, 1986).

These theories are in any case inadequate  when it comes to understanding social representations  in  the  making,  adjusting  themselves to  the  sinuousities of  a  given culture. How can we speak of constructing or creating reality on the basis of processes with exactly the opposite meaning? And to what extent can we rely on processes that dissociate thinking from communication, when all representations are both a resultant and a dissemination focus of what has been created? Reread the passage about the split  brain  quoted  earlier,  and  you  will  see  how  inextricably  dissemination  and knowledge are bound together.  When a representation  emerges, it is startling to see

how it grows out of a seeming repetition of clichts, an exchange of tautological terms as they occur in conversations, and a visualisation  of fuzzy images relating to strange objects.  And  yet  it  combines  all these heterogeneous  elements  into one whole  and endows the new  thing  with  a novel  and  even  cohesive appearance.  The  key  to its method of production lies in the anchoring and objectivation processes.

A final point. Social cognition pays almost no attention to the population  factor and even less to the cultural factor (Pepitone, 1986). For our part, we have taken them into account and they are of  great importance. The theory  of  social representations maintains enough flexibility to adjust to differences in groups, cultural matrices and information that circulate in a  given society. In this research phase, when the collecting of experiences and materials is paramount, observation, no matter how systematic it is,  is  subservient  to  the  characteristics of  the  population  under  observation  and  its special problems. If it were otherwise, what would be the point of the term 'social'  that we toss about so liberally?

This having been said, it is true that social psychology,  in this domain, concerns itself  with  private  behaviour  and  private  relationships.  In  this  rich  and  yet  narrow setting, moreover, everyone is expected to behave like a serious person, look at things clearly and choose with appropriate logic. No one dreams, no one believes in god, no one is gnawed by a devouring passion. The world in which people move about is in keeping with the world of  science and technology, a vast campus where problems are solved and everyone aspires to succeed. Yet anything that has the slightest connection with social representations must take into account the fact that men have a zone of darkness shrouding most of their thoughts and relationships. Very ancient beliefs lurk in the shadows and their memory is the repository of  a content that is only partially admitted. Such is the power of  attraction of this borderline zone of lucid knowledge that psychologists who make no effort to deal with this zone of darkness will blithely walk past  a  representation  and  fail  to  see what  is  fascinating  about it.  As  Bartlett observed: 'The familiar is readily accepted; the unfamiliar may hold us'  (Bartlett, 1932, p. 19).  Is  it  not  this  aspect  of  religious,  political  visions,  newspaper  stories  that characteristically  attracts  us  to them? Our public  life is  teeming  with  outbursts  of illusions,  syncretic  ideologies  and  arborescent  beliefs.  It  can  best  be  understood through social representations, as most studies have confirmed so far.

With this purpose in mind, I should like to carry my initial remarks one  step further. A theory of representation does not deal only with men and women in flesh and blood. It should  also allow us  to understand  their jointly created works, and beyond that, literature,  novels, movies,  art, and  even  science and  the  institutions  that  give them objective shape. Is there not  a vast storehouse of  material concerning our ability to acquire knowledge and to communicate to be found in these various cultural domains? Why should social psychology be excluded from them and withdraw from conversation taking place between the various scientific disciplines on these topics? In brief, I am not asserting that we should turn our backs to this large corpus of social cognition -unless, like others, it disappears from one day to the next (Moscovici,  1984) without warning. I am  simply  saying  that  we  should  examine  certain  approaches  more attentively  and  grasp  certain  opportunities that the  study of  social representations offers. It will take time to agree on a single method with respect to one of the oldest, if not the very first object of study and worship, to wit, the social mind.

In any case, Jahoda's objections could apply to any other concept, from attribution to  schema,  even  better  than  to  ours.  The  fact  that  they  currently  enjoy  a  certain

popularity in one part of social psychology, and that hundreds of experiments about them  have  been  published  in  the  most  prestigious journals  is  basically  irrelevant. Fundamental issues, like that of the individualistic fallacy (Farr, 1978) are swept under the rug, and the limitations of these concepts are not given serious consideration. My close contact  with  and  knowledge of  social psychology make  me less inclined than Jahoda to go along with  its priorities.  My verdict  on its strengths and weaknesses differs completely from his. This is inevitable, both because I do not believe in tough tests on thin theories, on methodical grounds, and because I consider the social nature of  thinking and existence in general self-evident. This happens not to be true of  our American  colleagues who  live  in  a  culture  that  offers no  alternative  to  individual representations, no language for expressing needs and concerns that transcend those of  individuals and express those of groups. For lack of familiarity with such concepts and such a language, they naturally wonder why and how something, for instance a representation, is social. I am often startled to hear this kind of  question, to be asked to justify  what,  in  my  eyes,  goes  without  saying.  Whereupon  people  shrug  their shoulders, because the answer I give them relies on experiences that the questioner lacks or that seem abstract to him. There seems to be emptiness for them where there is fullness for  me,  and  vice versa.  This gap  between us  explains why it  is difficult to explain the value and scope of the theory with which these remarks are concerned.

Numerous doubts persist with  respect to it, to be sure. That cannot  be avoided. These  doubts  do  not  shake  the  confidence  some  of  us  have  placed  in  the  line  of research we  have carried on for many years. And even less so now when swiftly and unobtrusively it is stimulating research wherever the need is for a heuristic framework rather than a dogma. There seems to be an opening there for all those who seek a new way of doing social psychology, a way that is closer to the other sciences of man and on the scale of the social phenomena in the midst of which they live. Like them, I am convinced that social representations point  in the long run towards the solution  of scientific problems and of societal problems that are no less real.

## REFERENCES

- Abric, J. C. (197 1). 'Experimental study  of  group  creativity: Task  representation, group structure and performance, European Journal o f Social Psychology, 1: (3): 3 11-326.
- Abric, J. C.  (1976). Jeux,  confits  et  reprksentations  sociales, Thkse  de  Doctorat  d'Etat, Universitt de Provence, Aix-en Provence.
- Abric,  J.  C.  and  Kahn, J. P.  (1972).  'The  effects  of  representations  and  behaviour  in experimental games', European Journal of Social Psychology, 2: 129-144.
- Ackerman,  W.  et  Zygouris,  R.  (1974).  'Reprksentation et  assimilation de  la  connaissance scientifique', Bulletin du CERP, 22 (1-2).
- Althusser, L. (1972). Pour Marx, Maspkro, Paris.
- D'Andrade, R. (1986a). Cognitive Psychology, (mimeo), Philadephia.
- D'Andrade, R. (1986b). Some propositions about  the relations  between  culture and human cognition (mimeo), U.C.S.D.
- Ansart, P. (1987). Le concept  de  'reprksentation'  en sociologie, Colloque de  I.N.R.P., Paris, 43-47.
- Apfelbaum, E. (1967). 'Reprtsentations  du partenaire et interactions i propos d'un dilemme du prisonnier', Psychologie Franpise, 12: 267-295.
- Arendt, H. (1982). Letters on Kant Spoliticalphilosophy, University of Chicago Press,  Chicago.
- Arendt, H. (1987). 'L'inttrEt  pour la politique', L.es cahiers de Philosophie, 4.
- Bakhtin, M. M. (1986). Speech genres and other late essays, University of Texas, Austin.

Barth, F. (1987). Cosmologies in the making, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. Bartlett,  F.  C. (1920). 'Some experiments in the reproduction  of  Folk-stories', Folklore, 30-47.

- 31:
- Bartlett, F.  C.  (1932). Remembering:  A  study  in  experimental  and  social  Psychology, Cambridge University Press, London.
- Batson, G. D. (1975). 'Attribution as a mediator of bias in helping', Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 32: 455466.
- Bergson, H. (1932). Les deux sources de la morale et de la religion, Alcan, Paris.
- Billig, M. (1982). Zdeology and Social  Psychology: extremism, moderation  and contradiction, Blackwell, Oxford.
- Billig, M. (1986). Arguing and  Thinking, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Bohm, D. and Prat, F. D. (1987).

Science, order and creativity,

Bantam Books, Toronto.

- Chombart  de Lauwe, M. J . (1971). Un monde autre: l'enfance, de ses  representations a son mythe, Payot, Paris.
- Codol, J. P. (1968). 'ReprCsentation  de la tlche et comportements dans une situation sociale', Psychologie Franqaise, 13: 241-264.
- Codol, J. P. 1969a). 'ReprCsentations  de soi, d'autrui et de la tgche dans une situation sociale', Psychologie Franqaise, 14 2  17-228.
- Codol, J. P. (1969b). 'Note terminologique sur I'emploi de quelques expressions concernant les activitks et processus cognitifs en psychologie sociale', Bulletin de Psychologie, 23: 63-7 I .
- Cornford, F. M . (1964). From religion to  philosophy, Harper and Brothers, New York.
- Cranach von, M. et al. (1980). Zielgerichtetes Handeln, Hans Huber, Bern.
- Deconchy, J. P.  (1984).  'Systkmes de  croyances  et  reprksentations  idkologiques'.  In: S. Moscovici (ed). Psychologie sociale, P.U.F.,  Paris, 331-356.
- Deutscher, I. (1984).  'Choosing  ancestors'.  In:  R.  Farr  and S. Moscovici  (eds.) Social Representations, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 7  I -100,
- Di  Giacomo, J. P.  (1980). 'Intergroup  alliances  and  rejections  within  a  protest  movement (analysis of social representations)', European Journal of Social Psychology, 10: 329--344.

Doise, W. (1985a). 'Les  reprksentations  sociales: dkfinition  d'un  concept', Connexions, 45: 243-253.

Doise, W. (1985b). 'Psychologie sociale et constructivisme cognitif', Archives  de Psvchologie, 53, 127-140.

- Doise, W. and Palmonari, A. (eds.) (1986). L3tude des reprksentations sociales, Delachaux et Niestlk,  Paris.

Doise, W. (1987). 'Pratiques scientifiques  et reprksentations sociales: Que faire de la psychologie de Piaget?' in Intelligence  et  Socialisation, C R I V dirigC par H. Malewska-Peyre et J. P. Almodovar.

Douglas, M.  (1985). Risk acceptability  according to the  social  sciences, Russell  Sage Foundation, New York.

Duby, G. (1988). La sociite chevaleresque, Flammarion, Paris.

Duhem, P. (1962). The aim and structure of physical theory, Atheneum, New York.

Dumont, L. (1972). Homo supiens, Gallimard, Paris.

Durkheim, E. (1898). Sociologie etphilosophie, P U F, Paris (ed. 1967).

Emler, N. and  Dickenson,  J. (1985). 'Children's representation  of  economic inequalities: the effects of  social class', British Journal of Developmental  Psychology, 3: 191  -198.

Evans-Pritchard, E. (1981). 'A  history of anthropological thought', Basic Books, New  York.

Farr, R. (1977). Heider, HarrC and Herzlich, on health and illness: Some observations on the structure of 'reprCsentations  collectives', European Journal of Social Psychology, 7: 49 1-504. Farr, R. (1978). 'On the varieties of Social Psychology: an essay on the relationships between psychology and other social sciences', Social Science Information, 17: 503-525.

Farr, R. (1984). Social representations:  their  role  in the  design and execution  o f   laboratory experiments, In: R. Farr and S. Moscovici (eds.) Social Representations, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 125-147.

Farr, R. (1987). 'The science of mental life: a social psychological perspective', Bulletin  of the British Psychological Society, 40 2-17.

Faucheux,  C.  and  Moscovici, S. (1968).  'Self-esteem and  exploitative  behaviour  in  a  game against chance and nature', Journal o f Personality and Social Psychology, 8: 83-88.

- Festinger, L. (ed.) (1980). Retrospections  on social psychology, Oxford University Press, New York.
- Fine, G. A. (1987). Welcome to the world of aids:  fantasies o f female revenge (mimeo).
- Flament, C. (1962). 'L'analyse de similitude', Cahier du Centre de Recherches  Opeiationnelles, 4 63-97.
- Flament, C. (1967). 'Reprtsentations dans une situation conflictuelle', Psychologie Francaise, 12: 297-304.
- Flament, C. (1968). L 'analyse  algibrique  des questionnaires, Doctorat d'Etat, Aix-en Provence. Flament,  C.  (1971).  'Image  des  relations  amicales dans  des  groupes  hitrarchiques', AnnPe Psychologique, 71: 117-125.
- Flament, C. et Monnier, C. (1972).  'Rapports entre amitit  et hitrarchie dans la reprtsentation de groupe', Cahiers de Psychologie, 14: 209-218.
- Flament, C. (1986). Structure et dynamique des reprksentations sociales, (mimeo), Aix-en-Provence.
- Fodor, J. A. (1981). Representations, M I T Press, Cambridge (MA).
- Forgas,  J. P.  (1981).  'What  is  social about  social cognition?' In:  J. P.  Forgas  (ed.) Social Cognition: perspectives on everyday understanding, Academic Press, London.
- Fraser, C. (1986). Social representations and social attitudes (mimeo), Sheffield.
- Gardin, J. C. (1974). Les analyses de discours, Delachaux et Niestlk, Neuchatel.
- Gilly, M. (1980). Maitre-kl2ve: r6les institutionnels et reprksentations sociales, P U F, Paris. Gramsci, A. (1978). Cahiers deprison, Gallimard, Paris.
- Grize, J. B.  (1984). Une reprtsentation des activitts du discours, Communication Information, vol IV, Univ. Laval, Quebec, 359-376.
- Grize, J. B., Vergts, P. and Silem, A. (1987). Reprhentations des nouvelles technologies: vers une approche sociologique des reprisentations sociales, Editions du CRNS, Lyon.
- Harrt, R. (1984). 'Some reflections on the concept of 'social representation'', Social Research, 51: 927-938.
- Heider, F. (1958). The Psychology of interpersonal relations, Wiley New York.
- Herzlich, C. (1969). Santk et maladie: analyse dime reprksentation sociale, Mouton, Paris.
- Hewstone, M., Jaspars, J. and Lalljee, M. (1982). 'Social representations,  social attributions and  social  identity:  the  intergroup  image  of  'public'  and  'comprehensive' schoolboys, European Journal of Social Psychology, 12: 241-271.
- Higgins, E. T. and Bargh, J. A. (1987). 'Social cognition and social perception', Annual Review of Psychology, 38: 369425.
- Hocart, A.  M. (1987). Imagination andproof, Univer. of Arizona Press, Tucson.
- Hooper. J. and Teresi, D. (1986). The 3-pound  universe, Dell, New York.
- Jodelet, D. (1983). Civils et bredins: reprisentation  de la maladie mentale et rapport a la  folie en milieu rural, Thtse de Doctorat d'Etat, E. H.E.S.S., Paris.
- Jodelet, D. (1984).  'Reprksentations sociales: phknomknes, concept et thtorie'. In: S. Moscovici (ed.): Psychologie sociale, P U F, Paris, 357-378.
- Jodelet, D. (1987). 'Reprtsentations et idtologie', In: J. L. Beauvois, R. Joule and J. M. Monteil
- (eds.): Perspectives cognitives er  conduites sociales, Del Val, Cousset.
- Johnson Laird,  P.  N.  and  Steedman,  M.  (1978).  'The psychology  of  syllogism', Cognitive PSyChOlOgy, 1 0 64-99.
- Kaes, R. (1976). L'appareil  psychique groupal: construction du groupe, Dunod, Paris.
- Kaplan, A. (1964). f i e  conduct o f inquiry, Chandler, San Francisco.
- Kruglanski, A. W. and Ajzen, I. (1983). 'Bias and error in human judgment', European Journal of Social Psychology, 1 3 145.
- Landman,  J.  and  Manis,  M.  (1983).  'Social  cognition:  some  historical  and  theoretical perspectives', Advances in Experimental  Social Psychology, 16: 49-1 26.
- Le Bouedec, G. (1985). 'Implicazioni metodologiche degli studi sulle rappresentazioni social?, Psicologia e Societu, 1: 8-19.
- Le Goff, J. (1974) In: J. Le Goff et P. Nora (eds.) Faire de I'histoire, t. 3, Gallimard, Paris. Levi-Strauss, C. (1971). L'homme nu, Plon, Paris.
- Uvy-Bruhl,  L. (1951). Les fonctions mentales dans les sociitis infkrieures, P U F, Paris.
- McGuire, W. J. (1986). 'The vicissitudes of  attitudes and similar representational constructs in twentieth century psychology', European Journal o f Psychology, 16: 89-1 30.

- M. Maffesoli (1985). La connaissance ordinaire,
- Libraririe des Mkridiens, Paris.
- Maisonneuve,'J. et Bruchon-Schweitzer, M. (I98  I). Modides du corps etpsychologie esthirique, P U F. Paris.
- Markova, I. (1987). Paradigms, thought and language, Wiley, Chichester.
- Markus, H. and Zajonc, R. B. (1985). 'The cognitive perspectives in social psychology', In: E. Aronson  and  G. Lindzey (eds.) Handbook o f Social  Psychology, Vol. 1, 3rd ed., Random House, New York.
- Mead, G. H. (1981). Selected  Writings, Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago.
- Medawar, P. B. (1965). f i e   art o f the soluble, Methuen 8z Co., London.
- Moscovici, S. (1961). Lapsychanalyse, son image et son public, P U F, Paris.
- Moscovici, S. (1963). 'Attitudes and opinions', Annual Review o f Psychology, 1 4 23  1-260.
- Moscovici, S. (1968). Essai sur I'histoire humaine de la nature, Flammarion, Paris.
- Moscovici,  S. (1981). 'On  social  representations,  In:  J.  P.  Forgas  (eds.) Social  Cognition, Academic Press, London.
- Moscovici, S.  (1983).  'The coming era of social representations', In: J. P. Codol and J. P. Leyens (eds.). Cognitive analysis o f social behavior, Martinus Nijhoff, The Hague.
- Moscovici, S. (1984a).  'The  phenomenon  of social  representations', In: R.  Farr  and S. Moscovici (eds.): Social Representations, C U P, Cambridge, 3-70. a
- Moscovici, S. (1984b). 'The myth  of  the  lonely paradigm: rejoinder', Social  Research, 51: 940-967.
- Moscovici, S. (1985). The Age o f the Crowd, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
- Moscovici, S. (1 988). La machine a  faire des dieux, Fayard, Paris.
- Moscovici, S. and Hewstone, M. (1983). 'Social representations and social explanations: from the 'naive' to the 'amateur' scientist', In: M.  Hewstone (ed.) Attribution Theory: Social and functional extensions, Blackwell, Oxford.
- Moscovici, S. et Hewstone, M. (1984). 'De la science au sens commun', In: S. Moscovici (ed.) Psychologie sociale, P U F, Paris, 539-565.
- Mugny,  G.  et  Carrugati,  F.  (1985). L'intelligence  au pluriel:  les  reprksentations  sociales  de I'intelligence et de son dkveloppement, Del Val, Gentve.
- Neisser, U. (1976). Cognition and reality, Freeman &amp; Co., San Francisco.
- Nisbett,  R.  and  Ross, L. (1980). Human  influence:  Strategies  and  Shortcomings o f social judgment, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
- Nigro,  G.,  Galli,  J. and  Poderico,  C.  (1986). La genesi  delle  representazione  sociale  della radioattivita: un approcio misto (mimeo).
- Obereysekere, G. (1981). Medusa's Hair, Chicago Univ. Press, Chicago.
- Otway, H. J. and Thamas, K. (1982). 'Reflections  on risk perceptions and policy', Risk Analysis, 2: 69-81.
- Palmonari, A. ( 1 98 1) (ed.). Ricerca sociopsicologica su un  process0 diprofessionalizzazione, I 1 Mulino, Bologna.
- Palmonari, A.,  Pombeni, M. L. and Zani, B.  (1987). 'Social representation  and  professionalization of  psychologists', Current Issues i n European Social Psychology, 2: 23  1-269.
- Pepitone, A. (1986). Australian Journal o f Psychology, 38: 245-256.
- Piaget, J . (1972). La reprcsentation du monde chez I'enfant, P U F, Paris.
- Piaget, J. et Inhelder, B. (1966). L'image mentale chez l'enfant, PUF, Paris.
- Plon,  M.  (1968). 'Observations thkoriques  et expkrimentales  sure le r61e  des representations dans des situations de choix conflictuels', Bulletin du CERP, 17: 205-244.

Lepartage du savoir,

Roqueplo, M. (1974).

Seuil, Paris.

- Rosa, de, A. M. (1987). 'The social representations  of  mental illness in children and  adults', Current Issues in European Social Psychology, 2: 47-1 3 1.
- Rossignol, C. et  Flament,  C. (1977). 'Dkcomposition de l'kquilibre structural,  Aspects de la reprksentation du groupe', Annke Psychologique, 73 : 417-425.
- Schutz,  A.  (1964). 'The problem  of  rationality  in  the social world', Collected  Papers Z Z , M. Nijhoff, The Hague.
- Semin, G. (1987). 'On the relationship between representation  of  theories in psychology and ordinary language', Current Issues in European Social Psychology, 2 327439.
- Semin,  G.  and  Manstead,  A.  (1979).  'Social  psychology:  social  or  psychological?' British Journal o f Social and Clinical Psychology, 18: 191-202.

- Snyder,  M.,  Tanke,  E.  D.  and  Berscheid,  E.  (1977).  'Social perception  and  interpersonal behavior: on the self-fulfilling  nature of social stereotypes', Journal o f Personality and Social Psychology, 35,656-666.
- Tank,  D.  W.  and  Hopfield,  J. J.  (1987).  'Collective computation  in  neuronlike  circuits', Scientific American, December, p.  104.
- Turnbull, W.  (1986). 'Everyday explanation; the pragmatics of  puzzle resolution', Journal  for the theory o f Social Behavior, 16: 121-134.
- Verges, P. (1987). 'A social and cognitive approach to economic representation', Current Issues in European Social Psychology, 2: 27 1-305.
- Vigotsky, L. S. (1965).  Thought and language, M I T Press, Cambridge (MA).
- Wade, S. and Schram, W. (1969). 'The  mass media as source of public affairs,  science  and health knowledge', Public Opinion Quarterly, 33:  197-208.
- Wason, P. C. and Johnson-Laird, P. W. (1972). Psychology o f reasoning:  structure and content, Batesford, London.
- Weber, M. (1978). Economy and Society, Harvard University Press, Cambridge (MA).
- Windisch,  U.  (1982). Penske  sociale,  langage  en  usage  et  logique  autre, L'Age  d'homme, Lausanne.
- Wittgenstein, L. (1980). Grammaire  philosophique, Gallimard, Paris.
- Wittgenstein, L. (1982). Remarques sur le Rameau d'or de Frazer, L'Age  d'Homme, Gentve.
- Zajonc,  R. (1980).  In:  L.  Festinger (ed.) Retrospections in  Social Psychology, Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford and New  York.
- Zukier, H. (1986). 'The paradigmatic and narrative modes in goal-guided inference'. In: R. M. Sorrentino and E. H. Higgins (eds.) Handbook o f motivation and cognition, Guilford Press, New York. 465-502.

## RBSUME

La thtorie des reprtsentations sociales occupe une place a part en psychologie sociale, B la fois par les probkmts qu'elle soulbve et l'tchelle des phtnomtnes dont elle s'occupe. Ceci provoque maintes critiques et malentendus. I1 se peut qu'une telle thtorie ne corresponde pas au modtle de la psychologie sociale  tel qu'il est dtfini B prtsent. Cependant on tente de montrer qu'elle rtpond a  des  questions  sociales et  scientifiques importantes,  en  quoi elle  diffire de  la  conception classique des reprtsentations collectives et adopte dts le dtbut une optique constructiviste qui s'est depuis rtpandue en psychologie sociale. Plusieurs courants de recherche ont confirm6 sa vision  des  rapports  entre  phtnomtnes  sociaux  et  phtnomtnes cognitifs, communication  et penste. D'autre remarques visent dtgager la nature des reprtsentations sociales,  leur capacitt a crter  des  informations,  leur  fonction  qui  est  de  nous  familiariser  avec  l'ttrange  selon  les cattgories  de  notre  culture.  En  allant  plus  loin,  on  insiste  sur  la  diversitt  des  approches mtthodologiques.  Si la mtthode exptrimentale est utile pour comprendre comment les  gens devraient  penser,  il  faut  aborder  les  processus  mentaux  et  sociaux  suptrieurs  a  l'aide  de mtthodes difftrentes, y compris I'analyse linguistique et l'observation de la faqon dont les gens pensent. Certes, les reprtsentations sociales ont un rapport  avec le domaine plus rtcent de la cognition sociale. Mais dans la rnesure oh elles dtpendent du contenu et du contexte, donc de la subjectivitt et de la sociabilitt, elles abordent les probltmes autrement que la cognition. En se rtftrant la psychologie de l'enfant et a l'anthropologie, on peut soutenir que c'est  aussi une manitre plus scientifique. I1 y a cependant beaucoup a apprendre des critiques, car la voie est encore  longue  avant  d'aboutir  a  une  thtorie  satisfaisante  de  la  penste  sociale  et  de  la communication.

## ZUSAMMENFASSUNG

Die Theorie der sozialen Vorstellungen nimmt einen eigenen Platz in der sozialen Psychologie ein, durch de Probleme die sie aufwirft ebenso wie durch das Massstab der Phanomene mit denen  sie  sich  befasst.  Eine  solche  Theorie  ist  vielleicht  nicht  dern  Model1  der  sozialen

Psychologie, wie  es  heute  ublich  ist,  angepasst.  Trotzdem  versucht  man  zu  zeigen  dass  sie bedeutende sozialen and wissenschaftlichen Fragen beantwortet, worin die Unterschiede  mit der klassischen Konzeption der kollektiven Vorstellungen bestehen, und dass sie von Anfang aus einen konstruktivistischen Gesichtspunkt aufnimmt der sich seitdem in der sozialen Psychologie durchgesetzt  hat.  Mehrere  Untersuchungsrichtungen  haben  ihre  Ansicht  der  Beziehungen zwischen  sozialen  und  kognitiven  Phanomenen,  Kommunikation  und  Denken  bestatigt. Weitere Bemerkungen, zielen darauf, die Natur der sozialen Vorstellungen aufzuzeigen, ihre Kapazitat,  Information zu schaffen und  ihre Funktion,  das Unheimliche fur uns heimlich zu machen, in Beziehung zu den Kategonen unserer Kultur.  Indem man weiter geht nimmt man Bezug  auf  die  Verschiedenheit  der  methodologischen  Annaherungen.  Obwohl  die  experimentelle Methode wertvoll ist um zu verstehen wie die Leute denken sollten, mussen hohere geistliche und soziale Prozesse mit Hilfe von anderen Methoden angegriffen werden, darunter sprachliche Analyse und  Beobachtung der  Weise in der  Leute denken. Gewiss haben soziale Vorstellungen eine Beziehung zu dem gegenwiirtigen Feld der sozialen Kognition. Aber in dem Masse in dem die ersteren von  Inhalt  and  Kontext,  also von  Subjektivitat  und  Soziabilitiit abhangen, fassen sie die Probleme anders als die letztere auf. Mit Bezung auf Kindespsychologie und  Anthropologie  kann  man  behaupten  dass diese Annaherrungsweise mehr wissenschaftlichen Charakter hat. Jeodch gibt es vie1 zu lernen von den Kritiken, denn es ist noch ein langer Weg bevor man an eine befriedigende Theorie des sozialen Denkens und der Kommunikation anlangt.

Copyright of European Journal of Social Psychology is the property of John Wiley &amp; Sons, Inc. and its content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder's express written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.