fnins-16-893903 July 25, 2022 Time: 11:51 # 1
TYPE Review
PUBLISHED 25 July 2022
DOI10.3389/fnins.2022.893903
OPEN ACCESS
EDITED BY
Julia Campbell,
University of Texas at Austin,
United States
REVIEWED BY
Mercede Erfanian,
University College London,
United Kingdom
Ester Benzaquén,
Newcastle University, United Kingdom
*CORRESPONDENCE
Andrada D. Neacsiu
andrada.neacsiu@duke.edu
SPECIALTY SECTION
This article was submitted to
Auditory Cognitive Neuroscience,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Neuroscience
RECEIVED 11 March 2022
ACCEPTED 28 June 2022
PUBLISHED 25 July 2022
CITATION
Neacsiu AD, Szymkiewicz V, Galla JT,
Li B, Kulkarni Y and Spector CW (2022)
The neurobiology of misophonia
and implications for novel,
neuroscience-driven interventions.
Front. Neurosci. 16:893903.
doi: 10.3389/fnins.2022.893903
COPYRIGHT
© 2022 Neacsiu, Szymkiewicz, Galla,
Li, Kulkarni and Spector. This is an
open-access article distributed under
the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (CC BY). The use,
distribution or reproduction in other
forums is permitted, provided the
original author(s) and the copyright
owner(s) are credited and that the
original publication in this journal is
cited, in accordance with accepted
academic practice. No use, distribution
or reproduction is permitted which
does not comply with these terms.The neurobiology of
misophonia and implications for
novel, neuroscience-driven
interventions
Andrada D. Neacsiu1*, Victoria Szymkiewicz2,
Jeffrey T. Galla2, Brenden Li2, Yashaswini Kulkarni2and
Cade W. Spector3
1Duke Center for Misophonia and Emotion Regulation, Duke Brain Stimulation Research Center,
Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Neuroscience, School of Medicine, Duke University,
Durham, NC, United States,2Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, Duke University,
Durham, NC, United States,3Department of Philosophy, Duke University, Durham, NC, United States
Decreased tolerance in response to speciﬁc every-day sounds (misophonia)
is a serious, debilitating disorder that is gaining rapid recognition
within the mental health community. Emerging research ﬁndings suggest
that misophonia may have a unique neural signature. Speciﬁcally,
when examining responses to misophonic trigger sounds, differences
emerge at a physiological and neural level from potentially overlapping
psychopathologies. While these ﬁndings are preliminary and in need of
replication, they support the hypothesis that misophonia is a unique disorder.
In this theoretical paper, we begin by reviewing the candidate networks
that may be at play in this complex disorder (e.g., regulatory, sensory, and
auditory). We then summarize current neuroimaging ﬁndings in misophonia
and present areas of overlap and divergence from other mental health
disorders that are hypothesized to co-occur with misophonia (e.g., obsessive
compulsive disorder). Future studies needed to further our understanding of
the neuroscience of misophonia will also be discussed. Next, we introduce
the potential of neurostimulation as a tool to treat neural dysfunction in
misophonia. We describe how neurostimulation research has led to novel
interventions in psychiatric disorders, targeting regions that may also be
relevant to misophonia. The paper is concluded by presenting several options
for how neurostimulation interventions for misophonia could be crafted.
KEYWORDS
misophonia, neuroscience, neurostimulation, intervention, review
Introduction to misophonia
Misophonia is a disorder characterized by distress when faced with speciﬁc sounds
or with the context surrounding such sounds (Brout et al., 2018; Swedo et al., 2021).
Sound or visual stimuli, labeled as “triggers, ” lead to negative emotional, physiological,
and behavioral responses that are more intense than in the general population. Triggers
tend to be repetitive and more often than not are generated by another’s human
Frontiers in Neuroscience 01 frontiersin.org

fnins-16-893903 July 25, 2022 Time: 11:51 # 2
Neacsiu et al. 10.3389/fnins.2022.893903
body. Sounds such as chewing, eating, slurping (Vitoratou
et al., 2021), throat clearing, and breathing/sniﬃng are common
triggers for misophonia. [See consensus deﬁnition for a more
comprehensive characterization of trigger sounds (Swedo et al.,
2021)]. Once triggered, children and adults with misophonia
experience intense distress and have diﬃculty disengaging
from the stimulus (Brout et al., 2018). While triggers may
vary from person to person, the typical response involves
increased autonomic arousal (muscle tension, increased heart
rate, and skin conductance) and self-reported experience of
anger, disgust, and anxiety (Siepsiak and Dragan, 2019). This
discomfort may translate into behavioral or verbal aggression
in the moment, and extreme avoidance behaviors outside of the
moment (Swedo et al., 2021).
Misophonia is hypothesized to develop in early adolescence
and does not improve with time (Brout et al., 2018; Swedo
et al., 2021). More research is needed to better understand
the onset of misophonia, with emerging studies suggesting
genetics (Sanchez and Silva, 2018; Kılıç et al., 2021), and
maladaptive learning (Schröder et al., 2013; Dozier, 2015;
Dozier and Morrison, 2017) as possible mechanisms through
which this disorder develops. Several studies document that
misophonia leads to impairment in functioning and negatively
aﬀects interpersonal relationships (Wu et al., 2014; Zhou et al.,
2017; Brout et al., 2018; Swedo et al., 2021). The severity of the
misophonic reaction depends on the context in which it occurs,
the perceived controllability, and the relationship between
the individual and the source of the trigger (Swedo et al.,
2021). Increased environmental stressors worsen misophonic
distress and reduce the ability to downregulate arousal when
faced with trigger sounds (Ferrer-Torres and Giménez-Llort,
2021). In addition, misophonic triggers signiﬁcantly reduce the
participant’s cognitive control and ability to engage in goal
directed behavior (Daniels et al., 2020).
Misophonia may overlap with other auditory conditions
such as tinnitus, hyperacusis (Aazh et al., 2019), autonomous
sensory meridian response (ASMR; McErlean and Banissy,
2018; Palumbo et al., 2018; Rouw and Erfanian, 2018), or with
psychiatric conditions (Quek et al., 2018; Swedo et al., 2021).
One study found a 52.4% overlap with obsessive compulsive
personality disorder (OCPD; Cavanna and Seri, 2015) while
in other samples this overlap was lower (26%; Jager et al.,
2020). Other typical comorbidities are mood disorders (10–
48%; Erfanian et al., 2019; Claiborn et al., 2020; Jager et al.,
2020), attention deﬁcit and hyperactivity disorder (ADHD;
12%), post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD; 12–15%; Rouw and
Erfanian, 2018; Erfanian et al., 2019; Claiborn et al., 2020),
and obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD; 15–21%; Erfanian
et al., 2019; Claiborn et al., 2020). Comorbidities with eating
disorders have also been reported (10% in one study; Erfanian
et al., 2019). One study found that PTSD alone was related to
misophonia severity (Rouw and Erfanian, 2018). These studies
should be seen as preliminary because they either had smallsamples (Erfanian et al., 2019), or they asked participants
to report what diagnoses they received or thought they had
(Claiborn et al., 2020), which may lack accuracy. Nevertheless,
research suggests that misophonia is independent from these
comorbidities and shouldn’t be diagnosed if the presenting
problems are better explained by one of these more established
disorders (Swedo et al., 2021). For instance, up to 50% of those
who describe misophonic distress do not have any other mental
health disorders (Rouw and Erfanian, 2018) indeed, emerging
research is painting the picture of a distinct problem that does
not ﬁt neatly within a diagnosable disorder (Brout et al., 2018).
Structure and function of neural
regions that may be connected to
misophonic distress
One clear way in which misophonia can be distinguished
from other disorders is by identifying how exactly this
dysfunction translates into aberrant neural function and
connectivity. In this section, we introduce regions of interest
for misophonia, and describe their broad structure, function,
and connectivity patterns. This section is focused on brain
regions that have been identiﬁed by at least two neuroscientiﬁc
studies as showing abnormalities in misophonia (see Table 1
and section “The neurobiology of misophonia”). We chose to
include review articles coupled with relevant research ﬁndings
to highlight typical function in these regions in healthy adults.
We also highlight, when available, ﬁndings of dysfunction in
these regions in adults or adolescents who meet criteria for
the disorders that most commonly co-occur with misophonia.
An exhaustive literature review of all the ﬁndings relevant to
these regions is beyond the scope of this article. Other regions
not detailed below but found in section “The neurobiology of
misophonia” may be important areas of intervention and should
continue to be investigated.
Insula
The insular cortex (see Figure 1B ) can be found in the
lateral sulcus, underneath the frontal and temporal lobes
(Naidich et al., 2004). It is highly connected with several
regions including the frontal, temporal, and parietal lobes,
the brainstem, and limbic structures such as the amygdala,
thalamus, cingulate gyrus, and basal ganglia (Flynn, 1999).
Therefore, the insula is involved in autonomic, self-awareness,
and emotional processing functions (Gu et al., 2013). On
each side, the insula can be divided into anterior, middle,
and posterior sections. Of primary interest to misophonia is
the anterior insula, which is a specialized region, involved in
autonomic and interoceptive functions (Flynn, 1999). A unique
Frontiers in Neuroscience 02 frontiersin.org

fnins-16-893903 July 25, 2022 Time: 11:51 # 3
Neacsiu et al. 10.3389/fnins.2022.893903
TABLE 1 Summary of brain regions relevant to misophonia, their established function, and the speciﬁc alterations in structure and function
identiﬁed in neuroimaging studies to date.
Brain region Function Alterations in misophonia
Insula Self-awareness, emotional processing, emotional awareness,
autonomic homeostasis
Anterior insula: autonomic and interoceptive functions,
body representation, and emotional experienceHyper-connectivity to frontal and temporal lobes, V1, V2 at rest;
hyperactivation of dorsal anterior insula (bilateral or right) during
exposure to trigger sounds; hyper connectivity with DMN, amygdala
and hippocampus during misophonic sound exposure
Orbitofrontal/
ventromedial
prefrontal corticesvmPFC: Evaluation of risk, downregulation of emotions
OFC: decision making, emotional processing, reward
valuation, and emotion assignment to sensory input, part of
TAO network governing integration of emotional state with
cognition and behaviorHyperconnectivity between lateral OFC and motor cortex (PMv, SMA);
increased myelination in vmPFC and OFC-frontal pole and OFC-dlPFC
networks
Cingulate cortex Emotional processing and regulation broadly.
ACC: conﬂict processing, reinforcement learning,
motivation, error detection, action selection, management
of aggressive behaviors, processing of social pain
Rostral ACC: empathy, emotional processing
MCC: decision making, executive and motor control,
emotion regulationRight ACC and bilateral MCC hyperactivity during misophonic triggers;
hyperconnectivity between MCC and A1 and lateral OFC during trigger
sounds; lack of inhibition success-related activity in the PCC
Ventral premotor
cortexIntegration of sensory information, calculation of optimal
motor response, mirror neurons (e.g., mimicking and
predicting intentions of other people)Hyperconnectivity to A1 and lateral OFC; hyperactivation during
misophonic triggers; hyperconnectivity to A2, V2 at rest
Supplementary motor
areaPreSMA: Planning complex movements, response
selection, conﬂict resolution, word selection, and decision
making
SMA: Planning of complex movements, timed deliberate
motor execution, emotional empathyHyperconnectivity with A1 and lateral OFC during presentation of
audio-visual triggers; bilateral hyperactivity during trigger sounds
compared to aversive
Superior temporal
cortexIdentiﬁcation and interpretation of sound sources,
language and sound processing, auditory attention,
interpretation of facial and emotional cues.
TPJ: emotional distancingHyperactivation during trigger sounds; auditory cortex
hyperconnectivity at rest to PMv, SMA, and lateral OFC;
hyperconnectivity at rest with the insula; TPJ-right inferior frontal
cortex hyperconnectivity at rest.
Amygdala Emotion processing, decision making in emotional
situations,
Right amygdala: regulation of negative emotions, detection
of dynamic emotional stimuli
Left amygdala: processing positive emotions, evaluation of
continuous emotional stimuliHyperactivity in the left amygdala during trigger sounds compared to
aversive stimuli; hypoactivity in left amygdala during aversive stimuli
compared to healthy controls; hyperconnectivity with anterior insula
during trigger sounds; hyperconnectivity during resting state with the
cerebellum; higher myelination on tracts between the amygdala and the
occipital cortex; larger gray matter volume in the right amygdala
Dorsolateral prefrontal
cortexWorking memory, planning, decision making, feeling of
threat-induced anxiety, social perspective taking, theory of
mind, deductive reasoning,Reduced inhibition success-related activation of left dlPFC; increased
myelination in tracts connecting OFC to dlPFC;
V1, visual area 1; V2, visual area 2; AIC, anterior insular cortex; A1, primary auditory cortex; A1, secondary auditory cortex; vmPFC, ventromedial prefrontal cortex; OFC, orbitofrontal
cortex; DMN, default mode network; TAO, temporo-amygdala-orbitofrontal; SMA, supplemental motor area; PMv, ventral premotor cortex; ACC, anterior cingulate cortex; MCC,
midcingulate cortex; TPJ, tempo-parietal junction; and STC, superior temporal cortex.
feature of the insula is that it includes a cluster of spindle-shaped
von Economo neurons (VENs; Economo, 1926), that are larger
than other neurons, and are used for rapid integration of
information between the frontal and insular cortices (Gu et al.,
2013). The insula is critical for emotional awareness, and is
especially involved in the interoceptive “feeling” of the emotion
(Gu et al., 2013). The function of the anterior insula has been
connected with heart rate and respiration changes, pain, feeling
of touch, awareness of temperature, risk, emotional processing,
trust, and norm violation (Gu et al., 2013; Droutman et al.,
2015). Therefore, this structure is responsible for perceived
awareness of one’s physiological state and needs. Insults to
the anterior insular cortex (AIC) result in either heightened,
or signiﬁcantly impaired, perceived wellbeing, and emotional
awareness. Studies examining the AIC show that it integrates
cognitive and motivational information with emotional inputs(Gu et al., 2013). Hyperacussis has also been described in case
reports of three individuals with insular damage, denoting that
this structure may be critical in the perception and modulation
of sound intensity (Boucher et al., 2015).
Degeneration of VENs as well as hypoactivity in the
anterior insula have been connected to alexithymia, or deﬁcits
in emotional awareness (Bird et al., 2010; Seeley, 2010).
Hypoactivity in the bilateral mid-insula has also been connected
with depression severity (Avery et al., 2014). Functional
hyperactivity of the insula has generally been related to tasks
where negative emotional stimuli are elicited in psychiatric
disorder (Schienle et al., 2005; Groenewold et al., 2013). One
study found hyperactivity in the right AIC when engaging
in downregulation of distress in adults who have excessive
weight versus matched controls (Steward et al., 2016) as well
as in depressed adults (Beauregard et al., 2006). Another
Frontiers in Neuroscience 03 frontiersin.org

fnins-16-893903 July 25, 2022 Time: 11:51 # 4
Neacsiu et al. 10.3389/fnins.2022.893903
FIGURE 1
(A)Position of the supplementary motor area (SMA), dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (dlPFC), ventral premotor cortex (PMv), superior temporal
cortex (STC), and ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) on an MNI template brain segmented using the AAL atlas (Tzourio-Mazoyer et al.,
2002). Masks for the dlPFC and vmPFC were extracted from the Mindboggle segmentation (Klein et al., 2005). (B)Coronal, sagittal, and
transversal views of subcortical regions relevant to misophonia extracted from Mindboggle and from the FSL Harvard-Oxford sub-cortical
structural segmentations. The anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) is blue, the amygdala is green, and the insular cortex is colored rainbow.
study identiﬁed hyperactivation in ADHD adolescent boys
when compared to typically developing boys during exposure
to negative-valenced stimuli (Vetter et al., 2018). In anxiety
disorders, it has been shown that anticipating negative stimuli
with unpredictable aversiveness is associated with insula
hyperactivity (Simmons et al., 2011; Gorka et al., 2014).
Tractography studies observe widespread connections
between the insula and the frontal and temporal lobes.
Speciﬁcally, structural connectivity to superior medial frontal
gyri (SMFG), orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), and the auditory
cortex (Ghaziri et al., 2017). Furthermore, the anterior insula
connects to the anterior cingulate (ACC) and midcingulate
cortices (Ghaziri et al., 2017). Studies examining connectivity
dysfunction in PTSD patients found increased right AIC-DMN
resting state connectivity 2 days after trauma exposure (Wang
et al., 2012), and in right AIC-amygdala functional connectivity
while listening to trauma reminders (Cisler et al., 2014).
A decrease in the functional connectivity between the right AIC
and the OFC/ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) at rest
was found to be uniquely associated with lack of insight in
OCD (Fan et al., 2017) and with alexithymia in smoking adults
(Sutherland et al., 2013).
Orbitofrontal/ventromedial prefrontal
cortices
The vmPFC ( Figure 1A ) is located at the bottom of the
frontal lobe and is critical for evaluating risk, and regulatingemotions, such as fear, by directly inﬂuencing the amygdala
(Motzkin et al., 2015). The OFC is located just above the orbits,
therefore in a similar anatomical location, and encompassing
similar Brodmann (BA) areas as the vmPFC (Phillips and
Della Sala, 1998). The OFC functions to assist in decision
making and emotional processing, and is connected to other
prefrontal cortex (PFC) regions associated with decision making
(Kahnt et al., 2012). In healthy adults, the OFC has also been
associated with assigning a reward value or emotion to primary
reinforcers such as taste, texture, or facial expressions (Rolls
and Grabenhorst, 2008). In order to make these evaluations, the
OFC has connections to the primary taste, inferior temporal,
primary olfactory, and somatosensory cortical areas (Rolls,
1996). The OFC also receives input from the amygdala and is
responsible for emotional enhancement in memory processing
(Rolls, 1996; Kumfor et al., 2013). In one study, atrophy in the
OFC was connected in patients with fronto-temporal dementia
to then inability to use negative emotions to retrieve memories
(Séguin, 2004). Reduced engagement of the OFC has also been
connected with diﬃculty adjusting behaviors after negative
feedback in OCD (Cisler et al., 2014) and ADHD patients
(Itami and Uno, 2002).
Hyperconnectivity between the OFC and other brain
regions can be seen in OCD and obesity (Black et al.,
2014; Liu et al., 2022). For example, OFC-ACC/and OFC-
caudate hyperconnectivity has been documented in OCD
(Liu et al., 2022), and lateral OFC-left dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex (dlPFC) hyperconnectivity in obese children when
compared to controls (Black et al., 2014). Hyperconnectivity
Frontiers in Neuroscience 04 frontiersin.org

fnins-16-893903 July 25, 2022 Time: 11:51 # 5
Neacsiu et al. 10.3389/fnins.2022.893903
between the vmPFC and striatum, frontal and motor
cortices are also connected to OCD, with vmPFC-caudate
hyperconnectivity being correlated with OCD severity
(Apergis-Schoute et al., 2018).
Cingulate cortex
The cingulate cortex lies underneath the frontal cortex,
in the medial portion of the cerebral hemisphere and is
comprised of Brodmann Areas (BA) 23–26 and 29–31 (Stanislav
et al., 2013). It mediates the pathway from the thalamus to
the hippocampus (Chauhan et al., 2021) and is implicated
in emotional processing and regulation, with speciﬁc areas
(anterior and posterior cingulate cortices) assumed to have
diﬀerentiated functions. The ACC ( Figure 1B ) sits at the
front of the cingulate cortex, wrapping around the head
of the corpus callosum (Monosov et al., 2020). Various
examinations implicate the ACC in several aspects of emotion
and cognition, including conﬂict processing, reinforcement
learning, motivation, error detection, action selection (Holroyd
and Yeung, 2011), management of aggressive behaviors (van
Heukelum et al., 2021), and processing of social pain
(Eisenberger, 2015). The ACC has also been broken into
diﬀerent subsections, each with diﬀerential functions. The
rostral ACC (rACC) is closely connected with the amygdala
and is thought to play a role in empathy and emotional
processing (Singer et al., 2004; De Brito et al., 2009). For
example, loss of white matter tracts connecting the rACC
with the amygdala diminishes the ACC’s ability to inhibit
amygdala activation, leading to increased fear responses seen
in PTSD (O’Doherty et al., 2018). The dorsal ACC (dACC),
also labeled the midcingulate cortex (MCC; Stevens et al., 2011),
is connected to the dlPFC, supplementary motor area (SMA),
supramarginal gyrus, and insula revealing its involvement in
social cognitive and motor processes (Overbeek et al., 2021;
Tuovinen et al., 2022). The MCC was found to mediate
decision making, executive control (Mattavelli et al., 2022), and
emotion regulation (Li et al., 2014) with increased activation
in the anterior MCC being associated with decreased negative
emotion (Stevens et al., 2011). Increased ACC activity during
a task has been associated with improved emotion regulation
(Tang et al., 2016).
Ventral premotor cortex
The ventral premotor cortex (PMv; Figure 1A ) is located
within the frontal cortex overlapping with the Brocca region
and including mirror neurons involved in mimicking and
predicting the intentions of others (Binkofski and Buccino,
2006). The PMv is a receptacle for multi-sensory inputs
including tactile, auditory, and visual, and is highly connectedwith adjacent premotor cortical regions (Boussaoud, 2001;
Pardo-Vazquez et al., 2009). Time and sensorimotor integration
of inputs have been causally connected to the PMv using
an inhibitory neurostimulation paradigm (Ruspantini et al.,
2011). In synchrony with adjacent areas, the PMv calculates the
optimal motor response given learned consequences of several
possible options (Pardo-Vazquez et al., 2008; Lemus et al., 2009).
Individuals with PMv impairment have diﬃculty adjusting
motor responses based on feedback (Berthier et al., 2017).
Supplementary motor area
The SMA ( Figure 1A ) of the brain is located on the
medial surface of the cortex anterior to the pre central sulcus
and is divided into two sub-regions (Kaas and Stepniewska,
2002). The preSMA connects predominantly with areas that
are fundamental to a wide spectrum of functions such as
planning complex movements, response selection, conﬂict
resolution, word selection, and decision making (Tremblay
and Gracco, 2009). The SMA proper occupies a signiﬁcant
portion of the superior frontal gyrus, taking up roughly one
third of its territory, with a primary function of planning
complex movements and deliberate motor execution (Tremblay
and Gracco, 2009). Lesions within the SMA have resulted
in an impaired ability to produce self-initiated or unique
motion; however, motions that have a strong conditional
response based upon memory are maintained as they may be
generated largely by using previously associated sensory cues
(Kaas and Stepniewska, 2002).
The rich connections of the SMA to the somatosensory
regions allow this region to function as more than simply
a point of translation of sensory stimuli into motor activity
(Kaas and Stepniewska, 2002). SMA neurons receive sensory
inputs and interpret them for the purpose of planning and
controlling the timing of a motor response so that movement
is deliberate and planned and not simply reﬂexive in nature.
In connection with the aMCC and the left anterior insula,
SMA has also been hypothesized to underline the experience
of empathy for other people’s fear or disgust emotions (Fan
et al., 2011). Examinations of the SMA in psychopathology
show deﬁcits in activation and in integration of sensory input
in ADHD and other developmental disorders (Piek and Dyck,
2004; Mostofsky et al., 2006). Therefore, unlike other brain
regions, hyperactivity and hyperconnectivity in this region is
uncommon in psychopathology.
The superior temporal cortex
The superior temporal cortex (STC; Figure 1A ) comprises
roughly 17% of the total cerebral cortex in humans and includes
areas with auditory, olfactory, vestibular, visual, and linguistic
Frontiers in Neuroscience 05 frontiersin.org

fnins-16-893903 July 25, 2022 Time: 11:51 # 6
Neacsiu et al. 10.3389/fnins.2022.893903
functions (Kiernan, 2012). The predominant role of the STC
is to identify the source of a sound and interpret it as human,
dog, car, etc. (Kiernan, 2012). The STC can be divided into two
regions with some functional overlap: the superior temporal
gyrus (STG) and the superior temporal sulcus (STS). Likely
most relevant to misophonia, the STG is fundamental to human
understanding of language and sound. It provides the ability to
analyze facial expressions and changes in terms of the inherent
emotional messaging (Bigler et al., 2007). Additionally, the STG
has a functional role in auditory processing within the context
of ambient noise. Speciﬁcally, this region becomes more active
in social situations when a person strains to hold conversation
amid a background information (Vander Ghinst et al., 2016).
The tempo-parietal junction (TPJ), which captures part of
the STG, has also been connected with the ability to engage
successfully in emotional distancing if the context requires it
(Powers et al., 2020a,b; Powers and LaBar, 2019). Hyperactivity
of the STG during exposure to trauma has been one of the brain
abnormalities distinguishing adults diagnosed with PTSD from
controls (Lanius et al., 2002).
Amygdala
The amygdala ( Figure 1B ) is a key structure in the brain
for processing emotions. It lies in the medial temporal lobe in
front of the hippocampus and is a part of the limbic system.
Extended research has found strong connectivity between the
amygdala and the cingulate cortex, OFC, insular cortex, dlPFC,
and parahippocampal gyrus (Stein et al., 2007). The amygdala
also interacts with the vmPFC when we engage in aﬀective
decision-making. The hypothesized role of the amygdala is
to assess the aﬀective components of the situation and the
of the vmPFC to lead to a judgment based on amygdala
inputs (Shenhav and Greene, 2014). Diﬀerences between the
roles of the right and left amygdala have been identiﬁed and
extensively researched. In brief, the right amygdala is naturally
larger than its left counterpart in healthy adults, resulting in
asymmetrical lateralization (Murphy et al., 1987). It uniquely
connects to the dorsomedial (dm)PFC, a neural pathway that
has been connected to the regulation of negative emotions
(Baeken et al., 2014). On a behavioral level, the right amygdala
is more engaged in processing negative emotional stimuli as
opposed to the left amygdala which is involved primarily in
processing positive emotional stimuli (Yoshimura et al., 2009).
More prominent involvement in habituation (Wright et al.,
2001) and fear conditioning (Baker and Kim, 2004) led to the
hypothesis that the right amygdala is part of a system that
detects dynamic emotional stimuli, while the left amygdala may
be more involved in evaluating a continuous stimulus. Higher
volume in the left amygdala has also been connected with
enhanced empathy (Goerlich-Dobre et al., 2015). The pervasive
amygdala dysfunction found in psychopathology tends to beassociated with hyperactivation or atypical connectivity of the
right amygdala (Abercrombie et al., 1998; Chen et al., 2004;
Gilboa et al., 2004; Kleinhans et al., 2010; Spoletini et al.,
2011; Pico-Perez et al., 2017; Thorsen et al., 2018; Picó-Pérez
et al., 2019) or insuﬃcient activation in the left amygdala
(Thorsen et al., 2018).
The neurobiology of misophonia
Initial conceptualizations of misophonia hypothesized
neural hyper-connectivity between auditory and limbic systems
(Jastreboﬀ and Hazell, 2008) based on prior examinations
of heightened noise sensitivity which found volumetric
enhancements in left auditory areas, bilateral hippocampus,
and right anterior insula (Kliuchko et al., 2018)1. Therefore,
initial examinations of the neurobiology of misophonia have
focused on the auditory and emotional neural networks. In
a preliminary investigation, 10 misophonic adults, and 7
matched healthy controls were exposed to 25 s audio-video
clips of neutral, aversive, or misophonic trigger sounds (San
Giorgi, 2015). Participants with other mental health disorders
were excluded. Increased activity in the left amygdala was
found for those diagnosed with misophonia versus controls
when being exposed to trigger versus aversive videos (San
Giorgi, 2015). This preliminary ﬁnding suggested that emotional
neural networks, rather than auditory over-responsivity, might
be key in understanding misophonia. Speciﬁcally, given the
hypothesis that the left amygdala may be more involved in
evaluating a continuous stimulus as negative, trigger sounds
may be overly identiﬁed as negative experiences in misophonic
contexts. Furthermore, given that the left amygdala tends
to under perform in the majority of psychiatric disorders,
hyperactivation in misophonia points to a unique neural
signature for this disorder.
Kumar et al. (2017) examined 20 adults diagnosed
with misophonia and 22 controls (non-misophonic) using a
functional neuroimaging paradigm. Participants had to report
being bothered by sounds of eating, breathing and chewing
regardless of whom the person engaging in these behaviors
was. Control participants were brieﬂy exposed to misophonic
triggers and only enrolled if they did not describe a misophonic
response to these sounds. No additional clinical characterization
of the two groups was performed. Exposing participants to
15 s audio clips of misophonic sounds led to signiﬁcantly
higher activation in the bilateral AIC in adults diagnosed
with misophonia versus controls. The researchers concluded
that trigger sounds may have been perceived with heightened
salience in those who experience misophonia. This enhanced
activation mediated increases in heart rate (HR) and galvanic
1 It is important to highlight that misophonia per se was not measured
in this study.
Frontiers in Neuroscience 06 frontiersin.org

fnins-16-893903 July 25, 2022 Time: 11:51 # 7
Neacsiu et al. 10.3389/fnins.2022.893903
skin response in adults with misophonia. Furthermore, during
trigger sounds alone, the AIC (especially in the left hemisphere)
had enhanced functional connectivity with core parts of the
default mode network (DMN; the vmPFC, posteromedial
cortex), with the hippocampus, and with the amygdala. This
hyperconnectivity suggests that individuals with misophonia
have diﬃculty disconnecting default mode memories of similar
contexts and thoughts from the active situation, increasing the
salience of the experience (Kumar et al., 2017). The enhanced
connectivity to the amygdala is also seen in PTSD during trauma
exposure (Cisler et al., 2014), suggesting that perception of
trigger sounds may be akin to trauma exposure.
Using a similar paradigm but changing the stimuli to include
both video and audio, Schröder et al. (2019) compared 21 adults
with misophonia with 23 controls. Unlike Kumar et al. (2017),
this study excluded participants with psychiatric comorbidities
(e.g., anxiety, mood, or substance use disorders) and did not ﬁnd
diﬀerences between groups when comparing misophonic (lip
smacking, loud breathing) with aversive triggers. Nevertheless,
when comparing misophonic with neutral sounds, the study
found signiﬁcant higher activation of the right insula, ACC, and
STC in adults with misophonia versus controls. Increased heart
rate and self-reported anger, disgust and sadness in response
to misophonic triggers also diﬀerentiated adults diagnosed with
misophonia from controls. Furthermore, repeated exposure to
the same triggers ampliﬁed the salience network activity which
the authors hypothesized indicated a conditioned response,
augmented by enhanced vigilance (Schröder et al., 2019).
A novel ﬁnding in this study is the increased ACC function
during symptom provocation which may suggest that adults
diagnosed with misophonia may engage in enhanced emotion
regulation during perception of misophonic trigger sounds
(Schröder et al., 2019; Cerliani and Rouw, 2020). Based on
the function of the ACC presented in the last section, is
also possible that increased ACC activation during misophonic
triggers can be a marker of higher perceived social pain
(or rejection) when sounds produced by another person are
experienced. In addition, hyperactivation of the STC during
trigger sounds in misophonia may suggest that misophonic
sounds are involuntarily brought into the forefront of the
context, enhancing their salience.
Cerliani and Rouw (2020) compared 19 participants
with misophonia and 20 controls. Twelve-second audio-visual
stimuli that were either neutral, aversive, or misophonic triggers
were presented during an fMRI paradigm. Each stimulus was
preceded by a 2 s text description. Signiﬁcantly higher brain
activity was found during perception of triggers versus aversive
sounds in misophonic adults versus controls in the SMA, MCC,
visual cortex (V1/V2), and right ventrolateral premotor cortex
(PMvl), including the right anterior insula. In addition to
enhanced activation, researchers also found hyperconnectivity
between MCC/SMA/PMvl with the primary auditory cortex
(A1), and the lateral OFC, a signature that appears to be uniqueto misophonia. Interestingly, these diﬀerences were not found
when comparing trigger sounds with neutral sounds.
The areas of enhanced activation are responsible for
planning motor behavior and may represent the misophonic
adult’s preparation to avoid or physically react to the sound.
The authors hypothesize that the misophonic reaction is not
a direct auditory-limbic response, rather a more complex
process mediated by higher order processes. The important
role of the lateral OFC connects misophonia to diﬃculties with
behavioral inhibition and with learning how to adjust responses
to misophonic triggers based on context. Speciﬁcally, adults
with misophonia may have diﬃculty reassessing the unnecessary
negative response associated with this particular type of
innocuous auditory stimuli (Cerliani and Rouw, 2020). This
ﬁnding supports the high co-occurrence between misophonia
and compulsive disorders. Concerning the SMA, the heightened
connectivity with the auditory cortex can suggest higher salience
of the auditory input when determining upcoming motor
action. The higher SMA activation during trigger versus aversive
sounds may suggest a stronger impulse to escape, or to overly
identify with the person engaged in the actions that yield
misophonic sounds.
Concerning the AIC, two studies showed hyperactivity
during exposure to trigger sounds in the absence of regulation
instructions (Kumar et al., 2017; Schröder et al., 2019). However,
in one study when the unpredictability of the trigger may have
been reduced by announcing the type of sound with a written
description, the hyperactivity seen in the insula was reduced
(Cerliani and Rouw, 2020). This may suggest that reducing
ambiguity may lessen the insula reactivity, although a direct
comparison is needed to support such a conclusion. Therefore,
it is possible that the unpredictability of how a misophonic
situation might unfold (i.e., how much worse the trigger sound
will get), negative emotions associated with the sounds, and
automatic engagement in maladaptive emotion regulation may
be responsible for the insula hyperactivity seen in misophonia.
It is also possible that hyperactivity in the insula in misophonia
may be connected to deﬁcits in attention (Eijsker et al., 2019).
Eijsker et al. (2019) administered a stop signal task to 25
adults with misophonia and 25 matched controls. Participants
were excluded if they met criteria for bipolar I, psychosis,
substance use disorders, autism, as well as other neurological
conditions. The majority of the sample had no comorbidities
except one case with ADHD, and one case with borderline
personality disorder. There were no diﬀerences in successful
engagement in the task between the two groups. Nevertheless,
misophonic adults evidenced reduced inhibition success-related
activation of left dlPFC and heightened activation in this
region during correct going trials when compared to controls.
Furthermore, misophonic adults only activated the SMFG
less during inhibition success compared to failure, suggesting
that feedback that may normally be passed to the insula
adjusts its activity may be missing or insuﬃcient. Controls
Frontiers in Neuroscience 07 frontiersin.org

fnins-16-893903 July 25, 2022 Time: 11:51 # 8
Neacsiu et al. 10.3389/fnins.2022.893903
only showed inhibition success-related activity in the posterior
cingulate cortex (PCC).
The authors interpret these ﬁndings as suggesting strategic
delay of responses in misophonic adults who may prefer
accuracy over speed (e.g., perfectionism) during this task
coupled with overly negative self-reﬂection in response to failure
and an inability to adjust strategy employed in response to
success and failure information. Others have also suggested that
perfectionism may be at play within misophonic patients (Jager
et al., 2020; Natalini et al., 2020), using self-reports, personality
assessments, and clinical examples, although the research data
is mixed (Szykowny, 2020). One recent experimental study
highlights that disproportionate attention to detail coupled
with cognitive inﬂexibility (which can also be construed as
perfectionism) is more prevalent in misophonic versus non-
misophonic adults (Simner et al., 2022).
Resting state connectivity studies also oﬀer insight into
brain diﬀerences that are related to misophonia. In a separate
assessment of the sample presented above, Eijsker et al.
(2021b) examined diﬀerences at rest between misophonic
adults and matched controls. A multivariate connectivity
analysis with the bilateral amygdalae as seed regions showed
hyperconnectivity during resting state with the cerebellum for
patients when compared to controls. Patients also showed
stronger connectivity within the right frontal cortex (IFC) and
TPJ at rest. The authors hypothesize that these abnormalities
reﬂect a tendency to enhance sensory processing of emotional
information and may lead to reﬂex-like behaviors. Enhanced
connectivity between the TPJ and the frontal cortex at rest
could also be connected with diﬃculty recruiting this area
for successful distancing from distressing noise in misophonic
contexts (Powers and LaBar, 2019).
Taken together, these studies highlight the neural networks
involved in misophonia and do not support the hypothesis
that misophonia is simply a noise sensitivity problem. Rather,
these studies suggest that brain networks involved in emotion,
salience, attention to detail, and cognitive ﬂexibility may display
aberrant function and connectivity in adults with misophonia
(See Supplementary Table 1 for speciﬁc locations for neural
diﬀerences found in the reviewed studies). Evidence supports
ampliﬁed physiological reactivity to misophonic cues that seems
to be connected to emotion much more than to heightened
responsivity of the auditory cortex. Similar to other clinical
disorders, prefrontal areas may be hypoactive, or connected to
these limbic structures in a dysfunctional way (Kumar et al.,
2017) leading to diﬃculties downregulating this exaggerated
arousal response. The speciﬁc ways in which the insula
connectivity is altered and the presence of hyperactivity in
motor areas during symptom provocation highlight that a
unique neural signature of misophonia exists. Small sample sizes
and diﬀerences in inclusion/exclusion criteria suggest the need
for replication for these ﬁndings in more tightly controlled
samples, including comparisons with clinical not just withhealthy controls. The wide range of functional diﬀerences found
from controls in diﬀerent studies also points to the necessity
of a large trial that can clarify with more accuracy which
of these candidate regions shows the most robust evidence
for dysfunction in misophonia. Interestingly, all studies point
toward hyperfunction in motor areas as being connected to
misophonic responses.
Along these lines, Kumar et al. (2021) proposed a new
mechanism for misophonia that involves the activity of mirror
neurons found in premotor areas. Using a resting state fMRI
(rs-fMRI) paradigm, the team showed that function in the
right secondary auditory and the PMv cortices are signiﬁcantly
more correlated at rest in 17 adults with misophonia than
in 20 controls. A similarly increased functional connectivity
at rest was found between the right secondary visual cortex
(V2) and the PMv. The right anterior insula also demonstrated
heightened functional connectivity at rest with the right V2
and the left primary visual cortex (V1) in adults diagnosed
with misophonia versus controls. When exposed to 15 s audio
clips, 19 participants with misophonia showed again a stronger
connectivity between the auditory cortex and the PMv regardless
of the sounds being played. The PMv demonstrated higher
activity in misophonic adults when compared to controls for
trigger sounds only, and the magnitude of activation in this
area correlated with the self-reported distress induced by the
sound. The authors identify that the area that demonstrates
hyperactivity within the PMv is responsible for engaging in
or observing mouth and lip movements. They conclude that
this pattern indicates hyperactivity of mirror neurons in areas
responsible for orofacial actions.
This neural mirroring may involve behavioral mirroring,
likely done with enhanced awareness, and inability to disconnect
or distract from this activity (Kumar et al., 2021). Given that
the PMv is also activated when observing lip movements of
others (Buccino et al., 2001), it is possible that misophonia
includes an inability to disengage from sensory cues related to
others orofacial movements. Given the function of the PMv, this
pattern of results may also suggest over-preparedness for the
reactions of others and higher importance given to the motor
movements involved in trigger sounds versus other sensory
inputs. This hypothesized mechanism doesn’t explain why
some trigger sounds, like clicking, elicit misophonic reactions
(Hansen et al., 2021), but it oﬀers a comprehensive explanation
for neuroimaging ﬁndings presented in the literature thus
far. A possibility exists that diﬀerent subtypes of misophonia
may exist, or that diﬀerent mechanisms through which the
misophonic reaction is triggered may be at play.
Structural abnormalities
The ﬁrst structural abnormality related to misophonia was
reported by Kumar et al. (2017) who found higher myelination
Frontiers in Neuroscience 08 frontiersin.org

fnins-16-893903 July 25, 2022 Time: 11:51 # 9
Neacsiu et al. 10.3389/fnins.2022.893903
in the vmPFC. Increased myelination of the vmPFC can also be
seen in monkeys who are exposed to early mild life stressors and
learn to cope with such stressors (Katz et al., 2009), suggesting
that this brain diﬀerence may be a marker of resilience. More
recent studies failed to replicate this ﬁnding when using voxel-
based morphometry along with structural MRI; nevertheless,
new ﬁndings emerged (Eijsker et al., 2021a,b). When compared
to controls ( n= 25) patients with misophonia ( n= 24) may
have larger gray matter volume in the right amygdala (Eijsker
et al., 2021b), a ﬁnding believed to be connected to the increased
emotional reactivity when being exposed to trigger sounds. The
same team also showed that adults with misophonia may have
greater white matter volumes in the left frontal cortex (the
left inferior fronto-occipital fasciculus, and the left body of the
corpus callosum; Eijsker et al., 2021a). This ﬁnding again points
toward a unique neural characteristic in misophonia, given that
the majority of mental health dysfunctions have been connected
tolower, not higher, white matter volumes (Thomason and
Thompson, 2011). Patients may also have lower diﬀusivities,
which reﬂects higher myelination. The aﬀected regions involve
tracts connecting the amygdala with the occipital cortex, and the
OFC with the frontal pole and the dlPFC (Eijsker et al., 2021a).
The authors interpret these ﬁndings as possibly underlying
processes responsible for disengaging attention away from the
aversive stimulus (Eijsker et al., 2021a). The regions aﬀected
are also involved in emotional empathy and recognizing facial
emotions (Philippi et al., 2009; Oishi et al., 2015), processes that
have not been studied in misophonia but which may play a role.
Future directions for the neuroscience
of misophonia
The rapid advancements in understanding the neuroscience
behind misophonia are promising. One drawback of the current
literature is the little overlap in ﬁndings, despite similar
paradigms. Therefore, one important future direction may be
to examine diﬀerences in much larger samples, using more
stringent controls for comorbidities. In addition, employing
tasks that elicit activation in the insula or the PMv in misophonic
patients, in the absence of misophonic triggers, may shed
light onto the speciﬁcity or generalizability of the observed
dysfunction. For example, examining diﬀerences in empathy or
emotional awareness in adults with and without misophonia
(Philippi et al., 2009; Oishi et al., 2015), may provide additional
insight into insula hyperactivation.
Future research should also examine neural diﬀerences
between misophonia and clinical controls during emotion
regulation. The rich body of literature of neural underpinnings
and plasticity of emotion regulation (Gross, 2013; Powers
and LaBar, 2019) may provide important additional avenues
for misophonia interventions. An additional important future
direction is to examine the developmental trajectory of neuralchanges in misophonia. Imaging studies in misophonic children
do not yet exist, and longitudinal examinations that show the
trajectory of dysfunction over time are also lacking.
Neurostimulation can be a helpful tool in understanding
causality and development. Therefore, paradigms that attempt
to temporarily enhance insula activity and measure sensitivity to
triggers in non-misophonic adults may answer questions about
misophonic mechanisms. Temporarily altering the function of
other brain regions related to misophonia could also provide
future insight into the causality of these dysfunctions in relation
to misophonia distress.
Last, but not least, misophonic triggers are context speciﬁc.
In other words, the sound must elicit speciﬁc visual imagery,
and must come from a speciﬁc set of people in order to
trigger a misophonic reaction. Neuroimaging examinations that
separate these diﬀerent components of the trigger experience
are also needed.
The neuroscience of overlapping
disorders
Knowledge of neurological dysfunction that can be seen in
comorbid conditions may broaden our understanding of the
neurobiology of misophonia (see Table 2 ). We chose to focus
this section of the review on psychiatric comorbidities, while
acknowledging that there is much to learn from misophonia’s
overlap with tinnitus, ASMR, or hyperacusis [see McGeoch
and Rouw (2020) for an example]. Our review is restricted
to psychiatric comorbidities because the solutions proposed
for neuroscience-based interventions were primarily developed
for psychiatric conditions. We focus on OCPD/OCD, mood
disorders, ADHD, and PTSD because several papers have
supported their co-occurrence with misophonia, and the rates
of overlap appear to be over 10% (Cavanna and Seri, 2015;
Quek et al., 2018; Rouw and Erfanian, 2018; Erfanian et al.,
2019; Claiborn et al., 2020; Jager et al., 2020; Swedo et al.,
2021). Other comorbidities may also occur and have relevance
to the neurobiology of misophonia. Nevertheless, existing data
either point to low co-occurrence [e.g., autism was reported by
3% of participants with misophonia in a large study (Claiborn
et al., 2020)], or there needs to be replication to ascertain
the relevance of a comorbidity to misophonia [e.g., for eating
disorders (Erfanian et al., 2019)].
Obsessive compulsive personality
disorders/obsessive compulsive
disorder
Much of the neural mechanisms and dysfunctions in OCPD
are diﬃcult to distinguish from OCD. OCD is characterized
as a chronic compulsive disorder, while OCPD is a behavioral
Frontiers in Neuroscience 09 frontiersin.org

fnins-16-893903 July 25, 2022 Time: 11:51 # 10
Neacsiu et al. 10.3389/fnins.2022.893903
TABLE 2 Summary of alterations in brain regions that are relevant to misophonia in disorders who have been shown to have comorbidity with
misophonia.
OCPD OCD MDD Bipolar disorder ADHD PTSD
Insula Increased higher
amplitudes of
low-frequency
ﬂuctuation in left
insula at rest; smaller
gray matter volumeHyperactivity during
symptom provocation;
during exposure to
pictures eliciting
disgust and fear;
increased connectivity
with the dmPFC;
hyperactivity in the
right anterior insula
during error
processing and
hypoactivity during
inhibitory controlHyperactivity during
exposure to negative
stimuli and during
emotion regulation, and
hypoactivity during
exposure to positive
stimuliReduced volume as a
precursor of
development of this
disorder; deactivation
during cognitive
interference trials and
altered connectivity
with the DMNHyperactivity when
presented with
negative stimuli
distractors; right
anterior insula
function connected to
emotion dysregulation
in ADHDHypoconnectivity with
frontal regions,
hyper-connectivity
with DMN and
periaqueductal gray at
rest; reduced volume;
functional
hyper-connectivity
with amygdala during
trauma cues
OFC/
vmPFCSmaller OFC volume Decreased activation
of the left OFC during
symptom provocation;
hypoactivity during
inhibitory controlHyperactivity in the
OFC when presented
with positive stimuli;
disrupted functional
connectivity between
OFC and nucleus
accumbensHypoactivity in the
OFC during emotion
regulationReduced OFC activity
when processing
rewardDecreased mPFC
volume and inverse
correlation between
responsiveness of the
mPFC and symptom
severity; decreased
gray matter volume in
right PFC
Cingulate cortex Smaller gray matter
in the cingulate
cortexDecreased activation
in the MCC during
symptom provocation;
decreased gray matter
volume in the ACC;
hyperactivity in the
dorsal ACC during
error processing, and
ventral ACC
hypoactivity during
inhibitory controlHyperactivity in the
ACC when presented
with negative stimuli or
with facial
expressions/hypoactivity
when exposed to
positive or non-facial
stimuliDeactivation during
cognitive interference
trials in the MCCHypoactivity in the
dACC when learning
verbal fear cues
PMv Decreased cortical
thickness in the left
premotor cortex
predicts treatment
responseReduced premotor
cortex surface area in
ADHD boys;
hypoactivity when
ignoring distractorsDecreased premotor
cortex volume
SMA Increased connectivity
between the caudate
the SMA at rest;
hyperactivity during
error processingFunctional connectivity
with nucleus accumbens
is positively correlated
with cognitive
impairmentUnderperformance
during neurocognitive
tasksReduced gray matter
volume
STC Increased rest
connectivity between
caudate and superior
and middle temporal
gyrusCompensatory
recruitment during
response inhibition.
Amygdala Smaller volume Hyperactivity during
symptom provocationHyperactivity when
presented with negative
stimuli/hypoactivity to
positive stimuliHyperactivity when
presented with
emotional stimuli and
during regulation;
reduced volumeHyperactivity when
learning to
discriminate aversive
stimuli viaverbal
instructionHyperactivity
connected to symptom
severity
dlPFC Smaller gray mater
volume in the
prefrontal cortexHypoactivity during a
planning taskLess activation when
exposed to negative
stimuliHypoactivity during
regulationHypoactivity in the left
dlPFC during working
memory and selective
motor response
inhibition tasks;
hypoactivity in the
right dlPFC during
response inhibition
tasksDecreased gray matter
volume in right dlPFC
OCPD, obsessive compulsive personality disorder; OCD, obsessive compulsive disorder; MDD, major depressive disorder; ADHD, attention deﬁcit and hyperactivity disorder; PTSD, post
traumatic stress disorder; PFC, prefrontal cortex; dACC, dorsal anterior cingulate cortex; MCC, midcingulate cortex; OFC, orbitofrontal cortex; vmPFC, ventromedial prefrontal cortex;
PMv, ventral premotor cortex; SMA, supplementary motor area; STC, superior temporal cortex; dlPFC, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex; and DMN, default mode network.
Frontiers in Neuroscience 10 frontiersin.org

fnins-16-893903 July 25, 2022 Time: 11:51 # 11
Neacsiu et al. 10.3389/fnins.2022.893903
disorder deﬁned by immoderate perfectionism (Gordon et al.,
2013). Emerging examinations of OCPD neural dysfunction
highlight altered activity during resting state in the bilateral
caudate, left insula, and left medial SFG areas when compared
to healthy controls (Lei et al., 2020). These ﬁndings highlight
higher engagement in self-perception and future planning at
rest, which may play into the perfectionistic tendencies seen
in this disorder. OCPD patients also have decreased gray
matter volume in the prefrontal, cingulate, and insular cortices
(Reetz et al., 2008). The decreased gray matter volume of these
areas most obviously aﬀects decision-making and correlates
with anxious tendencies such as avoidance behavior (Reetz
et al., 2008). Furthermore, OCPD patients have decreased
amygdala, hippocampus (Gurok et al., 2019), and OFC volumes,
and higher volume in the thalamus (Atmaca et al., 2019),
suggesting diﬃculties with memory, emotional processing, and
conscious attention. An fMRI study showed greater functional
connectivity within the precuneus, a region that controls
memory retrieval and manipulation, in OCPD adults when
compared to healthy controls (Coutinho et al., 2016). Thus, the
neural dysfunction seen in OCPD does not overlap with any
of the current ﬁndings of neural dysfunction in misophonia,
although direct comparisons are warranted. Interestingly,
OCPD is characterized by reduced amygdala volumes, with in
misophonia amygdala volumes may be increased.
Similar to OCPD, meta-analytic ﬁndings in OCD highlight
increased activation of the right caudate, putamen, and insula
as well as decreased activation of the left OFC, caudate, and
MCC when compared to controls (Yu et al., 2022). During
resting state, it has also been found in patients with OCD
that connectivity within the dmPFC-thalamus-caudate loop is
decreased, while connectivity between the caudate and the
superior and middle temporal gyrus, middle and inferior
occipital gyrus, and SMA is increased (Chen et al., 2016).
These neural ﬁndings have been associated with disruptions in
processing during distress, dysfunctional memory formation,
and impairments in cognitive and behavioral regulation.
Increased activity in the insula (Schienle et al., 2005) and
connectivity with the dmPFC was found as well (Beucke
et al., 2014), highlighting the insula’s critical role in emotional
processing and feelings of disgust often seen in OCD. Symptom
provocation in OCD also shows hyperactivity in the left
amygdala (Simon et al., 2014). Studies examining how patients
with an OCD diagnosis learn from errors and inhibit behaviors
show a hyperactive error processing mechanism and an
impaired ability to engage in inhibitory control (Norman et al.,
2019). These alterations have been connected with hyperactivity
in the dACC, SMA, pre-SMA, right anterior insula, and anterior
lateral PFC during error processing, and hypoactivity in the
rACC, OFC, and right anterior insula during inhibitory control
(Norman et al., 2019). Structural examinations ﬁnd that patients
with OCD have smaller gray matter volume in the ACC
compared to controls, suggesting deﬁcits with motor control
and visuospatial function (Peng et al., 2012).Unlike with OCPD, there is some overlap in neural
dysfunction between OCD and misophonia. Speciﬁcally,
hyperactivity in the insula and amygdala is seen during
symptom provocation in both disorders as well as
hyperconnectivity between the insula and frontal regions,
although the speciﬁc aberrant connectivity is diﬀerent between
OCD (dmPFC-insula) and misophonia (vmPFC-insula).
Hyperactivity in the ACC is found in both disorders, during
trigger sound exposure in misophonia and while engaging in
an error processing task in OCD. It would be interesting to
examine whether exposure to disgust and fear, as well as error
processing ’lead to hyperactivity in the insula in misophonia,
like they do in OCD. In other networks, OCD and misophonia
neuroimaging results diverge. For example, the function of
the OFC shows impairment in OCD, while in misophonia the
connectivity of the OFC seems to be primarily aﬀected. During
symptom provocation, the MCC is hyperactive in misophonia
and hypoactive in OCD. Inhibitory control shows dysfunction
in the ACC in OCD and the PCC in misophonia. The function of
SMA is diﬀerentially aﬀected in both disorders: in misophonia
trigger sounds lead to SMA hyperactivity, while in OCD error
processing tasks lead to SMA hypoactivity. The STC shows
altered connectivity at rest in both disorders, but with very
diﬀerent brain regions. Therefore, misophonia is unlikely to be
a variant of OCD given that the neuroscientiﬁc results point
primarily to diﬀerences and not to overlapping patterns.
Mood disorders
There has been considerable eﬀort to characterize neural
dysfunction in mood disorders in the recent years. Summaries
of this literature point to decreased activation in the dlPFC
during exposure to negative stimuli and sustained activation
in the amygdala in adults diagnosed with major depressive
disorder (MDD) when compared to controls (Groenewold
et al., 2013). Hyperactivation in the OFC when presented with
positive stimuli and hyperactivity in the ACC (Groenewold
et al., 2013) [particularly the subgenual ACC (sgACC)] (Gray
et al., 2020) and insula when being exposed to negative
stimuli (Groenewold et al., 2013) or when engaging in emotion
regulation (Beauregard et al., 2006), are also markers of
depression. Severity of depression and cognitive dysfunction
has been associated with alterations in functional connectivity
between the nucleus accumbens, the OFC, ACC, SMA, and
caudate (Gong et al., 2017). Decreased thickness in the left
premotor cortex is characteristic of depression, and indicative
of a positive response to antidepressants 8 weeks later
(Liu et al., 2021).
The markers of psychopathology in bipolar disorder
are somewhat diﬀerent. During emotional processing and
regulation, those who meet criteria for bipolar disorder show
hyperactivity in the amygdala, hypoactivity in the ventrolateral
prefrontal cortex and OFC, and decreased connectivity between
Frontiers in Neuroscience 11 frontiersin.org

fnins-16-893903 July 25, 2022 Time: 11:51 # 12
Neacsiu et al. 10.3389/fnins.2022.893903
these regions when compared to healthy controls (Phillips
and Swartz, 2014). Reduced insula and amygdala volumes
may be a precursor for bipolar disorder (Bechdolf et al.,
2012). Furthermore, during cognitive interference trials when
compared to controls, bipolar adults evidence deactivation in
the anterior insula and the ACC with altered connectivity with
the DMN (Ellard et al., 2019). The hypoactivity in the dlPFC
remains a consistent marker of both unipolar and bipolar mood
disorders (Townsend and Altshuler, 2012). Structural studies
ﬁnd reduced gray matter volume in the right SMA in both MDD
and bipolar adults when compared to clinical and non-clinical
controls (Chang M. et al., 2018).
Just like with OCD, there is overlap between misophonia
and mood disorders in the neural dysfunction seen during
symptom provocation, which in mood disorders takes the
form of exposure to negative emotional stimuli. In both
groups, symptom provocation leads to hyperactivity in the
amygdala and insula, as well as in the ACC. Interestingly,
exposure to positive stimuli leads to hypoactivity in these
regions, a phenomenon that would be interesting to test in
misophonia also. The OFC and SMA function and connectivity
are altered in both mood disorders and misophonia, but in
very diﬀerent ways, pointing toward divergence between these
disorders. Emotion regulation tasks within mood disorders also
lead to a pattern of aberrant function and connectivity, but
have not yet been studied in misophonia. Thus, examinations
of emotion regulation and positive emotional processing are
warranted, although they are unlikely to alter the current
conclusion that misophonia has a diﬀerent neural signature
than mood disorders.
Attention deﬁcit and hyperactivity
disorder
Meta-analyses of neuroimaging ﬁndings aimed to capture
dysfunction in ADHD found decreased activity in the bilateral
SFG and left dlPFC during working memory tasks as well
as in the bilateral inferior frontal gyri, right SFG, and right
dlPFC during response inhibition tasks (McCarthy et al.,
2014). In addition, in tasks testing selective motor response
inhibition, less activation in the left dlPFC and right caudate
was found (McCarthy et al., 2014). The decreased activity in
frontal regions correlate to behavioral symptoms of decreased
working memory capacity, inhibitory control, self-regulation,
and impulsivity control (McCarthy et al., 2014). Dysfunction
in reward processing has also been connected to ADHD,
speciﬁcally to hypoactivity in the OFC when compared to
controls (Van Den Heuvel et al., 2005). Underperformance in
the SMA and the basal ganglia during neurocognitive tasks,
and poor deactivation in the DMN when switching to response
inhibition have also been found to diﬀerentiate ADHD patients
from controls (Albajara Sáenz et al., 2019).Similar to other misophonia comorbidities, in ADHD when
compared to controls, exposure to negative stimuli leads to
higher activation in the insula (Vetter et al., 2018). In a rigorous
analysis of over 140 participants, investigators concluded that
the right anterior insula is likely the hub for altered emotion
regulation function in ADHD young adults (Viering et al., 2021).
Another study examined learning of fear cues in ADHD and
found diminished activation in the dACC when unlearning
an instructed fear cue as well as increased activation in the
amygdala when being exposed to a neutral cue in the absence
of fear instructions (Maier et al., 2014). The authors interpreted
these ﬁndings as impairments in processing of verbally aversive
information in ADHD. Unlike other comorbid disorders,
dysfunction in motor areas has been associated with ADHD
impairments. In one study, boys diagnosed with ADHD had
reduced premotor cortex areas when compared to typically
developing children (Dirlikov et al., 2015). Dysfunction in the
premotor cortex was also evidenced by an fMRI study showing
insuﬃcient recruitment of this area when trying to suppress
distractions (Vaidya et al., 2005). When attempting response
inhibition children with an ADHD diagnosis recruited the right
STC unlike comparison children, who recruited a front-striatal
network for this task (Vaidya et al., 2005).
Alterations in the dlPFC function during response
inhibition tasks as well as hyperactivity in the insula when
presented with upsetting stimuli appear to be commonalities
between misophonia and ADHD. The STC is hyperactive in
misophonia during trigger sounds, and appears to be recruited
as a compensatory mechanism to handle response inhibition in
ADHD. These ﬁndings may point to overlapping mechanisms
of these disorders, although a direct comparison is needed to
examine this hypothesis. On the other hand, alterations in other
brain regions appear to be very diﬀerent between misophonia
and ADHD. For example, diﬃculties ignoring distractors
are connected to PMv hypoactivity in ADHD, while trigger
sounds lead to PMv hyperactivity in misophonia. OFC function
appears to be altered in ADHD at least in one domain, while
in misophonia evidence primarily points toward dysfunctional
connectivity. Thus, misophonia and ADHD are likely to be very
distinct disorders.
Post-traumatic stress disorder
Post-traumatic stress disorder is a disorder that develops
in a subset of children and adults who experience a traumatic
event (Kessler et al., 2005). A review study conducted in
2016 summarized a decade’s worth of literature regarding
the neurobiological basis for PTSD and concluded that the
amygdala, the mPFC, and the hippocampus played important
roles in the development and maintenance of this disorder (Shin
et al., 2006). Speciﬁcally, this review concludes that patients
with PTSD evidence a heightened amygdala responsivity during
Frontiers in Neuroscience 12 frontiersin.org

fnins-16-893903 July 25, 2022 Time: 11:51 # 13
Neacsiu et al. 10.3389/fnins.2022.893903
trauma exposure, which is positively associated with symptom
severity. The mPFC is typically volumetrically smaller amongst
patients with PTSD and is hypo-responsive during symptomatic
states, with an inverse correlation to symptom severity (Shin
et al., 2006). The insula may also have a critical role in PTSD.
Resting state scans were used in one study to classify with 80%
accuracy participants with PTSD versus non-clinical controls
based on insula connectivity patterns (Harricharan et al.,
2020). Structural studies also show that in patients with PTSD
compared to controls, the premotor cortex (Rocha-Rego et al.,
2012) insula (Kunimatsu et al., 2020), and hippocampus (Shin
et al., 2006) have diminished volumes, with the hippocampus
showing aberrant functional, and neuronal integrity (Shin
et al., 2006). Newer ﬁndings also suggest diminished gray
matter volume in the right dlPFC, OFC, and SMA in 30
females with PTSD based on childhood trauma versus controls
(Thomaes et al., 2010).
When comparing the neural signature of misophonia and
PTSD, similarities emerge in insula dysfunction. In resting
state scans, participants with both misophonia and PTSD
display PFC-insula hyperconnectivity. Furthermore, symptom
provocation evidences hyperconnectivity between the insula
and the amygdala as well as hyperactivity in the insula
in both PTSD and misophonia. Nevertheless, PTSD seems
to be characterized by reduced volumes in many of the
structures of interest, a neural abnormality that has not been
related to misophonia yet. Future studies should examine in
more detail volumetric reductions in key brain regions in
misophonia to further elucidate diﬀerences or similarities to
PTSD. Furthermore, insula hyperactivity is not characteristic
of PTSD dysfunction, but is characteristic of misophonia.
Similarly, OFC dysfunction is characteristic of PTSD but not
of misophonia. Thus, there appear to be several diﬀerences
in PTSD and misophonia neural signatures to highlight the
uniqueness of each disorder.
Summary
Taken together (see Table 2 ), these ﬁndings highlight that,
while there is overlap in neural dysfunction in misophonia
and comorbid disorders, no other disorder can fully explain
the alterations seen in misophonia. Of all comorbid disorders
discussed here, PTSD and OCD neural dysfunction come
closest to misophonia, although the hallmark of these disorders
are the amygdala and the OFC, not the insula. When tasks
relevant to the disorder examined are employed (e.g., symptom
provocation, exposure to negative stimuli, emotion regulation in
mood disorders, planning in OCD, working memory in ADHD),
across comorbid disorders and misophonia, hyperactivity in
the insula, amygdala, ACC, and hypoactivity in the dlPFC can
be found. Therefore, the hyperactivity in subcortical regions
seen in misophonia may be related to aberrant processingof, or hypersensitivity to, negative emotions. Furthermore,
in misophonia and beyond, the dlPFC may be a general
marker of problematic allocation of resources to respond to
challenging contexts.
Findings related to the OFC and the motor cortex appear
to be unique to misophonia. The dysfunction seen in the
OFC appears to vary depending on the disorder under
investigation with a unifying theme across comorbid disorders
of functional hypoactivity and hypoconnectivity when disorder-
relevant tasks are employed. The pattern of hyperconnectivity
with other frontal and premotor regions appears to be uniquely
related to misophonia. Across comorbid disorders, there was
little examination of the role of the premotor cortex in
psychiatric presentations. While hyperactivity in both SMA and
PMv was found in misophonia during symptom provocation,
other disorders were characterized by either unremarkable
performance in these regions or by hypoactivity. Taken together,
these ﬁndings strongly suggest a unique neural signature for
misophonia, supporting an independent problem in need of
novel personalized solutions.
Neuroscience-informed
interventions: Brain stimulation
In order to most rapidly identify an intervention for
misophonia, a disorder for which there is currently no consensus
for an optimal treatment [see Aazh et al. (2019) for a review of
evidence for cognitive-behavioral interventions], neuroscientiﬁc
dysfunctions that are unique to this problem should be
directly targeted and altered. Thus, translating ﬁndings from
basic neuroscience studies into innovative therapies can be
the quickest way to ﬁnding a cure for misophonia. Non-
invasive neurostimulation (i.e., the purposeful modulation of
neural circuitry) is a powerful tool that resulted in novel
interventions for several treatment resistant conditions, such as
treatment refractory MDD (Neacsiu and Lisanby, 2015), OCD
(Trevizol et al., 2016), smoking (Maiti et al., 2017), and PTSD
(Kan et al., 2020).
Initially, neurostimulation targeted cortical regions at the
surface of the brain which were reachable by the generated
e-Field (which generally has a 2-cm depth of penetration
below the scalp; Deng et al., 2013). Nevertheless, research
ﬁndings suggest that the eﬀect of neurostimulation can be
seen throughout entire networks. A recent systematic review
of over 33 rTMS studies found that active rTMS induces
signiﬁcant changes in resting state functional connectivity in a
variety of targeted networks (Beynel et al., 2020). Furthermore,
functional and structural networks can then be used to alter
connectivity and activity in subcortical structures, such as the
insula (Addicott et al., 2019) amygdala (Baeken et al., 2010),
or ACC (Vink et al., 2018). In this way, neurostimulation can
Frontiers in Neuroscience 13 frontiersin.org

fnins-16-893903 July 25, 2022 Time: 11:51 # 14
Neacsiu et al. 10.3389/fnins.2022.893903
TABLE 3 Overview, advantages, and risks of various neurostimulation techniques.
Technique Overview Advantages Risks and disadvantages
Repetitive Transcranial
Magnetic Stimulation
(rTMS)Uses a ﬁgure-8 coil to generate a magnetic ﬁeld
that induces electricity within brain region
right underneath the center of the coil. RTMS
uses trains of magnetic pulses at speciﬁc
intervals called inter-train interval (ITI).
Frequencies of stimulation lower than 5 Hz are
considered inhibitory, while over 5 Hz are
considered excitatory.RTMS is the most traditional application of
brain stimulation that has been FDA-approved
for several interventions. There are several
devices available that administer rTMS safely
(Rossi et al., 2021) and a wide body of literature
that characterizes parameter diﬀerences exists
and can inform novel interventions.RTMS can be painful or uncomfortable for up
to 40% of those who undergo this treatment
modality. There is a very low likelihood for
seizures, especially with excitatory stimulation.
Other risks are scalp, jaw, or face muscle
contractions, mild headaches, and transient
mood changes. Treatments that involve rTMS
alone may require daily visits to a site where
equipment to administer it exists.
Deep Transcranial
Magnetic Stimulation
(dTMS)Uses an H-shaped coil, which is inserted in a
spherical helmet placed on the head. The
resulting magnetic ﬁeld can induce electrical
current in deeper brain regions than rTMS.
The gain in depth comes with reduced
stimulation precision.Deeper structures, such as the medial
prefrontal cortex or the anterior cingulate
cortex, can be targeted using this technology.
The use of a helmet to host the coil may make
it easier to administer than rTMS.Potential risk of dTMS are similar to rTMS
with the addition of possible facial, tooth, or
neck pain usually just during the stimulation.
Theta Burst Stimulation
(TBS)Uses a ﬁgure-8 coil, like rTMS but instead of
trains of single pulses, delivers trains of triple
pulses at a higher frequency.The main advantage is that the same amount of
stimulation achieved with a 35–40 min rTMS
session can be achieved with only 3 min of
iTBS. This allows for accelerated sessions (i.e.,
having multiple stimulation sessions in the
same day)The trade-oﬀ of increases eﬃciency of TBS
comes with an increased risk for seizure.
However, seizures are still considered a rare
event.
Transcranial Direct
Current Stimulation
(tDCS)Uses direct electrical currents to stimulate a
brain network. Two electrodes placed over the
head modulate neuronal activity viaa steady
current. Has two diﬀerent types depending on
need: anodal, which excites the network it
targets, and cathodal, which reduces neuronal
activity, thus allowing for greater control.TDCS devices are much cheaper and easier to
maintain than rTMS/dTMS/TBS devices. Naïve
adults can be taught to use these devices in
their own homes, increasing feasibility of
dissemination. Furthermore, integration with
MRI and EEG is easier to accomplish with
tDCS than with other stimulation modalities.The risks of tDCS are similar to those of rTMS.
There is also a low probability for scalp burns.
A disadvantage of this technology is that the
results for its eﬃcacy are mixed (e.g., Santos
et al., 2018), and, therefore, it may be less
eﬀective than other types of neurostimulation.
Currently, there is no FDA approved treatment
that relies on tDCS, and experts highlight the
need for more mechanistic understanding for
this technology (Fregni et al., 2015).
be used to remediate dysfunctional brain circuits regardless
of their location.
Overview of neurostimulation
approaches
Because the brain is an electric organ, communications
within neural networks may be altered with the use of
magnetic and electric ﬁelds that induce brief activity in targeted
brain cells. Magnetic stimulation relies on an electromagnetic
coil, while electric stimulation passes direct current through
the cortex in order to achieve neuromodulatory eﬀects
(Larrivee, 2020). In this section, we introduce several types of
neurostimulation applications, focusing on those that have been
successfully used in interventions for psychiatric disorders (see
Table 3 for a summary).
Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) employs rapidly
alternating magnetic pulses that induce an electric current in the
underlying cortex. It can be applied in single or repetitive pulses
to either activate, enhance, or inhibit activation in a superﬁcial
neural target. The induced current depolarizes cortical neurons
and alters the excitability of neural tissue (Neacsiu and Lisanby,
2015). High-frequency (HF; up to 20 Hz) rTMS has been
associated with more excitability resulting in enhanced activity,
and low frequency ( 1 Hz) with less excitability, and inhibited
activity (Pascual-Leone et al., 1994; Chen et al., 1997; Neacsiu
and Lisanby, 2015).Repetitive TMS (rTMS) is the most traditional therapeutic
application of brain stimulation (Neacsiu and Lisanby, 2015). It
uses a ﬁgure-8 coil that is placed over a predetermined location
of the head (called a target). The coil generates a magnetic
ﬁeld that induces electricity in the target by delivering magnetic
pulses (or trains) on and oﬀ, at speciﬁc intervals inter-train
intervals (ITI). An additional parameter important for rTMS is
the motor threshold (MT). This parameter represents the lowest
output of the rTMS machine needed to reliably elicit a motor
movement when stimulating the motor area (i.e., the lowest
output needed to reach the brain; Neacsiu and Lisanby, 2015).
As an example, a typical rTMS treatment session for depression
will contain 75 trains, each train being 4 s long, with an ITI of
26 s, delivered at 120% MT (Holtzheimer and McDonald, 2014).
HF-rTMS has been FDA approved as a treatment for depression
since 2008 (Holtzheimer and McDonald, 2014). Furthermore,
HF-rTMS over the dlPFC and superior medial frontal cortex,
has been found to signiﬁcantly inhibit activity in the right
insula (Li et al., 2017b; Chang D. et al., 2018). Therefore,
rTMS is a successful approach to changing function in structures
relevant to misophonia.
Deep transcranial magnetic stimulation (dTMS) aims to
target “deeper” regions of the brain by using an H shaped coil
pattern. This coil is inserted in a spherical helmet placed on the
patient’s head. Generally, dTMS follows the same parameters
as rTMS, with the diﬀerence being that dTMS is less precise
in hitting its target. The FDA recently approved dTMS in
conjunction with symptom provocation as a treatment for OCD
Frontiers in Neuroscience 14 frontiersin.org

fnins-16-893903 July 25, 2022 Time: 11:51 # 15
Neacsiu et al. 10.3389/fnins.2022.893903
in 2018 (Roth et al., 2021) and for smoking cessation in 2020
(Young et al., 2021). DTMS has also been employed in the
treatment of PTSD (Isserles et al., 2021) and has evidence
of successful use in interventions to target both cortical and
subcortical structures (Beynel et al., 2021; Roth et al., 2021).
Intermittent theta burst stimulation (iTBS) is also delivered
viaa ﬁgure-8 coil, using triple pulses at a higher frequency to
deliver unique, high-energy frequency of stimulation. The same
eﬀect that rTMS achieves with 75 trains, can be achieved with
only 20 trains of iTBS, each train lasting 2 s, 8 s ITI. Therefore,
iTBS session can be completed in about 3 min versus rTMS
sessions which take 35–40 min (Pabst et al., 2022). Given that
the majority of currently approved treatment protocols include
20–30 sessions [for depression for example (Sonmez et al.,
2019)], iTBS can save signiﬁcant time for patients. Recently,
an iTBS protocol has obtained approval for treatment-resistant
depression intervention (Blumberger et al., 2018). TBS has
also been used successfully to alter amygdala activity viaits
connectivity with the STS (Pitcher et al., 2017), highlighting
that this approach can successfully alter cortical and subcortical
brain structures, including areas indicated in misophonia.
Transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) is an
alternative type of brain stimulation that uses direct electrical
currents to stimulate a speciﬁc brain network. A constant
small current (1–2.5 mA) passes through two electrodes placed
over the head in order to modulate neuronal activity. Anodal
stimulation acts to excite the network it targets while cathodal
stimulation reduces neuronal activity (Fregni et al., 2015).
TDCS has not yet been cleared by the FDA in the treatment
of psychiatric disorders because mechanisms through which
tDCS operates need to be better understood (Fregni et al.,
2015). Nevertheless, it is widely researched for its therapeutic
applications, because of the low cost and ease to administer.
TDCS interventions are thought to be probably eﬃcacious
for non-drug resistant depression (Lefaucheur et al., 2017),
currently unsuccessful with tinnitus (positive response for 15%
of 602 participants across six studies; Santos et al., 2018),
and potentially relevant for remediating aberrant amygdala
hyperactivity (Ironside et al., 2019).
Neurostimulation interventions have primarily been
developed and successful for adults with psychiatric disorders
who did not respond to other treatments. Meta-analyses
of therapeutic applications within these samples ﬁnd eﬀect
sizes that are small-to-moderate when compared to placebo
(Neacsiu and Lisanby, 2015). Findings suggest that these eﬀect
sizes could be improved by using connectivity-driven targeting
(Fox et al., 2012; Opitz et al., 2016; Fox, 2018), neuroimaging
and neuro-navigation (Neacsiu and Lisanby, 2015; Beynel
et al., 2019) and employing electric ﬁeld (E-ﬁeld) modeling
(Bungert et al., 2017; Opitz et al., 2016). In addition, fusing
neuromodulation with behavioral practice (Tsagaris et al.,
2016) can enhance eﬃcacy. For example, combining HF-rTMS
with active emotion regulation practice yields behavioral
improvements in emotion regulation up to a week aftera single session when compared to emotion regulation
practice alone in transdiagnostic clinical adults (Neacsiu et al.,
2022b,a). In addition, combinations of rTMS with 16–20
sessions of psychotherapy demonstrate feasibility (Neacsiu
et al., 2018), with enhanced eﬀects over psychotherapy
alone (Kozel et al., 2018), or over cognitive training alone
(Cunningham et al., 2015).
Both researchers and consumers should be aware of the
potential risks involved with neurostimulation. The most
severe, but rare, risk is for seizure, which in prior studies
occurred in about 0.2% of research subjects (Rossi et al.,
2021). The most common side eﬀects are headaches or muscle
tension which can occur in up to 30% of those receiving
neurostimulation, depending on the protocol and target (Rossi
et al., 2009). Discomfort at the site of neurostimulation during
the procedure can happen in up to 40% of patients (Rossi
et al., 2009). Nevertheless, less than 2% of research participants
quit because of pain and discomfort, and the majority of
participants experienced habituation to this discomfort over
time (Rossi et al., 2009). Other, less common, side eﬀects are
temporary changes in mood, dizziness, and hearing impairment.
’Another potential risk is that compensatory rather than
dysfunctional networks may be impacted by this particular
treatment. Several guidelines have been established to guide
development and application of neurostimulation interventions
in order to maximize safety (Rossi et al., 2009, Rossi et al.,
2021).
In addition to risks, it is important to highlight that
there continue to be many unknowns with regards to this
technology. There is limited data on the long-term eﬀects of
neurostimulation interventions (Marangell et al., 2007) and
the parameter space (frequency, intensity, coil positioning,
and orientation; Beynel et al., 2019). Furthermore, the
exact mechanism through which neurostimulation changes
psychopathology in the brain is still unknown (Bestmann
and Feredoes, 2013). Other types of neurostimulation exist,
such as transcranial photobiomodulation, alternating current
stimulation, or focused ultrasound. While these technologies
can also oﬀer promise to treatments in general, they will
not be discussed in this review because of their limited
existing evidence for broad therapeutic eﬀects in psychiatric
disorders. Therefore, researchers and clinicians interested in
neurostimulation approaches should continue to follow the
literature for best practices and new approaches to increase
safety and eﬃcacy.
Neurostimulation as a treatment for
misophonia: design considerations
A neurostimulation treatment for misophonia could
be constructed through several avenues. On the one hand,
based on resting state misophonia ﬁndings, one could
develop a neurostimulation intervention that attempts to
Frontiers in Neuroscience 15 frontiersin.org

fnins-16-893903 July 25, 2022 Time: 11:51 # 16
Neacsiu et al. 10.3389/fnins.2022.893903
TABLE 4 Examples of speciﬁc parameters that are based on research ﬁndings or other protocols where similar goals (e.g., reducing
hyperconnectivity) were accomplished for different types of neurostimulation discussed in this review.
Protocol type Examples of parameters recommended by other experimental studies Citation
Inhibitory rTMS 1 Hz, continuous 110% rMT Tremblay et al., 2012
Turi et al., 2021
cTBS Continuous train of 600–1,200 pulses applied in the theta burst pattern (bursts of three stimuli at
50 HZ repeated at 5 Hz frequency) 80% rMT, 600 total pulsesHuang et al., 2005
Valchev et al., 2015
Dutta et al., 2021
Inhibitory tDCS Constant current of 1.5 mA Antonenko et al., 2017
Excitatory rTMS 10 Hz, 4–5 s trains, 15 s inter-train intervals at 120% rMT, over 1,600 pulses Horvath et al., 2010
Cash et al., 2017
Turi et al., 2021
Maeda et al., 2000
iTBS Triplet 50 Hz bursts, repeated at 5 Hz; 200 ms on and 8 s oﬀ Pitcher et al., 2017
Blumberger et al., 2018
Excitatory tDCS Constant current of 1.5 mA Baeken et al., 2010
Feeser et al., 2014
reduce hyperconnectivity between IFC-TPJ (Eijsker et al.,
2021b), PMv-insula, or other such hyperactive circuits
(Kumar et al., 2021). In order to reduce hyperconnectivity,
inhibitory neurostimulation may be attempted as a ﬁrst
choice of intervention. Existing studies highlight that
inhibitory neurostimulation can be successfully applied
over the TPJ (Powers et al., 2020a) and the PMv (Tremblay
et al., 2012). To enhance the eﬃcacy of neurostimulation,
resting state functional imaging data should be collected
prior to treatment administration in order to identify the
regions within the TPJ and the PMv that are connected
to IFC and the insula, respectively. These regions should
then be exposed to repetitive inhibitory neurostimulation
using either rTMS or continuous TBS (Huang et al.,
2005). Accelerated neurostimulation (Baeken, 2019),
or several consecutive sessions should be examined to
determine the optimal amount of neurostimulation to elicit
changes in misophonia.
On the other hand, given the therapeutic synergy between
behavioral and neuromodulatory interventions, one could
alter context either before or during neuromodulation. One
approach would be to expose participants to misophonic
triggers before administering neurostimulation, similar to
the FDA approved paradigm for OCD using dTMS (Roth
et al., 2021). The rationale behind the “symptom provocation”
is that it activates the circuitry involved in misophonia
leaving these networks more amenable to change. This
provocation could be followed with excitatory neurostimulation
targeted toward regions that downregulate the amygdala,
the insula, or the ACC (such as the dlPFC or MPFC),
as well as inhibitory neurostimulation over regions like
the SMA, PMv, STG, or vmPFC. An alternative approach
would be to expose participants to trigger sounds during
neurostimulation. Options for brain stimulation while
sounds are being played would be similar as previously
described (e.g., excitatory over dlPFC/mPFC, or inhibitory over
SMA/PMv/vmPFC/STG).An additional option, following research in emotion
regulation (Neacsiu et al., 2022a), would be to coach the use of
an emotion regulation skill [e.g., distancing (Powers and LaBar,
2019)] while misophonic triggers are presented. Excitatory
neurostimulation could then be concurrently administered
over a node of the emotion regulation network (e.g.,
the dlPFC). Alternatively, inhibitory neurostimulation could
be administered concurrently over a hyperactive area in
misophonia (e.g., SMA). Yet another option could be to enhance
dlPFC or SMFG activation using HF-rTMS during a stop signal
task, to correct diﬀerences from healthy subjects found in
misophonia (Eijsker et al., 2019).
While regions like the dlPFC or mPFC are mentioned
several times as options for stimulation, the speciﬁc target
within the dlPFC/mPFC might vary depending on the rationale
for its selection. For low resource approaches, the structural
dlPFC could be identiﬁed using the beam method (Beam
et al., 2009), a targeting approach that uses scalp measurements
to identify the optimal stimulation spot. A more precise
approach would involve neuroimaging, either structural, to
identify regions with more anatomic speciﬁcity, or functional,
to identify speciﬁc dysfunctional networks that may be
candidates for neurostimulation. For example, one might expose
participants to trigger versus neutral sounds in the scanner.
Using neuroimaging analysis software, the next step would be
to compute a contrast in activation between these two diﬀerent
auditory experiences. For surface targets, the region with the
highest activation within the vmPFC or within the PMv within
this contrast could be extracted. For connectivity targets, the
highest activation within the amygdala, insula, or ACC could
be extracted, followed by an analyses to help identify a surface
region with functional connectivity to one of these subcortical
regions of speciﬁc activity.
Similar approaches have been successfully used in other
disorders. For example, in adolescents with MDD, decreased
amygdala volumes were normalized using HF-rTMS to the
left dlPFC (Seewoo et al., 2022). Furthermore, HF rTMS to
Frontiers in Neuroscience 16 frontiersin.org

fnins-16-893903 July 25, 2022 Time: 11:51 # 17
Neacsiu et al. 10.3389/fnins.2022.893903
the dlPFC was found to signiﬁcantly increase ACC activity
(Tremblay et al., 2012), and resting state left dlPFC – ACC
connectivity (Huang et al., 2005), and decrease right insula
activity (Li et al., 2017a). In MDD and PTSD patients, 5 Hz
TMS to the dlPFC was also found to reduce the problematic
hyperconnectivity between the sgACC, the insula and the DMN
(Philip et al., 2018). In borderline personality disorder, HF-
rTMS over the right dlPFC yielded a decrease in connections
between the amygdala/insula and precuneus, PCC, and parietal
lobules (Sverak et al., 2021). Similarly, tDCS over the left dlPFC
led to increased long-term cerebral blood ﬂow to the ACC (Jog
et al., 2021), and reduced activation of the amygdala (Ironside
et al., 2019). Therefore, the dlPFC is a successful target for
changing activity and connectivity of subcortical structures such
as the insula and the ACC. These changes occur independent
of the type of targeting employed, although more precise,
connectivity-driven targeting is likely to have a more powerful
eﬀect than anatomically driven targeting (Neacsiu et al., 2018).
Diﬀerent regions of the mPFC and TPJ have also been
targeted successfully with documented downstream eﬀects. For
the treatment of OCD, after rTMS to the right OFC, PET
scans revealed decreased metabolism in the ACC (Nauczyciel
et al., 2014), implying deactivation in this region. Furthermore,
5 Hz rTMS over the mPFC led to an increase in functional
connectivity between the mPFC and amygdala (Beynel et al.,
2021). In MDD adults, HF rTMS over the dmPFC led to
reduced dmPFC – insula and sgACC-caudate connectivity
(Salomons et al., 2014). TDCS between the left TPJ and left
PFC reduced TPJ-insula and TPJ-SMA functional connectivity
in schizophrenia patients (Mondino et al., 2016) and in
non-clinical adults (Dalong et al., 2021). Taken together,
these studies oﬀer insight into the feasibility and initial
parameter set up necessary to engage other cortical targets in
neurostimulation intervention.
Researchers are encouraged to examine the eﬃcacy and
optimal parameters necessary for misophonia interventions
that utilize neurostimulation alone, or in conjunction with
a behavioral intervention (see Table 4 for examples of the
parameters to use.). It is important to highlight that the possible
avenues for intervention presented in this paper are by no
means exhaustive. Researchers should continue to examine the
therapeutic potential of altering other circuits and brain regions
as new theoretical ﬁndings and reﬁned hypotheses emerge.
In conclusion, a novel neurostimulation intervention could
be an eﬀective way to help suﬀerers. For example, rTMS
clinics are available in all 50 states, and over 250 million
Americans have insurance plans that cover this approach to
treatment (Neurostar, 2021). TDCS equipment is aﬀordable
and accessible, which has led to exciting innovations in
administering tDCS interventions remotely, by sending devices
at home and teaching patients how to independently use
them (Charvet et al., 2015; Hordacre, 2018). In addition,
TBS is emerging as the most eﬃcient way to administer
neurostimulation in a very short amount of time, allowingfor massed sessions (Chung et al., 2016; Pabst et al., 2022).
Furthermore, the funding for neurostimulation is skyrocketing,
with hundreds of millions of dollars being raised worldwide
to fund technology advancements (Albert, 2020). In short,
neurostimulation is becoming the frontier for developing
novel treatments worldwide and misophonia treatment research
should harness this enthusiasm.
Author contributions
AN conceptualized the review, summarized the research
on misophonia, and wrote the section on neurostimulation
treatment considerations. The co-authors each contributed
several paragraphs to the other sections of the review.
All authors contributed to the article and approved the
submitted version.
Funding
REAM Misophonia Grant (248771), supported part of AN
eﬀort during the writing of this review.
Acknowledgments
We would like to acknowledge the Duke Misophonia and
Emotion Regulation Center and the Ream Foundation for their
support with our examination of the misophonia literature.
Conﬂict of interest
The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could
be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest.
Publisher’s note
All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the
authors and do not necessarily represent those of their aﬃliated
organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the
reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or
claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed
or endorsed by the publisher.
Supplementary material
The Supplementary Material for this article can be
found online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/
fnins.2022.893903/full#supplementary-material
Frontiers in Neuroscience 17 frontiersin.org

fnins-16-893903 July 25, 2022 Time: 11:51 # 18
Neacsiu et al. 10.3389/fnins.2022.893903
References
Aazh, H., Landgrebe, M., Danesh, A. A., and Moore, B. C. (2019). Cognitive
behavioral therapy for alleviating the distress caused by tinnitus, hyperacusis
and misophonia: current perspectives. Psychol. Res. Behav. Manag. 12:991. doi:
10.2147/PRBM.S179138
Abercrombie, H. C., Schaefer, S. M., Larson, C. L., Oakes, T. R., Lindgren, K. A.,
Holden, J. E., et al. (1998). Metabolic rate in the right amygdala predicts negative
aﬀect in depressed patients. Neuroreport 9, 3301–3307. doi: 10.1097/00001756-
199810050-00028
Addicott, M., Luber, B., Nguyen, D., Palmer, H., Lisanby, S., and Appelbaum,
L. (2019). Low and high frequency rTMS eﬀects on resting-state functional
connectivity between the postcentral gyrus and the insula. Brain Connect. 9,
322–328. doi: 10.1089/brain.2018.0652
Albajara Sáenz, A., Villemonteix, T., and Massat, I. (2019). Structural and
functional neuroimaging in attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder. Dev. Med.
Child Neurol. 61, 399–405.
Albert, H. (2020). Investment is Pouring into Neuromodulation Treatments .
Berlin: Labiotech.
Antonenko, D., Schubert, F., Bohm, F., Ittermann, B., Aydin, S., Hayek, D., et al.
(2017). tDCS-induced modulation of GABA levels and resting-state functional
connectivity in older adults. J. Neurosci. 37, 4065–4073.
Apergis-Schoute, A. M., Bijleveld, B., Gillan, C. M., Fineberg, N. A., Sahakian,
B. J., and Robbins, T. W. (2018). Hyperconnectivity of the vmPFC in OCD. Brain
Neurosci. Adv. 2, 1–10. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1609194114
Atmaca, M., Korucu, T., Tabara, M. F., Yildirim, H., and Kılıç, M. C. (2019).
Volumetric MRI study of orbito-frontal cortex and thalamus in obsessive-
compulsive personality disorder. J. Clin. Neurosci. 64, 89–93. doi: 10.1016/j.jocn.
2019.03.062
Avery, J. A., Drevets, W. C., Moseman, S. E., Bodurka, J., Barcalow, J. C., and
Simmons, W. K. (2014). Major depressive disorder is associated with abnormal
interoceptive activity and functional connectivity in the insula. Biol. Psychiatry.
76, 258–266. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2013.11.027
Baeken, C. (2019). Accelerated neurostimulation in major depression: insights
from brain imaging. Brain Stimul. 12:464.
Baeken, C., De Raedt, R., Van Schuerbeek, P., Vanderhasselt, M.-A., De Mey, J.,
Bossuyt, A., et al. (2010). Right prefrontal HF-rTMS attenuates right amygdala
processing of negatively valenced emotional stimuli in healthy females. Behav.
Brain Res. 214, 450–455. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2010.06.029
Baeken, C., Marinazzo, D., Van Schuerbeek, P., Wu, G.-R., De Mey, J., Luypaert,
R., et al. (2014). Left and right amygdala-mediofrontal cortical functional
connectivity is diﬀerentially modulated by harm avoidance. PLoS One 9:e95740.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0095740
Baker, K. B., and Kim, J. J. (2004). Amygdalar lateralization in fear conditioning:
evidence for greater involvement of the right amygdala. Behav. Neurosci. 118:15.
doi: 10.1037/0735-7044.118.1.15
Beam, W., Borckardt, J. J., Reeves, S. T., and George, M. S. (2009). An eﬃcient
and accurate new method for locating the F3 position for prefrontal TMS
applications. Brain Stimul. 2, 50–54. doi: 10.1016/j.brs.2008.09.006
Beauregard, M., Paquette, V., and Le, J. (2006). Dysfunction in the neural
circuitry of emotional self-regulation in major depressive disorder. Neuroreport
17, 843–846.
Bechdolf, A., Wood, S. J., Nelson, B., Velakoulis, D., Yücel, M., Takahashi,
T., et al. (2012). Amygdala and insula volumes prior to illness onset in bipolar
disorder: a magnetic resonance imaging study. Psychiatry Res. 201, 34–39. doi:
10.1016/j.pscychresns.2011.06.010
Berthier, M. L., Torres-Prioris, M. J., and López-Barroso, D. (2017). Thinking
on treating echolalia in aphasia: recommendations and caveats for future research
directions. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 11:164. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2017.00164
Bestmann, S., and Feredoes, E. (2013). Combined neurostimulation and
neuroimaging in cognitive neuroscience: past, present, and future. Ann. N.Y. Acad.
Sci.1296, 11–30. doi: 10.1111/nyas.12110
Beucke, J. C., Sepulcre, J., Eldaief, M. C., Sebold, M., Kathmann, N., and
Kaufmann, C. (2014). Default mode network subsystem alterations in obsessive-
compulsive disorder. Br. J. Psychiatry 205, 376–382.
Beynel, L., Appelbaum, L. G., Luber, B., Crowell, C. A., Hilbig, S. A., Lim, W.,
et al. (2019). Eﬀects of online repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS)
on cognitive processing: a meta-analysis and recommendations for future studies.
Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 107, 47–58. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2019.08.018Beynel, L., Campbell, E., Naclerio, M., Galla, J. T., Ghosal, A., Michael,
A. M., et al. (2021). The eﬀects of functionally guided, connectivity-based
rTMS on amygdala activation. Brain Sci. 11:494. doi: 10.3390/brainsci110
40494
Beynel, L., Powers, J. P., and Appelbaum, L. G. (2020). Eﬀects of repetitive
transcranial magnetic stimulation on resting-state connectivity: a systematic
review. Neuroimage. 211:116596.
Bigler, E. D., Mortensen, S., Neeley, E. S., Ozonoﬀ, S., Krasny, L., Johnson,
M., et al. (2007). Superior temporal gyrus, language function, and autism. Dev.
Neuropsychol. 31, 217–238.
Binkofski, F., and Buccino, G. (2006). The role of ventral premotor cortex in
action execution and action understanding. J. Physiol. Paris 99, 396–405.
Bird, G., Silani, G., Brindley, R., White, S., Frith, U., and Singer, T. (2010).
Empathic brain responses in insula are modulated by levels of alexithymia but not
autism. Brain 133, 1515–1525. doi: 10.1093/brain/awq060
Black, W. R., Lepping, R. J., Bruce, A. S., Powell, J. N., Bruce, J. M., Martin, L. E.,
et al. (2014). Tonic hyper-connectivity of reward neurocircuitry in obese children.
Obesity 22, 1590–1593. doi: 10.1002/oby.20741
Blumberger, D. M., Vila-Rodriguez, F., Thorpe, K. E., Feﬀer, K., Noda, Y.,
Giacobbe, P., et al. (2018). Eﬀectiveness of theta burst versus high-frequency
repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation in patients with depression (THREE-
D): a randomised non-inferiority trial. Lancet 391, 1683–1692.
Boucher, O., Turgeon, C., Champoux, S., Ménard, L., Rouleau, I., Lassonde,
M., et al. (2015). Hyperacusis following unilateral damage to the insular cortex:
a three-case report. Brain Res. 1606, 102–112. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2015.02.030
Boussaoud, D. (2001). Attention versus intention in the primate premotor
cortex. Neuroimage 14, S40–S45.
Brout, J. J., Edelstein, M., Erfanian, M., Mannino, M., Miller, L. J., Rouw, R.,
et al. (2018). Investigating misophonia: a review of the empirical literature, clinical
implications, and a research agenda. Front. Neurosci. 12:36. doi: 10.3389/fnins.
2018.00036
Buccino, G., Binkofski, F., Fink, G. R., Fadiga, L., Fogassi, L., Gallese, V., et al.
(2001). Action observation activates premotor and parietal areas in a somatotopic
manner: an fMRI study. Eur. J. Neurosci. 13, 400–404.
Bungert, A., Antunes, A., Espenhahn, S., and Thielscher, A. (2017). Where does
TMS stimulate the motor cortex? Combining electrophysiological measurements
and realistic ﬁeld estimates to reveal the aﬀected cortex position. Cereb. Cortex 27,
5083–5094. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhw292
Cash, R. F., Dar, A., Hui, J., De Ruiter, L., Baarbé, J., Fettes, P., et al. (2017).
Inﬂuence of inter-train interval on the plastic eﬀects of rTMS. Brain Stimul. 10,
630–636.
Cavanna, A. E., and Seri, S. (2015). Misophonia: current perspectives.
Neuropsychiatr. Dis. Treat. 11:2117.
Cerliani, L., and Rouw, R. (2020). Increased orbitofrontal connectivity in
misophonia. bioRxiv [Preprint] doi: 10.1101/2020.10.29.346650
Chang, D., Zhang, J., Peng, W., Shen, Z., Gao, X., Du, Y., et al. (2018). Smoking
cessation with 20 Hz repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) applied
to two brain regions: a pilot study. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 12:344. doi: 10.3389/
fnhum.2018.00344
Chang, M., Womer, F. Y., Edmiston, E. K., Bai, C., Zhou, Q., Jiang, X.,
et al. (2018). Neurobiological commonalities and distinctions among three major
psychiatric diagnostic categories: a structural MRI study. Schizophr. Bull. 44,
65–74. doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbx028
Charvet, L. E., Kasschau, M., Datta, A., Knotkova, H., Stevens, M. C., Alonzo, A.,
et al. (2015). Remotely-supervised transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS)
for clinical trials: guidelines for technology and protocols. Front. Syst. Neurosci.
9:26. doi: 10.3389/fnsys.2015.00026
Chauhan, P., Jethwa, K., Rathawa, A., Chauhan, G., and Mehra, S. (2021). “The
anatomy of the hippocampus, ” in Cerebral Ischemia , ed. R. Pluta (Brisbane, AU:
Exon Publications).
Chen, B. K., Sassi, R., Axelson, D., Hatch, J. P., Sanches, M., Nicoletti, M., et al.
(2004). Cross-sectional study of abnormal amygdala development in adolescents
and young adults with bipolar disorder. Biol. Psychiatry 56, 399–405. doi: 10.1016/
j.biopsych.2004.06.024
Chen, R., Classen, J., Gerloﬀ, C., Celnik, P., Wassermann, E., Hallett, M., et al.
(1997). Depression of motor cortex excitability by low-frequency transcranial
magnetic stimulation. Neurology 48, 1398–1403.
Frontiers in Neuroscience 18 frontiersin.org

fnins-16-893903 July 25, 2022 Time: 11:51 # 19
Neacsiu et al. 10.3389/fnins.2022.893903
Chen, Y., Juhás, M., Greenshaw, A. J., Hu, Q., Meng, X., Cui, H., et al. (2016).
Abnormal resting-state functional connectivity of the left caudate nucleus in OCD.
Neurosci. Lett. 623, 57–62.
Chung, S. W., Hill, A. T., Rogasch, N. C., Hoy, K. E., and Fitzgerald, P. B.
(2016). Use of TBS in changing excitability of motor cortex: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 63, 43–64. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.
2016.01.008
Cisler, J. M., Steele, J. S., Lenow, J. K., Smitherman, S., Everett, B., Messias,
E., et al. (2014). Functional reorganization of neural networks during repeated
exposure to the traumatic memory in posttraumatic stress disorder: an exploratory
fMRI study. J. Psychiatr. Res. 48, 47–55. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2013.09.013
Claiborn, J. M., Dozier, T. H., Hart, S. L., and Lee, J. (2020). Self-identiﬁed
misophonia phenomenology, impact, and clinical correlates. Psychol. Thought 13,
349–375.
Coutinho, J., Goncalves, O. F., Soares, J. M., Marques, P., and Sampaio, A.
(2016). Alterations of the default mode network connectivity in OCPD: a pilot
study. Psychiatry Res. Neuroimaging 256, 1–7. doi: 10.1016/j.pscychresns.2016.08.
007
Cunningham, D. A., Varnerin, N., Machado, A., Bonnett, C., Janini, D., Roelle,
S., et al. (2015). Stimulation targeting higher motor areas in stroke rehabilitation:
a proof-of-concept, randomized, double-blinded placebo-controlled study of
eﬀectiveness and underlying mechanisms. Restor. Neurol. Neurosci. 33, 911–926.
doi: 10.3233/RNN-150574
Dalong, G., Jiyuan, L., Yubin, Z., Yufei, Q., Jinghua, Y., Cong, W., et al. (2021).
Cathodal transcranial direct current stimulation over the right temporoparietal
junction suppresses its functional connectivity and reduces contralateral spatial
and temporal perception. Front. Neurosci. 15:629331. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2021.
629331
Daniels, E. C., Rodriguez, A., and Zabelina, D. L. (2020). Severity of misophonia
symptoms is associated with worse cognitive control when exposed to misophonia
trigger sounds. PLoS One 15:e0227118. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0227118
De Brito, S. A., Mechelli, A., Wilke, M., Laurens, K. R., Jones, A. P., Barker, G. J.,
et al. (2009). Size matters: increased grey matter in boys with conduct problems
and callous–unemotional traits. Brain 132, 843–852.
Deng, Z. D., Lisanby, S. H., and Peterchev, A. V. (2013). Electric ﬁeld depth-
focality tradeoﬀ in transcranial magnetic stimulation: simulation comparison of
50 coil designs. Brain Stimul. 6, 1–13.
Dirlikov, B., Rosch, K. S., Crocetti, D., Denckla, M. B., Mahone, E. M., and
Mostofsky, S. H. (2015). Distinct frontal lobe morphology in girls and boys with
ADHD. Neuroimage 7, 222–229.
Dozier, T. H. (2015). Treating the initial physical reﬂex of misophonia with the
neural repatterning technique: a counterconditioning procedure. Psychol. Thought
8, 189–210.
Dozier, T. H., and Morrison, K. L. (2017). Phenomenology of misophonia: initial
physical and emotional responses. Am. J. Psychol. 130, 431–438.
Droutman, V., Bechara, A., and Read, S. J. (2015). Roles of the diﬀerent sub-
regions of the insular cortex in various phases of the decision-making process.
Front. Behav. Neurosci. 9:309. doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2015.00309
Dutta, P., Dhyani, M., Garg, S., Tikka, S. K., Khattri, S., Mehta, S., et al. (2021).
Eﬃcacy of intensive orbitofrontal continuous theta burst stimulation (iOFcTBS) in
obsessive compulsive disorder: a randomized placebo controlled study. Psychiatry
Res. 298:113784.
Economo, C. V. (1926). Eine neue Art Spezialzellen des Lobus cinguli und Lobus
insulae. Zeitschrift Gesamte Neurol. Psychiatr. 100, 706–712.
Eijsker, N., Schröder, A., Smit, D. J., van Wingen, G., and Denys, D. (2019).
Neural basis of response bias on the Stop Signal Task in misophonia. Front.
Psychiatry 10:765. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2019.00765
Eijsker, N., Schröder, A., Liebrand, L. C., Smit, D. J., van Wingen, G., and Denys,
D. (2021a). White matter abnormalities in misophonia. Neuroimage 32:102787.
doi: 10.1016/j.nicl.2021.102787
Eijsker, N., Schröder, A., Smit, D. J., van Wingen, G., and Denys, D.
(2021b). Structural and functional brain abnormalities in misophonia. Eur.
Neuropsychopharmacol. 52, 62–71.
Eisenberger, N. I. (2015). Meta-Analytic Evidence for the Role of the Anterior
Cingulate Cortex in Social Pain . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1–2.
Ellard, K. K., Gosai, A. K., Felicione, J. M., Peters, A. T., Shea, C. V., Sylvia,
L. G., et al. (2019). Deﬁcits in frontoparietal activation and anterior insula
functional connectivity during regulation of cognitive-aﬀective interference in
bipolar disorder. Bipolar Disord. 21, 244–258. doi: 10.1111/bdi.12709
Erfanian, M., Kartsonaki, C., and Keshavarz, A. (2019). Misophonia and
comorbid psychiatric symptoms: a preliminary study of clinical ﬁndings. Nordic
J. Psychiatry 73, 219–228. doi: 10.1080/08039488.2019.1609086Fan, J., Zhong, M., Zhu, X., Gan, J., Liu, W., Niu, C., et al. (2017). Resting-state
functional connectivity between right anterior insula and right OFC correlate with
insight level in OCD. Neuroimage Clin. 15, 1–7. doi: 10.1016/j.nicl.2017.04.002
Fan, Y., Duncan, N. W., de Greck, M., and Northoﬀ, G. (2011). Is there a core
neural network in empathy? An fMRI based quantitative meta-analysis. Neurosci.
Biobehav. Rev. 35, 903–911. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2010.10.009
Feeser, M., Prehn, K., Kazzer, P., Mungee, A., and Bajbouj, M. (2014).
Transcranial direct current stimulation enhances cognitive control during
emotion regulation. Brain Stimul. 7, 105–112.
Ferrer-Torres, A., and Giménez-Llort, L. (2021). Sounds of silence in times of
COVID-19: distress and loss of cardiac coherence in people with misophonia
caused by real, imagined or evoked triggering sounds. Front. Psychiatry 12:638949.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2021.638949
Flynn, F. G. (1999). Anatomy of the insula functional and clinical correlates.
Aphasiology 13, 55–78.
Fox, M. D. (2018). Mapping symptoms to brain networks with the human
connectome. N. Engl. J. Med. 379, 2237–2245.
Fox, M. D., Buckner, R. L., White, M. P., Greicius, M. D., and Pascual-Leone,
A. (2012). Eﬃcacy of TMS targets for depression is related to intrinsic functional
connectivity with the subgenual cingulate. Biol. Psychiatry. 72, 595–603.
Fregni, F., Nitsche, M., Loo, C., Brunoni, A., Marangolo, P., Leite, J., et al. (2015).
Regulatory considerations for the clinical and research use of transcranial direct
current stimulation (tDCS): review and recommendations from an expert panel.
Clin. Res. Regul. Aﬀ. 32, 22–35. doi: 10.3109/10601333.2015.980944
Ghaziri, J., Tucholka, A., Girard, G., Houde, J.-C., Boucher, O., Gilbert, G., et al.
(2017). The corticocortical structural connectivity of the human insula. Cereb.
Cortex 27, 1216–1228.
Gilboa, A., Shalev, A. Y., Laor, L., Lester, H., Louzoun, Y., Chisin, R., et al.
(2004). Functional connectivity of the prefrontal cortex and the amygdala in
posttraumatic stress disorder. Biol. Psychiatry 55, 263–272.
Goerlich-Dobre, K. S., Lamm, C., Pripﬂ, J., Habel, U., and Votinov, M. (2015).
The left amygdala: a shared substrate of alexithymia and empathy. Neuroimage
122, 20–32. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.08.014
Gong, L., Yin, Y., He, C., Ye, Q., Bai, F., Yuan, Y., et al. (2017). Disrupted reward
circuits is associated with cognitive deﬁcits and depression severity in major
depressive disorder. J. Psych. Res. 84, 9–17. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2016.09.016
Gordon, O. M., Salkovskis, P. M., Oldﬁeld, V. B., and Carter, N. (2013).
The association between obsessive compulsive disorder and obsessive compulsive
personality disorder: prevalence and clinical presentation. Br. J. Clin. Psychol. 52,
300–315.
Gorka, S. M., Nelson, B. D., Phan, K. L., and Shankman, S. A. (2014). Insula
response to unpredictable and predictable aversiveness in individuals with panic
disorder & comorbid depression. Biol. Mood Anxiety Disord. 4:9. doi: 10.1186/
2045-5380-4-9
Gray, J. P., Müller, V. I., Eickhoﬀ, S. B., and Fox, P. T. (2020). Multimodal
abnormalities of brain structure and function in major depressive disorder: a meta-
analysis of neuroimaging studies. Am. J. Psych. 177, 422–434. doi: 10.1176/appi.
ajp.2019.19050560
Groenewold, N. A., Opmeer, E. M., de Jonge, P., Aleman, A., and Costafreda,
S. G. (2013). Emotional valence modulates brain functional abnormalities in
depression: evidence from a meta-analysis of fMRI studies. Neurosci. Biobehav.
Rev. 37, 152–163. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2012.11.015
Gross, J. J. (2013). Handbook of Emotion Regulation , 2nd Edn. New York, NY:
The Guilford Press, 669.
Gu, X., Hof, P. R., Friston, K. J., and Fan, J. (2013). Anterior insular cortex and
emotional awareness. J. Comp. Neurol. 521, 3371–3388.
Gurok, M. G., Korucu, T., Kilic, M. C., Yildirim, H., and Atmaca, M. (2019).
Hippocampus and amygdalar volumes in patients with obsessive-compulsive
personality disorder. J. Clin. Neurosci. 64, 259–263. doi: 10.1016/j.jocn.2019.03.
060
Hansen, H. A., Leber, A. B., and Saygin, Z. M. (2021). What sound sources
trigger misophonia? Not just chewing and breathing. J. Clin. Psychol. 77, 2609–
2625.
Harricharan, S., Nicholson, A. A., Thome, J., Densmore, M., McKinnon, M. C.,
Théberge, J., et al. (2020). PTSD and its dissociative subtype through the lens
of the insula: anterior and posterior insula resting-state functional connectivity
and its predictive validity using machine learning. Psychophysiology 57:e13472.
doi: 10.1111/psyp.13472
Holroyd, C. B., and Yeung, N. (2011). “An integrative theory of anterior
cingulate cortex function: option selection in hierarchical reinforcement learning, ”
inNeural Basis of Motivational & Cognitive Control , eds R. B. Mars, J. Sallet,
M. F. S. Rushworth, and N. Yeung (Cambridge, MA: MIT), 333–349.
Frontiers in Neuroscience 19 frontiersin.org

fnins-16-893903 July 25, 2022 Time: 11:51 # 20
Neacsiu et al. 10.3389/fnins.2022.893903
Holtzheimer, P. E., and McDonald, W. (2014). A Clinical Guide to TMS . Oxford:
Oxford Press.
Hordacre, B. (2018). The role of telehealth to assist in-home tDCS:
opportunities, promising results and acceptability. Brain Sci. 8:102. doi: 10.3390/
brainsci8060102
Horvath, J. C., Mathews, J., Demitrack, M. A., and Pascual-Leone, A. (2010).
The NeuroStar TMS device: conducting the FDA approved protocol for treatment
of depression. J. Vis. Exp. 45:e2345.
Huang, Y.-Z., Edwards, M. J., Rounis, E., Bhatia, K. P., and Rothwell, J. C. (2005).
Theta burst stimulation of the human motor cortex. Neuron 45, 201–206.
Ironside, M., Browning, M., Ansari, T. L., Harvey, C. J., Sekyi-Djan, M. N.,
Bishop, S. J., et al. (2019). Eﬀect of prefrontal cortex stimulation on regulation of
amygdala response to threat in individuals with trait anxiety: a randomized clinical
trial. JAMA Psychiatry 76, 71–78. doi: 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2018.2172
Isserles, M., Tendler, A., Roth, Y., Bystritsky, A., Blumberger, D. M., Ward,
H., et al. (2021). Deep transcranial magnetic stimulation combined with brief
exposure for post-traumatic stress disorder–a prospective multisite randomized
trial. Biol. Psychiatry 90, 721–728. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2021.04.019
Itami, S., and Uno, H. (2002). Orbitofrontal cortex dysfunction in attention-
deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder revealed by reversal and extinction tasks.
Neuroreport 13, 2453–2457. doi: 10.1097/00001756-200212200-00016
Jager, I., de Koning, P., Bost, T., Denys, D., and Vulink, N. (2020). Misophonia:
phenomenology, comorbidity and demographics in a large sample. PLoS One
15:e0231390. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0231390
Jastreboﬀ, P. J., and Hazell, J. W. (2008). Tinnitus Retraining Therapy:
Implementing the Neurophysiological Model . Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Jog, M. S., Kim, E., Anderson, C., Kubicki, A., Kayathi, R., Jann, K., et al. (2021).
In-vivo imaging of targeting and modulation of depression-relevant circuitry
by transcranial direct current stimulation: a randomized clinical trial. Transl.
Psychiatry 11:138. doi: 10.1038/s41398-021-01264-3
Kaas, J. H., and Stepniewska, I. (2002). “Motor cortex, ” in Encyclopedia of the
Human Brain , Vol. 2, ed. V. S. Ramachandran (Cambridge, MA: Academic Press),
159–169.
Kahnt, T., Chang, L. J., Park, S. Q., Heinzle, J., and Haynes, J.-D. (2012).
Connectivity-based parcellation of the human orbitofrontal cortex. J. Neurosci. 32,
6240–6250.
Kan, R. L., Zhang, B. B., Zhang, J. J., and Kranz, G. S. (2020). Non-invasive
brain stimulation for posttraumatic stress disorder: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Transl. Psychiatry 10:168. doi: 10.1038/s41398-020-0851-5
Katz, M., Liu, C., Schaer, M., Parker, K. J., Ottet, M.-C., Epps, A., et al. (2009).
Prefrontal plasticity and stress inoculation-induced resilience. Dev. Neurosci. 31,
293–299. doi: 10.1159/000216540
Kessler, R. C., Berglund, P., Demler, O., Jin, R., Merikangas, K. R., and Walters,
E. E. (2005). Lifetime prevalence and age-of-onset distributions of DSM-IV
disorders in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry
62, 593–602.
Kiernan, J. (2012). Anatomy of the temporal lobe. Epilepsy Res. Treat.
2012:176157.
Kılıç, C., Öz, G., Avano ˘glu, K. B., and Aksoy, S. (2021). The prevalence and
characteristics of misophonia in Ankara, Turkey: population-based study. BJPsych
open 7:e144. doi: 10.1192/bjo.2021.978
Klein, A., Mensh, B., Ghosh, S., Tourville, J., and Hirsch, J. (2005). Mindboggle:
automated brain labeling with multiple atlases. BMC Med. Imaging. 5:7. doi: 10.
1186/1471-2342-5-7
Kleinhans, N. M., Richards, T., Weaver, K., Johnson, L. C., Greenson, J.,
Dawson, G., et al. (2010). Association between amygdala response to emotional
faces and social anxiety in autism spectrum disorders. Neuropsychologia 48,
3665–3670.
Kliuchko, M., Puoliväli, T., Heinonen-Guzejev, M., Tervaniemi, M., Toiviainen,
P., Sams, M., et al. (2018). Neuroanatomical substrate of noise sensitivity.
Neuroimage 167, 309–315.
Kozel, F. A., Motes, M. A., Didehbani, N., DeLaRosa, B., Bass, C., Schraufnagel,
C. D., et al. (2018). Repetitive TMS to augment cognitive processing therapy in
combat veterans of recent conﬂicts with PTSD: a randomized clinical trial. J. Aﬀect.
Disord. 229, 506–514. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2017.12.046
Kumar, S., Dheerendra, P., Erfanian, M., Benzaquén, E., Sedley, W., Gander,
P. E., et al. (2021). The motor basis for misophonia. J. Neurosci. 41,
5762–5770.
Kumar, S., Tansley-Hancock, O., Sedley, W., Winston, J. S., Callaghan, M. F.,
Allen, M., et al. (2017). The brain basis for misophonia. Curr. Biol. 27, 527–533.Kumfor, F., Irish, M., Hodges, J. R., and Piguet, O. (2013). The orbitofrontal
cortex is involved in emotional enhancement of memory: evidence from the
dementias. Brain 136, 2992–3003. doi: 10.1093/brain/awt185
Kunimatsu, A., Y asaka, K., Akai, H., Kunimatsu, N., and Abe, O. (2020). MRI
ﬁndings in posttraumatic stress disorder. J. Magn. Reson. Imaging 52, 380–396.
Lanius, R. A., Williamson, P. C., Boksman, K., Densmore, M.,
Gupta, M., Neufeld, R. W., et al. (2002). Brain activation during
script-driven imagery induced dissociative responses in PTSD: a
functional magnetic resonance imaging investigation. Biol. Psychiatry 52,
305–311.
Larrivee, D. (2020). “Introductory chapter: neurostimulation and the
structural basis of brain activity, ” in Neurostimulation and Neuromodulation
in Contemporary Therapeutic Practice , eds D. Larrivee and S. M. Rayegani
(London: IntechOpen).
Lefaucheur, J.-P., Antal, A., Ayache, S. S., Benninger, D. H., Brunelin, J.,
Cogiamanian, F., et al. (2017). Evidence-based guidelines on the therapeutic use
of tDCS. Clin. Neurophysiol. 128, 56–92.
Lei, H., Huang, L., Li, J., Liu, W., Fan, J., Zhang, X., et al. (2020). Altered
spontaneous brain activity in obsessive-compulsive personality disorder. Compr.
Psychiatry 96:152144. doi: 10.1016/j.comppsych.2019.152144
Lemus, L., Hernández, A., and Romo, R. (2009). Neural encoding of auditory
discrimination in ventral premotor cortex. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 106,
14640–14645. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0907505106
Li, M., Metzger, C. D., Li, W., Safron, A., van Tol, M.-J., Lord, A., et al. (2014).
Dissociation of glutamate and cortical thickness is restricted to regions subserving
trait but not state markers in major depressive disorder. J. Aﬀect. Disord. 169,
91–100. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2014.08.001
Li, X., Du, L., Sahlem, G. L., Badran, B. W., Henderson, S., and George,
M. S. (2017a). Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) of the dlPFC
reduces resting-state insula activity and modulates functional connectivity of the
orbitofrontal cortex in cigarette smokers. Drug Alcohol Depend. 174, 98–105.
doi: 10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2017.02.002
Li, X., Du, L., Sahlem, G. L., Badran, B. W., Henderson, S., and
George, M. S. (2017b). RTMS of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex reduces
resting-state insula activity and modulates functional connectivity of
the orbitofrontal cortex in cigarette smokers. Drug Alcohol Depend. 174,
98–105.
Liu, J., Cao, L., Li, H., Gao, Y., Bu, X., Liang, K., et al. (2022). Abnormal
resting-state functional connectivity in patients with OCD: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 135: 104574.
Liu, X., Hou, Z., Yin, Y., Xie, C., Zhang, H., Zhang, H., et al. (2021). Decreased
cortical thickness of left premotor cortex as a treatment predictor in major
depressive disorder. Brain Imaging Behav. 15, 1420–1426. doi: 10.1007/s11682-
020-00341-3
Maeda, F., Keenan, J. P., Tormos, J. M., Topka, H., and Pascual-Leone, A. (2000).
Interindividual variability of the modulatory eﬀects of repetitive transcranial
magnetic stimulation on cortical excitability. Exp. Brain Res. 133, 425–430.
Maier, S., Szalkowski, A., Kamphausen, S., Feige, B., Perlov, E., Kalisch, R., et al.
(2014). Altered cingulate and amygdala response towards threat and safe cues
in attention deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder. Psychol. Med. 44, 85–98. doi: 10.1017/
S0033291713000469
Maiti, R., Mishra, B. R., and Hota, D. (2017). Eﬀect of high-frequency
transcranial magnetic stimulation on craving in substance use disorder: a meta-
analysis. J. Neuropsychiatry Clin. Neurosci. 29, 160–171.
Marangell, L., Martinez, M., Jurdi, R., and Zboyan, H. (2007). Neurostimulation
therapies in depression: a review of new modalities. Acta Psychiatr. Scand. 116,
174–181.
Mattavelli, G., Lo Presti, S., Tornaghi, D., and Canessa, N. (2022). High-
deﬁnition transcranial direct current stimulation of the dorsal anterior cingulate
cortex modulates decision-making and executive control. Brain Struct. Funct. 227,
1565–1576. doi: 10.1007/s00429-022-02456-3
McCarthy, H., Skokauskas, N., and Frodl, T. (2014). Identifying a consistent
pattern of neural function in attention deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder: a meta-
analysis. Psychol. Med. 44, 869–880.
McErlean, A. B. J., and Banissy, M. J. (2018). Increased misophonia in self-
reported autonomous sensory meridian response. PeerJ 6:e5351. doi: 10.7717/
peerj.5351
McGeoch, P. D., and Rouw, R. (2020). How everyday sounds can trigger strong
emotions: ASMR, misophonia and the feeling of wellbeing. Bioessays 42:2000099.
doi: 10.1002/bies.202000099
Mondino, M., Jardri, R., Suaud-Chagny, M.-F., Saoud, M., Poulet, E.,
and Brunelin, J. (2016). Eﬀects of fronto-temporal tDCS on auditory verbal
Frontiers in Neuroscience 20 frontiersin.org

fnins-16-893903 July 25, 2022 Time: 11:51 # 21
Neacsiu et al. 10.3389/fnins.2022.893903
hallucinations and resting-state functional connectivity of the left temporo-
parietal junction in patients with schizophrenia. Schizophr. Bull. 42, 318–326.
doi: 10.1093/schbul/sbv114
Monosov, I. E., Haber, S. N., Leuthardt, E. C., and Jezzini, A. (2020). Anterior
cingulate cortex and the control of dynamic behavior in primates. Curr. Biol. 30,
R1442–R1454.
Mostofsky, S. H., Rimrodt, S. L., Schafer, J. G., Boyce, A., Goldberg, M. C.,
Pekar, J. J., et al. (2006). Atypical motor and sensory cortex activation in attention-
deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder: a functional magnetic resonance imaging study
of simple sequential ﬁnger tapping. Biol. Psychiatry 59, 48–56. doi: 10.1016/j.
biopsych.2005.06.011
Motzkin, J. C., Philippi, C. L., Wolf, R. C., Baskaya, M. K., and Koenigs, M.
(2015). Ventromedial prefrontal cortex is critical for the regulation of amygdala
activity in humans. Biol. Psychiatry 77, 276–284.
Murphy, G. Jr., Inger, P., Mark, K., Lin, J., Morrice, W., Gee, C., et al. (1987).
Volumetric asymmetry in the human amygdaloid complex. J. Hirnforsch. 28,
281–289.
Naidich, T. P., Kang, E., Fatterpekar, G. M., Delman, B. N., Gultekin, S. H.,
Wolfe, D., et al. (2004). The insula: anatomic study and MR imaging display at
1.5 T. Am. J. Neuroradiol. 25, 222–232.
Natalini, E., Dimaggio, G., Varakliotis, T., Fioretti, A., and Eibenstein, A. (2020).
Misophonia, maladaptive schemas and personality disorders: a report of three
cases. J. Contemp. Psychother. 50, 29–35.
Nauczyciel, C., Le Jeune, F., Naudet, F., Douabin, S., Esquevin, A., Vérin, M.,
et al. (2014). Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation over the orbitofrontal
cortex for obsessive-compulsive disorder: a double-blind, crossover study. Transl.
Psychiatry 4:e436. doi: 10.1038/tp.2014.62
Neacsiu, A. D., and Lisanby, S. H. (2015). “Magnetic stimulation for depression:
subconvulsive and convulsive approaches, ” in Neuromodulation in Psychiatry ,
eds C. Hamani, P. Holtzheimer, A. M. Lozano, and H. Mayberg (Oxford: Wiley
Blackwell), 155–180.
Neacsiu, A. D., Beynel, L., Graner, J. L., Szabo, S. T., Appelbaum, L. G.,
Smoski, M. J., et al. (2022a). Enhancing cognitive restructuring with concurrent
fMRI-guided neurostimulation for emotional dysregulation: a randomized
controlled trial. J. Aﬀect. Disord. 301, 378–389. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2022.
01.053
Neacsiu, A. D., Beynel, L., Powers, J. P., Szabo, S. T., Appelbaum, L. G., Lisanby,
S. H., et al. (2022b). Enhancing cognitive restructuring with concurrent repetitive
transcranial magnetic stimulation for transdiagnostic psychopathology: a proof
of concept randomized controlled trial. Psychother. Psychosom. 91, 94–106. doi:
10.1159/000518957
Neacsiu, A. D., Luber, B. M., Davis, S. W., Bernhardt, E., Strauman,
T. J., and Lisanby, S. H. (2018). On the concurrent use of self-system
therapy and functional magnetic resonance imaging-guided transcranial magnetic
stimulation as treatment for depression. J. ECT 34, 266–273. doi: 10.1097/YCT.
0000000000000545
NeuroStar (2021). Find a Doctor . Malvern, PA: NeuroStar.
Norman, L. J., Taylor, S. F., Liu, Y., Radua, J., Chye, Y., De Wit, S. J., et al. (2019).
Error processing and inhibitory control in OCD: a meta-analysis using statistical
parametric maps. Biol. Psychiatry 85, 713–725. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2018.11.
010
O’Doherty, D. C. M., Ryder, W., Paquola, C., Tickell, A., Chan, C., Hermens,
D. F., et al. (2018). White matter integrity alterations in post-traumatic stress
disorder. Hum. Brain Mapp. 39, 1327–1338.
Oishi, K., Faria, A. V., Hsu, J., Tippett, D., Mori, S., and Hillis, A. E. (2015).
Critical role of the right uncinate fasciculus in emotional empathy. Ann. Neurol.
77, 68–74. doi: 10.1002/ana.24300
Opitz, A., Fox, M. D., Craddock, R. C., Colcombe, S., and Milham, M. P.
(2016). An integrated framework for targeting functional networks via transcranial
magnetic stimulation. Neuroimage 127, 86–96.
Overbeek, G., Gawne, T. J., Reid, M. A., Kraguljac, N. V., and Lahti, A. C.
(2021). A multimodal neuroimaging study investigating resting-state connectivity,
glutamate and GABA at 7 T in ﬁrst-episode psychosis. J. Psychiatry Neurosci. 46,
E702–E710. doi: 10.1503/jpn.210107
Pabst, A., Proksch, S., Médé, B., Comstock, D. C., Ross, J. M., and
Balasubramaniam, R. (2022). A systematic review and meta-analysis of
the eﬃcacy of intermittent theta burst stimulation (iTBS) on cognitive
enhancement. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 135:104587. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2022.
104587
Palumbo, D. B., Alsalman, O., De Ridder, D., Song, J.-J., and Vanneste, S. (2018).
Misophonia and potential underlying mechanisms: a perspective. Front. Psychol.
9:953. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.00953Pardo-Vazquez, J. L., Leboran, V., and Acuna, C. (2008). Neural correlates of
decisions and their outcomes in the ventral premotor cortex. J. Neurosci. 28,
12396–12408.
Pardo-Vazquez, J. L., Leboran, V., and Acuña, C. (2009). A role for the ventral
premotor cortex beyond performance monitoring. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A.
106, 18815–18819. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0910524106
Pascual-Leone, A., Valls-Solé, J., Wassermann, E. M., and Hallett, M. (1994).
Responses to rapid-rate transcranial magnetic stimulation of the human motor
cortex. Brain 117, 847–858.
Peng, Z., Lui, S. S. Y., Cheung, E. F. C., Jin, Z., Miao, G., Jing, J., et al. (2012).
Brain structural abnormalities in OCD: converging evidence from white matter
and grey matter. Asian J. Psych. 5, 290–296.
Philip, N. S., Barredo, J., van ’t Wout-Frank, M., Tyrka, A. R., Price, L. H., and
Carpenter, L. L. (2018). Network mechanisms of clinical response to transcranial
magnetic stimulation in posttraumatic stress disorder and major depressive
disorder. Biol. Psychiatry 83, 263–272. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2017.07.021
Philippi, C. L., Mehta, S., Grabowski, T., Adolphs, R., and Rudrauf, D. (2009).
Damage to association ﬁber tracts impairs recognition of the facial expression of
emotion. J. Neurosci. 29, 15089–15099. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0796-09.2009
Phillips, L. H., and Della Sala, S. (1998). Aging, intelligence, and anatomical
segregation in the frontal lobes. Learn. Individ. Diﬀer. 10, 217–243.
Phillips, M. L., and Swartz, H. A. (2014). A critical appraisal of neuroimaging
studies of bipolar disorder: toward a new conceptualization of underlying neural
circuitry and a road map for future research. Am. J. Psychiatry 171, 829–843.
doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.2014.13081008
Picó-Pérez, M., Ipser, J., Taylor, P., Alonso, P., López-Solà, C., Real, E., et al.
(2019). Intrinsic functional and structural connectivity of emotion regulation
networks in obsessive-compulsive disorder. Depress Anxiety 36, 110–120. doi:
10.1002/da.22845
Pico-Perez, M., Radua, J., Steward, T., Menchon, J. M., and Soriano-Mas, C.
(2017). Emotion regulation in mood and anxiety disorders: a meta-analysis of
fMRI cognitive reappraisal studies. Prog. Neuropsychopharmacol. Biol. Psychiatry
79(Pt. B), 96–104. doi: 10.1016/j.pnpbp.2017.06.001
Piek, J. P., and Dyck, M. J. (2004). Sensory-motor deﬁcits in children with
developmental coordination disorder, ADHD and autistic disorder. Hum. Mov Sci.
23, 475–488. doi: 10.1016/j.humov.2004.08.019
Pitcher, D., Japee, S., Rauth, L., and Ungerleider, L. G. (2017). The superior
temporal sulcus is causally connected to the amygdala: a combined TBS-fMRI
Study. J. Neurosci. 37, 1156–1161. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0114-16.2016
Powers, J. P., and LaBar, K. S. (2019). Regulating emotion through distancing:
a taxonomy, neurocognitive model, and supporting meta-analysis. Neurosci.
Biobehav. Rev. 96, 155–173. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2018.04.023
Powers, J. P., Davis, S. W., Neacsiu, A. D., Beynel, L., Appelbaum, L. G., and
LaBar, K. S. (2020a). Examining the role of lateral parietal cortex in emotional
distancing using TMS. Cogn. Aﬀect. Behav. Neurosci. 20, 1090–1102. doi: 10.3758/
s13415-020-00821-5
Powers, J. P., Graner, J. L., and LaBar, K. S. (2020b). Multivariate patterns
of posterior cortical activity diﬀerentiate forms of emotional distancing. Cereb.
Cortex 30, 2766–2776. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhz273
Quek, T. C., Ho, C. S., Choo, C. C., Nguyen, L. H., Tran, B. X., and Ho, R. C.
(2018). Misophonia in Singaporean psychiatric patients: a cross-sectional study.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 15:1410. doi: 10.3390/ijerph15071410
Reetz, K., Lencer, R., Steinlechner, S., Gaser, C., Hagenah, J., Büchel, C., et al.
(2008). Limbic and frontal cortical degeneration is associated with psychiatric
symptoms in PINK1 mutation carriers. Biol. Psychiatry 64, 241–247. doi: 10.1016/
j.biopsych.2007.12.010
Rocha-Rego, V., Pereira, M. G., Oliveira, L., Mendlowicz, M. V., Fiszman, A.,
Marques-Portella, C., et al. (2012). Decreased premotor cortex volume in victims
of urban violence with PTSD. PLoS One 7:e42560. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.
0042560
Rolls, E. T. (1996). The orbitofrontal cortex. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol.
Sci.351, 1433–1444.
Rolls, E. T., and Grabenhorst, F. (2008). The orbitofrontal cortex and beyond:
from aﬀect to decision-making. Prog. Neurobiol. 86, 216–244.
Rossi, S., Hallett, M., Rossini, P. M., Pascual-Leone, A., and Safety of Tms
Consensus Group (2009). Safety, ethical considerations, and application guidelines
for the use of TMS in clinical practice and research. Clin. Neurophysiol. 120,
2008–2039. doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.2009.08.016
Rossi, S., Antal, A., Bestmann, S., Bikson, M., Brewer, C., Brockmöller, J.,
et al. (2021). Safety and recommendations for TMS use in healthy subjects and
patient populations, with updates on training, ethical and regulatory issues: expert
guidelines. Clin. Neurophysiol. 132, 269–306. doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.2020.10.003
Frontiers in Neuroscience 21 frontiersin.org

fnins-16-893903 July 25, 2022 Time: 11:51 # 22
Neacsiu et al. 10.3389/fnins.2022.893903
Roth, Y., Tendler, A., Arikan, M. K., Vidrine, R., Kent, D., Muir, O., et al. (2021).
Real-world eﬃcacy of deep TMS for OCD: post-marketing data collected from
twenty-two clinical sites. J. Psych. Res. 137, 667–672. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2020.
11.009
Rouw, R., and Erfanian, M. (2018). A large-scale study of misophonia. J. Clin.
Psychol. 74, 453–479.
Ruspantini, I., Mäki, H., Korhonen, R., D’Ausilio, A., and Ilmoniemi, R. J.
(2011). The functional role of the PMv in a visually paced ﬁnger tapping task: a
TMS study. Behav. Brain Res. 220, 325–330. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2011.02.017
Salomons, T. V., Dunlop, K., Kennedy, S. H., Flint, A., Geraci, J., Giacobbe,
P., et al. (2014). Resting-state cortico-thalamic-striatal connectivity predicts
response to dorsomedial prefrontal rTMS in major depressive disorder.
Neuropsychopharmacology 39, 488–498. doi: 10.1038/npp.2013.222
San Giorgi, R. (2015). Hyperactivity in amygdala and auditory cortex in
misophonia: preliminary results of a functional magnetic resonance imaging
study. Amsterdam Brain Cogn. J. 2, 21–28.
Sanchez, T. G., and Silva, F. E. D. (2018). Misofonia familiar ou síndrome da
sensibilidade seletiva a sons: evidência de herança autossômica dominante? Braz.
J. Otorhinolaryngol. 84, 553–559.
Santos, A. D. H. M., Santos, A. P. S., Santos, H. S., and Silva, A. C. D. (2018).
The use of tDCS as a therapeutic option for tinnitus: a systematic review. Braz. J.
Otorhinolaryngol. 84, 653–659.
Schienle, A., Schäfer, A., Stark, R., Walter, B., and Vaitl, D. (2005). Neural
responses of OCD patients towards disorder-relevant, generally disgust-inducing
and fear-inducing pictures. Int. J. Psychophysiol. 57, 69–77. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpsycho.
2004.12.013
Schröder, A., van Wingen, G., Eijsker, N., San Giorgi, R., Vulink, N. C., Turbyne,
C., et al. (2019). Misophonia is associated with altered brain activity in the auditory
cortex and salience network. Sci. Rep. 9:7542.
Schröder, A., Vulink, N., and Denys, D. (2013). Misophonia: diagnostic criteria
for a new psychiatric disorder. PLoS One 8:e54706. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.
0054706
Seeley, W. W. (2010). Anterior insula degeneration in frontotemporal dementia.
Brain Struct. Funct. 214, 465–475.
Seewoo, B. J., Rodger, J., Demitrack, M. A., Heart, K. L., Port, J. D., Strawn,
J. R., et al. (2022). Neurostructural diﬀerences in adolescents with treatment
resistant depression and treatment eﬀects of transcranial magnetic stimulation.
Int. J. Neuropsychopharmacol. Online ahead of print, doi: 10.1093/ijnp/pyac007
Séguin, J. R. (2004). Neurocognitive elements of antisocial behavior: relevance
of an orbitofrontal cortex account. Brain Cogn. 55, 185–197. doi: 10.1016/S0278-
2626(03)00273-2
Shenhav, A., and Greene, J. D. (2014). Integrative moral judgment: dissociating
the roles of the amygdala and ventromedial prefrontal cortex. J. Neurosci. 34,
4741–4749. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3390-13.2014
Shin, L. M., Rauch, S. L., and Pitman, R. K. (2006). Amygdala, medial prefrontal
cortex, and hippocampal function in PTSD. Ann. N.Y Acad. Sci. 1071, 67–79.
Siepsiak, M., and Dragan, W. (2019). Misophonia-a review of research results
and theoretical concepts. Psychiatr. Pol. 53, 447–458.
Simmons, A. N., Stein, M. B., Strigo, I. A., Arce, E., Hitchcock, C., and Paulus,
M. P. (2011). Anxiety positive subjects show altered processing in the anterior
insula during anticipation of negative stimuli. Hum. Brain Mapp. 32, 1836–1846.
doi: 10.1002/hbm.21154
Simner, J., Koursarou, S., Rinaldi, L., and Ward, J. (2022). Attention, ﬂexibility,
and imagery in misophonia: does attention exacerbate everyday disliking of
sound? J. Clin. Exp. Neuropsychol. 43, 1006–1017. doi: 10.1080/13803395.2022.
2056581
Simon, D., Adler, N., Kaufmann, C., and Kathmann, N. (2014). Amygdala
hyperactivation during symptom provocation in OCD and its modulation by
distraction. Neuroimage 4, 549–557. doi: 10.1016/j.nicl.2014.03.011
Singer, T., Seymour, B., O’Doherty, J., Kaube, H., Dolan, R. J., and Frith, C. D.
(2004). Empathy for pain involves the aﬀective but not sensory components of
pain. Science 303, 1157–1162.
Sonmez, A. I., Camsari, D. D., Nandakumar, A. L., Voort, J. L. V., Kung, S.,
Lewis, C. P., et al. (2019). Accelerated TMS for depression: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Psychiatry Res. 273, 770–781. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2018.12.041
Spoletini, I., Piras, F., Fagioli, S., Rubino, I. A., Martinotti, G., Siracusano,
A., et al. (2011). Suicidal attempts and increased right amygdala volume in
schizophrenia. Schizophr. Res. 125, 30–40. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2010.08.023
Stanislav, K., Alexander, V., Maria, P., Evgenia, N., and Boris, V. (2013).
Anatomical characteristics of cingulate cortex and neuropsychological memory
tests performance. Procedia Soc. Behav. Sci. 86, 128–133.Stein, J. L., Wiedholz, L. M., Bassett, D. S., Weinberger, D. R., Zink, C. F.,
Mattay, V. S., et al. (2007). A validated network of eﬀective amygdala connectivity.
Neuroimage 36, 736–745.
Stevens, F. L., Hurley, R. A., and Taber, K. H. (2011). Anterior cingulate cortex:
unique role in cognition and emotion. J. Neuropsych. Clin. Neurosci. 23, 121–125.
doi: 10.1176/jnp.23.2.jnp121
Steward, T., Pico-Perez, M., Mata, F., Martinez-Zalacain, I., Cano, M.,
Contreras-Rodriguez, O., et al. (2016). Emotion regulation and excess weight:
impaired aﬀective processing characterized by dysfunctional insula activation and
connectivity. PLoS One 11:e0152150. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0152150
Sutherland, M. T., Carroll, A. J., Salmeron, B. J., Ross, T. J., and Stein,
E. A. (2013). Insula’s functional connectivity with ventromedial prefrontal
cortex mediates the impact of trait alexithymia on state tobacco craving.
Psychopharmacology 228, 143–155. doi: 10.1007/s00213-013-3018-8
Sverak, T., Linhartova, P., Gajdos, M., Kuhn, M., Latalova, A., Lamos, M.,
et al. (2021). Brain connectivity and symptom changes after transcranial magnetic
stimulation in patients with borderline personality disorder. Front. Psychiatry
12:770353. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2021.770353
Swedo, S., Baguley, D. M., Denys, D., Dixon, L. J., Erfanian, M., Fioretti, A.,
et al. (2021). A consensus deﬁnition of misophonia: using a delphi process to reach
expert agreement. medRxiv [Preprint] doi: 10.1101/2021.04.05.21254951
Szykowny, N. (2020). The Relationship Between Misophonia and Perfectionism .
Palo Alto, CA: Palo Alto University.
Tang, Y.-Y., Tang, R., and Posner, M. I. (2016). Mindfulness meditation
improves emotion regulation and reduces drug abuse. Drug Alcohol Depend. 163,
S13–S18.
Thomaes, K., Dorrepaal, E., Draijer, N., de Ruiter, M. B., van Balkom, A. J.,
Smit, J. H., et al. (2010). Reduced anterior cingulate and orbitofrontal volumes
in child abuse-related complex PTSD. J. Clin. Psychiatry 71:17127. doi: 10.4088/
JCP.08m04754blu
Thomason, M. E., and Thompson, P. M. (2011). Diﬀusion imaging, white
matter, and psychopathology. Annu. Rev. Clin. Psychol. 7, 63–85.
Thorsen, A. L., Hagland, P., Radua, J., Mataix-Cols, D., Kvale, G., Hansen, B.,
et al. (2018). Emotional processing in obsessive-compulsive disorder: a systematic
review and meta-analysis of 25 functional neuroimaging studies. Biol. Psychiatry
Cogn. Neurosci. Neuroimaging 3, 563–571.
Townsend, J., and Altshuler, L. L. (2012). Emotion processing and regulation in
bipolar disorder: a review. Bipolar Disord. 14, 326–339.
Tremblay, P., and Gracco, V. L. (2009). Contribution of the pre-SMA to the
production of words and non-speech oral motor gestures, as revealed by rTMS.
Brain Res. 1268, 112–124. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2009.02.076
Tremblay, P., Sato, M., and Small, S. L. (2012). TMS-induced modulation of
action sentence priming in the ventral premotor cortex. Neuropsychologia 50,
319–326. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2011.12.002
Trevizol, A. P., Shiozawa, P., Cook, I. A., Sato, I. A., Kaku, C. B., Guimarães,
F. B., et al. (2016). Transcranial magnetic stimulation for OCD: an updated
systematic review and meta-analysis. J. ECT 32, 262–266.
Tsagaris, K. Z., Labar, D. R., and Edwards, D. J. (2016). A framework for
combining rTMS with behavioral therapy. Front. Syst. Neurosci. 10:82. doi: 10.
3389/fnsys.2016.00082
Tuovinen, N., Y alcin-Siedentopf, N., Welte, A.-S., Siedentopf, C. M., Steiger,
R., Gizewski, E. R., et al. (2022). Neurometabolite correlates with personality
and stress in healthy emerging adults: a focus on sex diﬀerences. Neuroimage
247:118847. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2021.118847
Turi, Z., Lenz, M., Paulus, W., Mittner, M., and Vlachos, A. (2021). Selecting
stimulation intensity in repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation studies: a
systematic review between 1991 and 2020. Eur. J. Neurosci. 53, 3404–3415.
Tzourio-Mazoyer, N., Landeau, B., Papathanassiou, D., Crivello, F., Etard, O.,
Delcroix, N., et al. (2002). Automated anatomical labeling of activations in SPM
using a macroscopic anatomical parcellation of the MNI MRI single-subject brain.
Neuroimage 15, 273–289.
Vaidya, C. J., Bunge, S. A., Dudukovic, N. M., Zalecki, C. A., Elliott, G. R., and
Gabrieli, J. D. (2005). Altered neural substrates of cognitive control in childhood
ADHD: evidence from functional magnetic resonance imaging. Am. J. Psychiatry
162, 1605–1613. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.162.9.1605
Valchev, N., ´Curˇci´c-Blake, B., Renken, R. J., Avenanti, A., Keysers, C., Gazzola,
V., et al. (2015). cTBS delivered to the left somatosensory cortex changes its
functional connectivity during rest. Neuroimage 114, 386–397.
Van Den Heuvel, O. A., Veltman, D. J., Groenewegen, H. J., Cath, D. C., Van
Balkom, A. J., Van Hartskamp, J., et al. (2005). Frontal-striatal dysfunction during
planning in OCD. Arch. Gen. Psych. 62, 301–309.
Frontiers in Neuroscience 22 frontiersin.org

fnins-16-893903 July 25, 2022 Time: 11:51 # 23
Neacsiu et al. 10.3389/fnins.2022.893903
van Heukelum, S., Tulva, K., Geers, F. E., van Dulm, S., Ruisch, I. H., Mill,
J., et al. (2021). A central role for anterior cingulate cortex in the control of
pathological aggression. Curr. Biol. 31, 2321–2333.e5.
Vander Ghinst, M., Bourguignon, M., de Beeck, M. O., Wens, V., Marty, B.,
Hassid, S., et al. (2016). Left superior temporal gyrus is coupled to attended
speech in a cocktail-party auditory scene. J. Neurosci. 36, 1596–1606. doi: 10.1523/
JNEUROSCI.1730-15.2016
Vetter, N. C., Buse, J., Backhausen, L. L., Rubia, K., Smolka, M. N., and Roessner,
V. (2018). Anterior insula hyperactivation in ADHD when faced with distracting
negative stimuli. Hum. Brain Mapp. 39, 2972–2986. doi: 10.1002/hbm.24053
Viering, T., Hoekstra, P. J., Philipsen, A., Naaijen, J., Dietrich, A., Hartman,
C. A., et al. (2021). Functional network topology of the right insula aﬀects emotion
dysregulation in hyperactive-impulsive attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder.
Sci Rep. 11:15045. doi: 10.1038/s41598-021-94426-8
Vink, J. J. T., Mandija, S., Petrov, P. I., van den Berg, C. A. T., Sommer, I. E. C.,
and Neggers, S. F. W. (2018). A novel concurrent TMS-fMRI method to reveal
propagation patterns of prefrontal magnetic brain stimulation. Hum. Brain Mapp.
39, 4580–4592. doi: 10.1002/hbm.24307
Vitoratou, S., Uglik-Marucha, N., Hayes, C., Erfanian, M., Pearson, O., and
Gregory, J. (2021). Item response theory investigation of misophonia auditory
triggers. Audiol. Res. 11, 567–581. doi: 10.3390/audiolres11040051
Wang, Z., Sun, Y.-W., Wan, J.-Q., Su, S.-S., Zhou, Y., and Xu, J.-R. (2012). A
preliminary study of alterations in default network connectivity in PTSD patientsfollowing recent trauma. Brain Res. 1484, 50–56. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2012.09.
029
Wright, C. I., Fischer, H., Whalen, P. J., McInerney, S. C., Shin, L. M., and Rauch,
S. L. (2001). Diﬀerential prefrontal cortex and amygdala habituation to repeatedly
presented emotional stimuli. Neuroreport 12, 379–383. doi: 10.1097/00001756-
200102120-00039
Wu, M. S., Lewin, A. B., Murphy, T. K., and Storch, E. A. (2014). Misophonia:
incidence, phenomenology, and clinical correlates in an undergraduate student
sample. J. Clin. Psychol. 70, 994–1007. doi: 10.1002/jclp.22098
Yoshimura, S., Ueda, K., Suzuki, S.-I., Onoda, K., Okamoto, Y., and Y amawaki,
S. (2009). Self-referential processing of negative stimuli within the ventral anterior
cingulate gyrus and right amygdala. Brain Cogn. 69, 218–225. doi: 10.1016/j.bandc.
2008.07.010
Young, J. R., Galla, J. T., and Appelbaum, L. G. (2021). Transcranial magnetic
stimulation treatment for smoking cessation: an introduction for primary care
clinicians. Am. J. Med. 134, 1339–1343. doi: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2021.06.037
Yu, J., Zhou, P., Yuan, S., Wu, Y., Wang, C., Zhang, N., et al. (2022). Symptom
provocation in obsessive-compulsive disorder: a voxel-based meta-analysis and
meta-analytic connectivity modeling. J. Psychiatr. Res. 146, 125–134. doi: 10.1016/
j.jpsychires.2021.12.029
Zhou, X., Wu, M. S., and Storch, E. A. (2017). Misophonia symptoms
among Chinese university students: Incidence, associated impairment, and clinical
correlates. J. Obsess. Comp. Related Disord. 14, 7–12.
Frontiers in Neuroscience 23 frontiersin.org