Frontiers in Psychology 01 frontiersin.org
Understanding the misophonic 
experience: a mixed method 
study
Yesim Ozuer 1*, Rilana Cima 1,2,3, Elke Kestens 1 and Ilse Van Diest 1
1 Research Group Health Psychology, Faculty of Psychology and Educational Sciences, KU Leuven, 
Leuven, Belgium, 2 Adelante, Centre for Expertise in Rehabilitation and Audiology, Hoensbroek, 
Netherlands, 3 Department of Clinical Psychological Science, Maastricht University, Maastrich, 
Netherlands
Misophonia is a poorly understood condition in which intense distress is experienced 
in response to mostly orofacial stimuli. To better understand why specifically anger 
and disgust seem to characterize this distress, we investigated meanings conveyed 
by misophonic trigger stimuli in two studies. Study 1 explored these meanings 
and emotions in two small focus groups ( n = 3, n = 5) of misophonia sufferers. 
Four meaning—themes were generated based using reflexive thematic analysis: 
“intrusion,” “violation,” “offense,” and “lack of autonomy.” Also, four emotional 
reaction themes were constructed: “anger/defensive rage,” “disgust,” “fear,” and 
“safety behaviors.” Study 2 aimed to corroborate the findings of Study 1 in a large, 
independent sample. To this end, misophonia symptom severity was assessed in 
431 young adults using the Amsterdam Misophonia Scale (A-Miso-S). Participants 
rated the extent to which the meanings and reactions identified in Study 1 matched 
their experiences with prototypical misophonic trigger stimuli. The meanings 
showed a positive, moderate correlation with misophonia symptom severity and 
accounted for 35.15% of the variance in A-Miso-S scores. An exploratory factor 
analysis identified two factors explaining 50% of the variance in the meanings and 
reactions. Factor 1, “Avoidance of intrusive/disgusting stimuli” had high and unique 
loadings on avoidance, intrusion, and disgust. Factor 2, “Autonomy/Violation,” had 
high and unique loadings on violation, lack of autonomy, offense, and defensive 
rage. These findings suggest that the meanings of intrusion, violation, and lack of 
autonomy are inherent to the misophonic experience, with potential implications 
for treatment strategies.
KEYWORDS
misophonia, thematic analysis, emotional representations, meaning information, 
defensive anger, factor analysis
1 Introduction
Misophonia is a disorder characterized by an excessive negative emotional response or 
decreased tolerance toward—most typically— orofacial human sounds related to breathing 
and eating (e.g., Bernstein et al., 2013 ; Brout et al., 2018 ; Dozier, 2015a ; Edelstein et al., 2013 ; 
Jastreboff and Jastreboff, 2002 ; Jastreboff and Jastreboff, 2015 ; Siepsiak et al., 2020 ; Hansen 
et al., 2021 ; Hansen et al., 2022 ; Swedo et al., 2022 ). Consensus is growing, however, that 
trigger stimuli can involve other sounds (typing, ball bouncing, walking in heels; e.g., Hansen 
et al., 2021 ) and modalities as well (visual, kinesthetic; e.g., Claiborn et al., 2020 ; Ferrer-Torres 
and Giménez-Llort, 2022 ; Jager et al., 2020a ). The core emotional reactions toward trigger 
stimuli seem to consist of anger and disgust—whether moral or visceral—rather than anxiety 
(Cavanna and Seri, 2015 ; Dibb and Golding, 2022 ; Edelstein et al., 2013 ; Palumbo et al., 2018 ; 
Iskander et al., 2023 ; Norena, 2024 ).OPEN ACCESS
EDITED BY
M. Zachary Rosenthal,  
Duke University, United States
REVIEWED BY
Jennifer Jo Brout,  
International Misophonia Research Network 
(IMRN), United States
Marta Siepsiak,  
University of Social Sciences and Humanities, 
Poland
*CORRESPONDENCE
Yesim Ozuer   
 yesim.ozuer@gmail.com
RECEIVED 09 September 2024
ACCEPTED 24 January 2025
PUBLISHED 05 February 2025
CITATION
Ozuer Y, Cima R, Kestens E and Van 
Diest I (2025) Understanding the misophonic 
experience: a mixed method study.
Front. Psychol.  16:1493676.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1493676
COPYRIGHT
© 2025 Ozuer, Cima, Kestens and Van Diest. 
This is an open-access article distributed 
under the terms of the Creative Commons 
Attribution License (CC BY) . The use, 
distribution or reproduction in other forums is 
permitted, provided the original author(s) and 
the copyright owner(s) are credited and that 
the original publication in this journal is cited, 
in accordance with accepted academic 
practice. No use, distribution or reproduction 
is permitted which does not comply with 
these terms.TYPE Original Research
PUBLISHED  05 February 2025
DOI 10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1493676

Ozuer et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1493676
Frontiers in Psychology 02 frontiersin.orgAlthough misophonia is currently not recognized as a 
diagnostic separate entity in the DSM-5, it associated with a low 
quality of life, and poses also a burden on those who live with 
misophonia sufferers ( Dibb and Golding, 2022 ; Guzick et  al., 
2023 ; Jager et al., 2020a ). Current literature suggests that the onset 
of misophonia is situated typically, but not exclusively, in 
childhood or adolescence ( Dozier, 2015a ; Guzick et  al., 2023 ; 
Johnson et al., 2013 ; Kumar et al., 2017 ; Rouw and Erfanian, 2018 ; 
Potgieter et al., 2019 ; Siepsiak et al., 2023 ), with initial complaints 
of misophonia being experienced on average at the age of 13 ( Jager 
et al., 2020a ) or as early as age of 9 ( Dixon et al., 2024 ). However, 
since there are no general population-based studies on this topic, 
and findings of both latter studies are based on retrospective 
reports from adults with misophonia symptoms, the age of onset 
remains unclear.
Recent studies with undergraduate student populations have 
provided growing insights into the prevalence of misophonia across 
various cultures. Prevalence rates were found to be 19.9% in the USA 
using the Misophonia Questionnaire (MQ) ( Wu et  al., 2014 ) and 
15.85% among Indian college students responding to the Amsterdam 
Misophonia Scale (A-Miso-S) ( Schröder et al., 2013 ; Patel et al., 2023 ). 
General population studies using the A-Miso-S ( Schröder et al., 2013 ) 
reported prevalence rates ranging from 5.9% in a German sample 
(Jakubovski et  al., 2022 ) to 49.1% in the UK, although only 0.3% 
reported very extreme symptoms ( Naylor et al., 2020 ). A recent study 
using multiple assessments, such as the S-Five, MQ, A-Miso-S, and a 
diagnostic interview, estimated an 18% prevalence in the general 
population in the UK ( Vitoratou et  al., 2023 ). Notably, a recent 
population-based study conducted in the USA estimated a prevalence 
of 4.6% at clinical levels and 78.5% for sensitivity to misophonic 
sounds in a nationally representative sample of adults ( Dixon et al., 
2024 ). Despite these insights, as noted by Möllmann et al. (2023)  and 
Wu et al. (2014) , a robust prevalence estimate is hard to make due to 
the lack of consensus on diagnostic methods ( Ferrer-Torres and 
Giménez-Llort, 2022 ).
Until recently, research on misophonia primarily centered on its 
definition, assessment, treatment, and comorbidities (e.g., Baguley 
and McFerran, 2011 ; Jastreboff and Jastreboff, 2002 ; Schröder et al., 
2013 ; Schröder et al., 2017 ; Rouw and Erfanian, 2018 ; Rosenthal et al., 
2023 ). The complex nature of misophonia is increasingly recognized 
and evident from its apparent emotional underpinnings, such as 
anger, anxiety, and disgust ( McMahon et al., 2024 ), its transdiagnostic 
nature and comorbidity with conditions such as mood, anxiety, and 
obsessive-compulsive disorders ( Guzick et  al., 2023 ; Herdi and 
Yıldırım, 2024 ), as well as the diversity of its triggers. Given this 
complexity, it has been recognized that the field and especially the 
treatment of misophonia could benefit from a deeper understanding 
of the nature and origin of the condition (e.g., Jager et al., 2020a ; 
Kumar et al., 2017 ; Mattson et al., 2023 ; Taylor, 2017 ).
Etiological mechanisms of misophonia have been studied from 
various perspectives, including neuroscience, auditory science, and 
psychology (e.g., Hansen et al., 2021 ; Kumar et al., 2021 ; Hansen et al., 
2022 ; Swedo et al., 2022 ; Rosenthal et al., 2023 ; Berger et al., 2024 ; 
Neacsiu et  al., 2024 ). In this paper, we  specifically focus on the 
psychological aspects of the condition to deepen our understanding 
of the misophonic experience. Here, we aim to focus specifically on 
the psychological aspects of the condition that may help understanding 
the misophonic experience.An interesting, yet open question in this respect is why, to our 
knowledge, anger and disgust, rather than fear or other emotions, 
seem to constitute the core emotional reactions to misophonic 
triggers. As physical properties of the sound (e.g., loudness, pitch, 
timbre) appear unrelated to the intensity or nature of emotional 
reactions ( Edelstein et al., 2013 ), it has been hypothesized that specific 
meanings of the trigger stimuli are inherently related to the emotional 
reaction,—which can comprise changes in in conscious experience, 
behavior, and/or (neuro) physiological processes ( Jastreboff and 
Jastreboff, 2015 ; Swedo et al., 2022 ). The importance of meanings in 
emotion formation align with the theory of constructed emotion 
(Barrett, 2017 ), and with the hypothesized nature of emotional 
representations in memory by Lang (1979)  and Lang et al. (1980) . 
According to the theory of constructed emotion, emotions arise from 
the brain’s attempt to make sense of the continuous stream of sensory 
information stemming from the inner (body) and outer environment. 
As such, emotions can be considered a meaning making process. To 
do so, the brain predicts visceromotor and skeletomotor actions as 
well as the sensory inputs that are expected to result from them. This 
inference is constructed from ongoing sensory input, as well as from 
learned or innate priors ( Barrett, 2017 ). Following Lang’s 
bio-informational theory ( Lang, 1979 ; Lang et al., 1980 ), the memory 
representation of a strong emotional experience can be considered a 
coherent associative network containing three types of information: 
stimulus, response, and meaning. In this framework, activating one 
element of the network (e.g., perceiving an orofacial sound) may 
activate the entire network, leading to an emotional experience. 
Whereas the prototypical misophonic trigger stimuli and the 
associated physiological and behavioral response patterns have been 
well-documented (e.g., Brout et  al., 2018 ; Kumar et  al., 2017 ; 
Möllmann et  al., 2023 ; Swedo et  al., 2022 ), less is known about 
“meaning” information in the representation of misophonic 
experiences. Swedo et al. (2022)  highlight that misophonic responses 
often seem to be triggered not by the loudness of the auditory stimuli 
but by specific patterns or personal meanings attributed to the sounds. 
This aligns well with recent findings on the importance of context and 
social cognition in misophonia ( Siepsiak et al., 2023 ; Berger et al., 
2024 ) and suggests that individuals with misophonia may assign 
particular significance to trigger sounds that extends beyond their 
purely auditory characteristics.
The literature indicates that these associated meanings may vary 
depending on the individual’s learning history, socio-cultural 
environment, and socialization, as well as the person or source 
generating the sounds ( Bernstein et al., 2013 ; Edelstein et al., 2013 ; 
Norena, 2024 ). Some case studies and other sources suggest that 
meanings related to disrespect, violation, injustice, and offense may 
characterize the misophonic experience (e.g., Cowan et  al., 2021 ; 
Gregory and Foster, 2023 ; Gregory et al., 2024 ; Norena, 2024 ), but 
potential meanings have not been systematically investigated to date. 
Identifying the “meanings” that misophonia sufferers associate with 
their trigger sounds is crucial to advancing our understanding of 
misophonic experiences.
The current studies sought to investigate potentially common 
meanings associated with trigger sounds in individuals suffering from 
misophonia symptoms. Identifying these common meanings can 
be expected to enhance our understanding of the anger and disgust 
reactions experienced in persons with misophonia, potentially leading 
to more effective treatment strategies on the longer term. To uncover

Ozuer et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1493676
Frontiers in Psychology 03 frontiersin.orgpotential meanings associated with stimuli in individuals with 
misophonia, we conducted two methodologically distinct studies.
The first study consisted of two semi-structured focus groups 
conducted with a few persons suffering from misophonia. A thematic 
analysis on the focus groups’ transcripts was conducted to unveil 
potential meanings participants experience upon confrontation with 
trigger stimuli. A second study sought to validate the meanings 
identified in study 1. To this end, we conducted a questionnaire study 
with a larger, independent sample of respondents to examine the 
extent to which these meanings are related to the presence and severity 
of misophonia symptoms.
2 Study 1
2.1 Materials and methods
2.1.1 Participants
Persons with symptoms of misophonia were recruited using social 
media (i.e., Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn). The recruitment poster 
included the following information; “Looking for people who are 
experiencing symptoms of misophonia or have been diagnosed with 
misophonia by a mental health professional. We  invite you  to 
participate in our focus group sessions to improve our understanding 
of the condition. ” Prospective participants who expressed interest via 
email were sent an invitation to complete an informed consent form 
and a two-part online questionnaire. To qualify, participants needed 
to meet the following criteria: (a) be over 17 years old, (b) score above 
10 on the A-Miso-S ( Schröder et al., 2013 ), and (c) be fluent in Dutch. 
Before proceeding to the questionnaire, participants underwent 
screening for hearing loss and self-reported history of tinnitus or 
hyperacusis. Eligible participants were then invited to participate. 
Eight participants were recruited, (see Table 1  for demographics) and 
were reimbursed with a 10 Euro online shopping voucher. The study 
was pre-registered on OSF (Open Science Framework; doi: 10.17605/
OSF.IO/JZMYB) and approved by the ethical committee of KU 
Leuven University (SMEC; approval number is G-2021-
3500-R2 (AMD)).
2.1.2 Procedure
To allow maximal participation and discussion with eligible 
participants, 2 separate focus groups were organized at different time 
points, depending on the participants’ availabilities. Discussions took 
place in a secure online setting (i.e., Microsoft Teams) on May 2021 
and on June 2021. Both focus groups ( n = 3, n = 5) were moderated 
by the same student in clinical psychology (A3) using a focus group 
manual with semi-structured questions in presence of a licensed 
clinical psychologist (A2/A4) as second moderators, and an observer (A1). Duration of the first and second focus group sessions were 2 h 
and 55 min and 2 h and 10 min, respectively. Sessions were recorded 
with the written consent of the participants and transcribed verbatim 
by the moderator of the focus groups (A3).
Using a standardized manual, the focus group sessions were 
structured into three sections, ( i) thinking about events in which 
participants felt triggered ( ii) reflecting on reactions present during 
the events and ( iii) discussion of the possible meaning of the trigger 
stimuli (see Standardized Manual in Supplementary material ). In the 
first section, participants were asked to imagine a recent and 
memorable event in which they experienced the symptoms of 
misophonia and had difficulty containing their reactions. In the 
second section, each person was asked to describe emotional and 
physical experiences regarding the triggers and the emotional, 
behavioral and physiological reactions directed toward the source of 
the sound. Lastly, participants were asked to elaborate on possible 
meanings of the trigger sounds. To facilitate this, they were invited to 
think about what unwanted experiences the sounds may convey to 
them, and whether there are specific people they associate with these 
sounds. At the start of the focus groups, participants were introduced 
to ground rules (i.e., being respectful to each other’s opinions and 
feelings and not interrupting others when they are speaking), to 
maintain a respectful and safe environment for everyone. Participants 
raised their (virtual) hands when they wanted to participate in the 
discussion and they were given opportunity to communicate with 
each other as well.
2.1.2.1 Questionnaires
One week prior to the focus group session, participants provided 
demographical information (see Table  1 ) and answered questions 
related to their misophonia (see Table  1 ) as well as the A-Miso-S 
(Schröder et al., 2013 ), a 6-item questionnaire based on the Y ale-
Brown Obsessive-Compulsive Scale (Y-BOCS; Goodman et al., 1989 ) 
adapted for misophonia by Schröder et  al. (2013) . The A-Miso-S 
(Schröder et  al., 2013 ) allows classifying severity of misophonia 
complaints (0–4 subclinical, 5–9 mild, 10–14 moderate, 15–19 severe 
and 20–24 extreme). The A-Miso-S ( Schröder et  al., 2013 ) 
questionnaire assesses various aspects of misophonia experiences over 
the past week, including the degree of annoyance or preoccupation 
with trigger sounds, the extent to which daily activities were affected, 
the level of distress caused by misophonia sounds, efforts to divert 
attention from these sounds, and the degree of avoidance of 
triggering situations.
2.1.3 Data analysis
We applied a reflexive deductive thematic analysis to the 
transcripts to construct overarching themes that seemed to refer to 
meanings conveyed by trigger stimuli, and to prototypical reactions 
TABLE 1  Demographics of participants in both focus groups ( N = 8) from the survey before the focus groups.
Focus group 1 Focus group 2 Both groups
Mean age (years), range 46, 34–65 41.67, 23–58 44.38, 23–58
Female n (%) 4 (80) 2 (66.67) 6 (75)
Mean A-Miso-S ( Schröder et al., 2013 ) 
score, range12.2, 11–14 14, 10–20 12.88, 10–20
Information in this table consists of answers collected on a survey prior to the focus groups.

Ozuer et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1493676
Frontiers in Psychology 04 frontiersin.organd behaviors evoked by trigger stimuli. To this end, we identified, 
analyzed and reported occurrences of interest within the transcripts 
that represent a significant aspect of the data in relation to these 
questions ( Braun and Clarke, 2006 ). Inspired by Braun and Clarke 
(2006)  the thematic analysis involved the following 6 steps, (1) 
familiarizing with the data, (2) generating initial codes, (3) searching 
for themes, (4) reviewing themes, (5) defining and naming themes, (6) 
producing the report. In line with Braun and Clarke’s thematic analysis 
guidelines ( Braun and Clarke, 2006 ; Braun and Clarke, 2019 ), 
we approached our data using a reflexive deductive approach. While 
we did not search for specific, hypothesized themes in the transcripts, 
the thematic analysis was clearly guided by our overarching interest in 
exploring the potential meanings and emotions tied to misophonia 
triggers. The approach taken was to prioritize deeper interpretive 
insights rather than descriptive summaries (see Braun and Clarke, 
2022 , paper, for a distinction between both approaches). Initially, 3 
authors (A1, A2, A4) read the transcripts 3 times thoroughly and 
generated initial codes relating to the potential meanings associated 
with trigger sounds. Secondly, a list of potential theme-related codes, 
along with supporting extracts from the raw data was created. In the 
third step, each code was analyzed to be  collated under possible 
overarching themes with the use of thematic maps. During the 
revision phase, authors independently assessed the identified themes 
for sufficient data support, then divided them into three sets 
(meanings, primary reactions, secondary reactions), forming the final 
thematic map. In determining the classification of a theme, the authors 
discussed whether the codes that create an overarching theme formed 
a coherent pattern and whether the final thematic map captured the 
essence of the data ( Braun and Clarke, 2006 ). Finally, a list of all of the 
main themes was established including precise descriptions. All stages 
of the qualitative analyses were conducted using the Dutch transcript. 
Later, some of the sentences and phrases were translated to English by 
the authors in order to be used as examples in this manuscript.
2.2 Results
Seven themes generated from the thematic analysis (see Table 2 ), 
which could be further organized into 3 higher-order sets/categories. 
A first set of themes referred to 3 recurring meanings associated with 
trigger sounds (“associated meanings”): intrusion/violation , offense  
and lack of autonomy . The second set, “primary emotional reactions, ” 
comprised themes referring to instantaneous emotional responses to 
trigger sounds: anger/defensive rage  and disgus t. The third set, 
“secondary responses, ” included themes referring to secondary 
emotions and less impulsive behaviors to deal with the anticipated or 
actual misophonic threatening situations: fear, and safety behaviors . 
Note that the term “set” is used here for descriptive purposes to 
conceptually organize the themes and is not a component of our 
thematic analysis approach.
2.2.1 Associated meanings
2.2.1.1 Theme 1: Intrusion/violation
This theme captured a significant aspect of the participants’ 
misophonia, namely; others being responsible for the aversive 
experience. The experience of being intruded upon or violated in 
privacy by others came up as a solid theme that typically triggered defensive anger. Illustrative extracts for this theme emphasized that 
the source of the sound was perceived as an intentional attack (see 
Table 2  for a direct quote from the participant regarding the source of 
the sound). Participants typically assumed that persons generating the 
sound were aware of the anger they caused, or ought to be aware. As 
such, the source of the sound violated the expected state of safety in 
the misophonia sufferer. The expected feeling of safety was derived 
from descriptions such as “my house” or “my personal area, ” 
suggesting that the participant expected their boundaries to be known 
by the source of the sound. Related to this, lack of understanding from 
family or friends or the lack of respect from strangers was a common 
experience described by the participants, likely associated with the 
subjective perception that their boundaries were not respected.
The perception of intrusion/violation was associated with the 
person who is generating the trigger, rather than the sound itself, 
directing emotional reactions to the person rather than the general 
circumstances or the sounds. During the focus groups, examples of 
where intrusion and violation were experienced included a partner 
cutting nails and family members eating loudly at the dinner table. In 
each of these cases, participants mentioned that those who were 
making the sounds were responsible for their behavior, which led to a 
perception of intrusion and violation of personal space. For example, 
when the participant mentioned their “partner cutting nails, ” they saw 
it as an intentional intruding behavior, given their partner’s awareness 
of their misophonia. For instance, a participant described the situation 
as an assault:
“Yes, I think, you, I feel assaulted, is not the right word, because that 
would trivialize some things, of course that would trivialize real 
assaults, but I feel very much in my person, in my, yes in my, I do 
not know how to say it, actually assaulted, like yes, you are entering 
an area where you are not allowed to enter. Very much as if I were 
standing naked in front of someone without being asked, that’s what 
it actually comes down to. It is very unfair I feel treated unfairly. ” 
(Participant 4).
2.2.1.2 Theme 2: offense
This theme captured the aspect of misophonia corresponding to 
the distress and perceived attack caused by others when there is no 
intentionality perceived by the misophonia sufferer. Even if the actions 
of the people creating the trigger sounds were not perceived as 
intentional attacks, there is still an offense taken by the misophonia 
sufferer. An offensive context can be defined as a situation in which 
the misophonia sufferer expects to be  unintentionally violated by 
others (e.g., a public cafeteria). In an offensive context, the 
misophonia-sufferer realizes that their needs, sensitivities and 
expectancies may not be  clear to others and those generating the 
offensive sounds might not have been aware of the emotional distress 
they cause. When describing offensive contexts, no known sources of 
the sound were mentioned, rather the context was aversive in nature 
because there might be  potential sources of the sound who are 
unknown to the participant beforehand. It is also important to note 
that participants identified certain scenarios in which they felt 
offended because people around them fail to behave according to their 
rules. Participants cited noisy restaurants, trains, and cafeterias as 
offensive contexts and mentioned individuals in their lives who 
repeatedly clean their noses or create other orofacial sounds as 
potentially offensive. Overall, trigger stimuli produced by other

Ozuer et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1493676
Frontiers in Psychology 05 frontiersin.orgTABLE 2  Direct quotes from the transcripts of both focus group sessions and the themes derived from the transcripts.
Theme Direct quotes
Intrusion/Violation“Gosh, that’s just annoying that I just cannot tolerate those sounds and they do not understand my feelings. They just do that on purpose because they know that it triggers me. That’s really annoying. Just the feeling that 
they do not understand me. And that they do not know what they are doing wrong. ” (Participant 2)
“I think so, Participant 4, because for example I matched perfectly with my father, not with my mother, but perfectly with my father, and yet it was him who was the source of my irritation. ” (Participant 3)
“Maybe because you grant more autonomy and intention to a human than to a pig. Y es, a pig has no other choice, it smacks and does not think about it, while a human can choose not to smack…What would a pig have 
against me, while another human being could have something against me. Come on, purely theoretical. A pig has nothing against you, it just does. ” (Participant 4)
“Y es. That would be the same if someone poked me with his finger, you do not do that either and that’s actually how it comes across to me with someone with a bik. Only that it is auditory instead of physical that they tell 
me. ” (Participant 4)
“ And what I am also very concerned with, especially towards others in the misophonia group, is that every misophone  has the right to a safe place and to a safe person. So I’ve made myself a safe place by just always walking 
around with earplugs, because you absolutely have to have a place where you can go and where you can be absolutely sure that I will never experience it. And a safe person, I have that too, my best friend is my safe person 
for me and that means: he understands it, he has it a bit himself, so yes, he understands it anyway. ” (Participant 4)
“Y es, I also think because they are contact sounds, so they go through the floors and they go through the walls, so I can hear that inside, but I experience such a moment every time: (him) I am in my safe bubble, in my 
home environment where I expect to be safe, to be calm and then suddenly something like this comes in and it actually breaks through that safety and that peace and basically everything you expect from a home 
environment and that hits you so hard that you are indeed shocked by it and you immediately that fight or flight reaction that I have. So either you become angry because you cannot flee or you want to flee, but fleeing is 
not an option for me, so every time it’s to anger succeeds” (Participant 5)
“Y eah or a violation of your experiences at the moment, then we make it a bit smaller. Y es, that might be a little more accurate. ” (Participant 6)
“But to actually look for an explanation for that, perhaps from my person or something, I have never actually gone that far, but if I think about it a little further, it often has to do with the fact that it occurs, that it almost is 
an infringement on you, on your world of thought, on your own world. ” (Participant 6)
“ And then, the immediate reaction is: I do get angry because I then have the feeling: It’s as if that person is suddenly in my apartment, so he has crossed my boundary. ” (Participant 5)
“ And that that sound, well, the source is that person who just chews who does not even eat with his mouth open or something like that, hey just the chew chewing sound, that concrete mixer that keeps going, oh. ” 
(Participant 1)
Offense“…but if that filter is not there, and it concerns things that people do, they are very offensive can happen. ” (Participant 4)
“Y es, just that, I just do not think that’s polite. That’s distasteful, disgusting. I do not need to see what you have in your mouth” (Participant 2)
“The feeling of this is not an education… (they are) badly brought up. ” (Participant 3)
“ And I heard that once and then I thought: okay, that was dirty. I also find that very rude. But I thought okay, that’s possible one time, but yes, that person really did that repeatedly. ” (Participant 7)
Lack of autonomy“The feeling of why, why am I like this and why is not everyone like this? And then no other people?…Mainly powerlessness I think I am, yes. ” (Participant 3)
“Y es, what I really like is: I thought for a long time that I was a freak and that I was alone in the world, the only one who had that, together with my sister. And that there must have been something about our upbringing 
that had completely messed us up. ” (Participant 4)
“I hope that, I hope that nothing wrong will happen there because of me. But at that moment I thought: This is the only way I can do anything to stop this now because otherwise I will go crazy here, I will go crazy here 
and yes I had to, I had to be home too, I had to work, I had to behave normally in a work context and that just wasn’t about that noise all day long. ” (Participant 5)
“Now, what I do not have at all that Participant 5 has: I do not expect understanding from people who do not know me. Because I find my own situation so excessive, I think my behavior is simply disproportionate to the 
action, so I do not expect any understanding from people who do not know me. I expect a lot of understanding from people who do know me. ” (Participant 6)
“But it’s like that I do not know who said that before: If I know that I could not avoid it, that I’m stuck in a situation, then I also think, wow, what could I do here? being able to do, it gives such an overwhelming feeling. ” 
(Participant 8)
Anger/Defensive 
rage“Because my upstairs neighbor was a 98-year-old man. His TV was on maximum, I could literally do anything, I stormed upstairs several times to shout at that man, almost. So that, but and then, I hear too good, too 
good. ” (Participant 3)
“I even have it with, I’m going to be honest, I have two dogs. I love them, but when my dogs start licking themselves, I also feel like shooting through the ceiling. ” (Participant 3)
“ Also, that one anger that aggression. Sometimes it really starts to look red before your eyes if yes, then that’s just yes, no, no button that flies around. ” (Participant 5)
(Continued)

Ozuer et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1493676
Frontiers in Psychology 06 frontiersin.orgpersons were described as impolite and offensive, while easily evoking 
an intense and immediate anger or disgust reaction in misophonia 
sufferers. An example of this can be seen in the following testimony:
“That’s, that’s just super loud it’s very recognizable from that one 
misunderstanding and yes, thinking that others should indeed 
simply be held up that mirror. That they see their own behavior from 
the outside. ” (Participant 1).
2.2.1.3 Theme 3: lack of autonomy
This theme was generated frequently when participants described 
situations where they felt a profound lack of control over their own 
actions, emotions, and surroundings, coupled with a sense of not 
recognizing themselves. It captures experiences such as an inability to 
change or escape unwanted situations and the emotional barriers they 
could not overcome. Importantly, it is not limited to situations where 
a specific individual was perceived as a source of the sound who had 
control over the trigger stimuli, but also in instances where the 
misophonia sufferer felt a lack of control over their own emotions and 
reactions to the trigger sound, or over the situation in general. In 
reflecting on these experiences, we identified “loss of control” as a 
recurring term that contributed to a broader sense of diminished 
autonomy. The overarching theme “Lack of autonomy” encompasses 
various aspects of autonomy loss, including feelings of not recognizing 
oneself, feeling trapped by circumstances that dictate one’s emotional 
state, and a sense of misunderstanding from others. Participants 
expressed that they were “controlled” not only by the actions of others 
(e.g., feeling forced to tolerate triggering sounds in shared spaces like 
trains) but also by the misophonia itself, which led to self-imposed 
restrictions to avoid anticipated triggers.
Unlike other themes, “lack of autonomy” did not appear verbatim 
in the transcripts but was derived from various phrases that conveyed 
this broader sense of constrained agency. Participants expressed 
frustration and self-doubt, questioning, “Why am I like this?” and 
feeling as though “no one else” shared their experience. Other 
participants described a sense of “powerlessness, ” feeling like a “freak” 
or that their reactions were “disproportionate” or “aberrant. ” 
Statements such as “I am stuck in a situation” and “I’m going crazy 
here” illustrate the depth of their helplessness, where participants felt 
constrained by their own emotional responses rather than physical 
barriers. Along with these, the lack of control created a fundamental 
sense of desperation, linking directly to a diminished sense of 
autonomy. A participant described the feeling in the following way:
“Why am I like this? Why is this happening to me? And what about 
other people? It’s a feeling, I think, or a meaning of powerlessness. ” 
(Participant 3).
2.2.2 Primary emotional responses
2.2.2.1 Theme 4: anger/defensive rage
When one experiences an intrusion or violation of one’s own 
space, one is motivated to protect themselves and their surroundings 
and this protection can express itself as rage ( Siegel and Victoroff, 
2009 ). Defensive rage is a highly reactive and impulsive response to 
perceived threats, marked by an abrupt escalation in sympathetic 
nervous system activity ( Larson and Langer, 1997 ; Blanchard et al., 
2001 ). Unlike predatory aggression, which is more calculated and TABLE 2  (Continued)
Theme Direct quotes
Disgust“So, then I focus even harder on those sounds of the food, because all three of them are smacking the table, all three of them. And especially when mom eats yogurt, oh that’s real, oh I’m so disgusted. ” (Participant 2)
“it is also a very strong emotion that comes to the fore, so yes, disgust and stronger than that dislike even like yes really. ” (Participant 6)
“It would also explain why sounds that are not made by humans are also annoying, but you will have less disgust there. ” (Participant 4)
Safety behaviors“Y es, noise canceling or something, but you are sure that you can always go to something like that, to channel your flight behavior a bit, like that. Come on, I have it that way on purpose. ” (Participant 4)
“Social circumstances, on the train I will do the same as Participant 7, you just leave or you put in earphones. I will never sit on a train without music. ” (Participant 6)
“ And with looking for tactics of what can help me now to deal with this and if, that is mainly yes, putting in earplugs, putting on white noise music. ” (Participant 9)
“Y es, I have noticed that it is better to put on headphones or put in earplugs or whatever or go outside if possible. ” (Participant 5)
Fear“…either I have to react or I have to run away, but I think there is also a part of fear. And you have, yes, the fear because you anticipate: a feeling may come, so you are already walking on eggshells. But I suspect that the 
moment that happens, it must have something to do with fear or something and hey, I have not quite figured out yet what it is exactly. But what I feel very strongly is: where do you get the nerve to penetrate me so much 
that I have to concern myself with you, that’s all. ” (Participant 4)
“Sometimes I even just plan my day knowing that at that moment there will be a noise, so I will not be in the kitchen when my neighbors also start cooking around that moment. Which is quite obsessive, which also leads 
to that spiral of fear and doubt and shame. ” (Participant 5)
The original transcript is in Dutch, the relevant text was translated by the authors. The authors can be contacted for the original (Dutch) text. Extracts used in the results section do not appear in the table to avoid repetition.

Ozuer et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1493676
Frontiers in Psychology 07 frontiersin.orggoal-oriented, defensive rage is a rapid, reflexive response aimed at 
protecting oneself from immediate danger ( Siegel and Victoroff, 
2009 ). This form of aggression is often accompanied by heightened 
arousal, intense physiological activation (such as increased heart rate 
and blood pressure), and behaviors intended to repel or intimidate the 
perceived threat ( Larson and Langer, 1997 ; Blanchard et al., 2001 ; 
Siegel and Victoroff, 2009 ). Our participants’ descriptions of their 
emotional responses to misophonic sounds align with this definition 
of defensive rage. It was most apparent when they encountered a 
situation in which they experience intrusion and violation. While 
participants describe intense emotional responses, these do not always 
manifest as overt aggression. As reflected in phrases like, “I also feel 
like shooting through the ceiling” the emotional surge often remains 
internal, without escalating into physical or verbal aggression. As the 
feeling of defensive rage is related to an urgent situation wherein one 
needs immediate protection of oneself, there is a lack of thinking and 
purposeful behavior toward the situation. Likewise, the misophonia 
sufferer reacts impulsively to stimuli or situations that are experienced 
as offensive/intrusive/devaluating to one’s autonomy. During the focus 
group sessions, the current theme mostly came up when the source of 
the sound was someone the misophonia sufferer knows well. These 
results were obtained from phrases of participants such as; “like a 
match that goes off, ” “I flipped at that moment, ” etc. An example of the 
anger experienced by a participant was phrased with the 
following words:
“That’s real, I get there aggressive by. I always compare that a bit 
with if you know that about wild animals, that sketch where that 
lady suddenly does that. That’s really yes. That is the perfect wording 
and physically it gives me one too accelerated heart rate: my heart 
starts beating faster yes, that is really a purely physical reaction. And 
yes, really pure aggression. Yes, not physically of course because 
I would like to, but that’s not in me. But just verbal Hey, I get very 
aggressive verbally. Not in social circumstances, eh, in private 
circumstances eh. ” (Participant 6).
2.2.2.2 Theme 5: disgust
Although defensive rage was the dominant primary emotional 
response for most participants, disgust toward the sound and its 
source was also common. Similar to defensive rage, the feeling of 
disgust was not observed as a reaction that required conscious mental 
processing, rather, the participants mentioned it mostly when they 
were describing events in which they encountered trigger sounds of 
misophonia. Interestingly, participants mostly identified the sound-
generating people as “disgusting” rather than the action or the sound 
itself. In contrast to other themes derived from participants’ detailed 
descriptions of emotions and events, they directly labeled certain 
events and people as disgusting. Participants repetitively used phrases 
such as “they disgust me, ” “this person disgusts me, ” “I experience an 
unbelievably intense disgust” etc. Lastly, compared to the other 
emotions, participants made remarkably few attempts to understand 
or explain their intense disgust, one example of these situations was 
as follows:
“Yes, just that, I just do not think that’s polite. That’s distasteful, 
disgusting. I do not need to see what you have in your mouth. ” 
(Participant 2).2.2.3 Secondary reactions
2.2.3.1 Theme 6: safety behaviors
The concept of safety was generated in the transcripts, as 
participants described situations where they felt unsafe or engaged in 
behaviors that aligned with their personal sense of safety. It is 
important to distinguish this set of themes from the formerly 
discussed themes as these are not impulsive reactions but rather 
intentional safety behaviors. In the focus group discussions, “escape” 
involved physical distancing during a threatening event, while 
“avoidance” was a precautionary reaction to anticipated aversive 
situations. One of the most common examples was the use of ear plugs 
or headphones, as can be seen in the following example:
“Yes, I have noticed that it is better to put on headphones or put in 
earplugs or whatever or go outside if possible. ” (Participant 5).
In addition, participants mentioned leaving rooms or creating 
distance between themselves and “the sources of the sound” during 
disturbing situations with trigger sounds. The tendency to avoid was 
mentioned in situations in which participants deliberately chose not 
to engage in specific events (i.e., not attending dinner parties, going to 
the movies etc.) or with certain people (i.e., people that they know 
who will likely trigger their misophonia). Furthermore, participants 
reported that they often try to mask the trigger sounds by either using 
headphones or chewing loudly themselves. The potential offensive 
contexts mentioned in the previous theme led participants to avoid or 
escape situations because of expected encounters with sounds and/or 
people. For instance, as a participant described, sleeping together with 
her/his partner was an offensive context, for which they had to make 
accommodations in their sleeping arrangements.
2.2.3.2 Theme 7: fear
Two aspects of fear popped up from the current data set. First, 
being afraid of encountering trigger sounds and second, from one’s 
own possible (uncontrollable) reaction toward the sound or the 
person responsible for the sound (i.e., fear of consequences). The 
former mostly affected the daily lives of the misophonia sufferers and 
their families. The latter described a specific fear of not being able to 
control one’s own reaction and “going too far” in response to a sound 
or “sources of the sound. ” An example of this fear can be seen in the 
following sentence from one of the participants:
“But at such a moment, that person would be standing next to me, 
I could sometimes really do something to them and then I would 
be afraid of it afterwards because I am not like that and then I think: 
when will a moment come when I go too far, that I do something. ” 
(Participant 5).
Both types of fear reactions were anticipatory and influence the 
quality of life. Fear reactions were mainly reported when the 
participants mentioned an offensive context from which they cannot 
distance themselves. They described their experiences in offensive 
contexts with the phrases; “I was afraid that the person next to me 
might make the sounds, ” “what would have I done if they made the 
sounds, ” “I am afraid of my reactions, ” “I know what will follow these 
sounds, ” etc.

Ozuer et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1493676
Frontiers in Psychology 08 frontiersin.org2.3 Discussion study 1
In order to better understand the excessive anger and disgust 
reactions in misophonia, the current study aimed to broadly explore 
meanings associated with trigger stimuli in misophonic individuals. 
Due to the explorative nature of the research question, we opted for a 
qualitative study consisting of two semi-structured focus group 
discussions with small groups of persons suffering from misophonia.
Although individual experiences of misophonia vary, the 
thematic analysis suggested key similarities in the meanings attached 
to trigger stimuli and subsequent reactions. Specifically, when 
trigger stimuli are produced by persons who are supposed to know 
how distressing the stimuli are to the misophonia sufferer (e.g., 
family members, partners, friends), misophonia sufferer experience 
to be  intruded on/violated  by the other person. Intrusion and 
violation have been described also in recently published case studies 
(e.g., Gregory and Foster, 2023 ; Gregory et al., 2024 ), suggesting that 
both meanings as derived in the present thematic analysis may 
be generalizable to most people suffering from misophonia. Our 
data showed that when experiencing “intrusion/violation, ” the 
misophonia sufferer feels almost intentionally harmed. This finding 
corroborates earlier findings that misophonic anger is directed 
toward the other person, rather than to the sound itself ( Edelstein 
et al., 2013 ), and with recent findings showing anger outbursts are 
associated with blaming others (so-called “externalizing appraisals, ” 
see Wang et al., 2022 ). Similar sounds produced by animals and 
babies tend to trigger less emotion, likely because babies and animals 
are inherently innocent, or have no/less control over their actions 
and can therefore not be held responsible ( Edelstein et al., 2013 ). 
Other findings suggest that persons with misophonia experience 
especially anger when trigger sounds are produced by people close 
to them ( Bernstein et al., 2013 ; Dozier, 2015a ). Interestingly, anger 
in response to a violation of borders in persons with misophonia is 
reminiscent of defensive rage that stems from the motivation to 
protect oneself and surroundings ( Siegel and Victoroff, 2009 ). These 
observations led us to reflect on the theoretical distinctions between 
types of anger and identify the defensive nature of the emotional and 
behavioral responses expressed in our data. Different from predatory 
rage, defensive rage is characterized by a sudden increase in 
sympathetic activity and is highly impulsive ( Siegel and Victoroff, 
2009 ). In our focus groups, participants described emotional 
reactions that appeared to align more closely with defensive 
responses, as their anger was accompanied by a strong urge to escape 
the situation or shield themselves from the triggering sounds and 
associated individuals. These observations suggest that the extreme 
emotional reactions in misophonia may be  driven by acquired, 
anger-provoking connotations (or: “meanings”) attached to the 
trigger sounds and the person producing them, especially when they 
are close to them. While the emotional experience described by 
participants is consistent with defensive rage, it is important to note 
that these emotions do not always manifest as overt aggressive 
behaviors. As reflected in statements such as “I flipped at that 
moment, ” participants often describe an internal surge of anger or 
frustration, which may not necessarily escalate into physical or 
verbal aggression. This distinction between emotional response and 
actual behavior highlights the complex nature of misophonic 
reactions, where the intensity of the emotional experience can 
be intense, but not always outwardly expressed through aggression.Offense  and disgust  showed up as major themes running through 
the focus group discussions, which converges with many other reports 
in the literature ( Edelstein et  al., 2013 ; Dozier, 2015a ; Jager et  al., 
2020a ; Siepsiak et  al., 2020 ). Individuals with misophonia often 
perceive the actions of sound-producers as deliberate attacks against 
them, while also occasionally seeing these individuals, especially those 
less familiar, as only displaying poor manners ( Taylor, 2017 ). This 
distinction underscores the theme of “offense, ” as participants did not 
attribute intentionality to these actions, yet still considered the trigger 
sound producers as rude and lacking proper etiquette. Moreover, 
participants often attributed disgust not just to the sound itself, but 
primarily to the individuals producing those sounds with “poor 
manners, ” whom they labelled as “dirty” or “disgusting. ” This reaction 
was notably immediate and visceral, occurring without conscious 
mental processing. Participants frequently expressed intense disgust 
toward specific individuals, using phrases like “they disgust me” or 
“this person disgusts me. ” In comparison to other emotions, focus 
group participants did not try to elaborate or to reason their feelings 
of disgust, which is in line with the unreasoning disgust hypothesis of 
Russell and Giner-Sorolla (2011) . The hypothesis states that compared 
to (moral) anger, (moral) disgust is less likely to be  justified with 
cognitively elaborated reasons ( Russell and Giner-Sorolla, 2011 ). 
Therefore, even though sometimes the person with misophonia felt 
uncomfortable with their own reactions and find them excessive, they 
still labelled the actions of the person producing the sounds as being 
impolite, disgusting or unintentionally offensive ( Taylor, 2017 ; Brout 
et al., 2018 ). Furthermore, this complex reaction to trigger sounds, 
characterized by immediate disgust toward the individual producing 
the sound, raises questions about the nature of disgust in misophonia. 
While responses seem largely visceral, it remains unclear whether this 
disgust is moral or sensory. Some research suggests it may be a moral 
disgust ( Iskander et al., 2023 ; Norena, 2024 ), but further investigation 
is needed to clarify whether the disgust in misophonia aligns more 
with moral or visceral disgust.
The lack of autonomy  was revealed as the last meaning, referring 
to having control over one’s own emotions and behavior, over the 
(offensive) behaviors of others, and even over one’s life. Reports in the 
literature indicate early adolescence as the most typical age of onset 
for misophonia ( Johnson et al., 2013 ; Dozier, 2015a ; Kumar et al., 
2017 ; Rouw and Erfanian, 2018 ; Guzick et  al., 2023 ). At this age, 
children may experience an increasing and often unmet need for 
autonomy and independence from their parents ( Y oung et al., 2019 ; 
Hu et al., 2021 ). At the same time, self-control and emotion regulatory 
capacity are still underdeveloped ( Y oung et al., 2019 ; Warschburger 
et al., 2023 ). Both may set the stage for strong learning experiences 
through which anger and disgust reactions can become associated 
with misophonic triggers. In addition, a possible motivational conflict 
can be observed in the scenarios in which a person requires a certain 
level of autonomy, yet is still bound by their parents. Potentially, the 
underlying motivation to gain autonomy may have been present 
before the development of misophonia.
Apart from “intrusion/violation of borders, ” “anger/defensive 
rage, ” “offense, ” “disgust, ” and “lack of autonomy, ” major themes such 
as (anticipatory) fear , escape  and avoidance  also constructed. During 
the final stage of the thematic analysis discussions, we consolidated 
the themes of escape and avoidance behaviors into a single overarching 
theme named “safety behaviors. ” Consistent with the literature 
(Edelstein et al., 2013 ; Cavanna and Seri, 2015 ; Palumbo et al., 2018 ;

Ozuer et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1493676
Frontiers in Psychology 09 frontiersin.orgDibb and Golding, 2022 ), fear did not show up as an instant primary 
emotional reaction to trigger stimuli in a similar way as “anger/
defensive rage” and “disgus” did. Instead, fear was referred to more in 
terms of concerns of what could happen if persons would be trapped 
in a context in which trigger stimuli might occur, how to avoid or 
escape from such contexts, and the potential social consequences if 
one would be unable to control aggressive impulses. Thus, in contrast 
to other sound-related disorders such as hyperacusis or bothersome 
tinnitus, our findings suggest that fear seems less of a central, primary 
emotion in response to the misophonia trigger sounds.
The semi-structured focus groups were directed specifically at 
understanding misophonic events exploring meanings of the trigger 
stimuli leading to excessive and instantaneous emotional reactions. 
Longer term consequences of repeated misophonic experiences in the 
participants’ interpersonal, professional, and emotional functioning, 
were not extensively discussed and were not represented in the 
findings from the conducted thematic analysis. That does not make 
them unimportant, however. Feelings of guilt, shame, helplessness/
sadness were occasionally mentioned in the focus group discussions 
and may importantly relate to the overall impact of misophonia on the 
sufferers and their families. This aligns with prior literature reporting 
“internalizing appraisals” ( Gregory and Foster, 2023 ), which are also 
important to recognize as an important aspect of suffering in persons 
with misophonia, other than the instant emotional reactions (anger, 
disgust) and meanings in response to triggers that were the focus of 
this study.
Qualitative designs offer flexibility to explore various aspects of a 
topic, but come with a number of limitations that need to 
be acknowledged. First, the data collected during the focus groups are 
based on open-ended questions, and participants have control over the 
information they share. During the discussions, participants may 
occasionally veer off-topic and may influence each other with their 
answers. Therefore, answers may have been different in an individually 
conducted interview. Participants may have been inclined to provide 
socially desirable or conformist answers. For instance, because 
participants were invited to think back to a situation where they felt 
bad because of the sound, there is a chance that thoughts and behaviors 
elicited by stronger emotions might be overrepresented. Even though 
we made concerted efforts to minimize these limitations by having the 
moderator adhere to the script as closely as possible, future research 
can rely on diverse qualitative designs (i.e., focus groups, interviews, 
surveys etc.) to tackle these issues. Second, although the researchers 
were engaged to maintain objectivity and made decisions solely based 
on the data during the thematic analysis, it is worth acknowledging 
that alternate themes, slightly different labels for existing themes, and 
slightly different relationship between themes may have resulted from 
a thematic analysis when performed by other researchers.
In line with Braun and Clarke’s guidelines on thematic analysis 
(Braun and Clarke, 2006 ; Braun and Clarke, 2019 ), we conducted a 
reflexive thematic analysis aimed at exploring the potential meanings 
and emotions associated with misophonia trigger sounds. While our 
analysis was not driven by pre-existing themes, it was guided by our 
theoretical interest in understanding meaning formation processes, 
which aligns with a deductive approach. The analysis was interpretative 
rather than descriptive, meaning that we generated themes by actively 
reflecting on and analyzing the data with an overarching goal of 
creating meaning themes. Since completing our analysis, Braun and 
Clarke (2022)  have highlighted the distinction between “topic summary” and “meaning-based interpretive story” themes, with an 
emphasis on choosing between these approaches. Although this 
updated guidance was not available at the time of our analysis, our 
thematic approach aligns closely with their concept of “meaning-
based interpretive story” themes, as we  prioritized deeper 
interpretative insights over descriptive summaries.
Last but not least, the focus groups consisted of a small number of 
individuals. The low number of participants facilitated a safe 
environment for the participants and ensured the chance for everyone 
to have open discussions. However, while this approach provided 
valuable insights, it remains imperative to verify the generalizability 
of the findings through a confirmatory study encompassing a broader 
population of individuals exhibiting misophonic symptoms across 
different severity levels. To address this need, we conducted a larger 
scale questionnaire study, including main the meanings generated in 
this study, to focus on the generalizability of the findings.
3 Study 2
The primary objective of study 2 was to validate the findings from 
our exploratory qualitative study (study 1) using a large, independent 
sample. Specifically, we aimed to (1) assess the extent to which the 
meanings of “intrusion/violation, ” “offense, ” and “lack of autonomy” 
are experienced in response to prototypical misophonic triggers, and 
(2) determine whether these experiences correlate positively with the 
severity of misophonic symptoms. Additionally, the study aimed to 
explore the relationships among these meanings, primary reactions, 
and secondary reactions (i.e., the themes identified in the thematic 
analysis of Study 1) and to uncover a possible meaningful latent 
structure through factor analysis.
3.1 Methods and materials
3.1.1 Participants
A total of 463 participants initially completed 2 questionnaires; 
after accounting for dropouts and excluding responses completed in 
less than half the median time to ensure data integrity, the final sample 
consisted of 431 participants (359 female) with an average age of 
18.42 years (range: 17–35; 86% Belgian, 14% international students). 
Notably, participants’ misophonia status was not determined 
beforehand, meaning they were included without prior knowledge of 
whether they did or did not have misophonia. All participants were 
Dutch-speaking first year Bachelor of Psychology students. 
Participation was incentivized by offering course credits. Informed 
consent was obtained from all participants, with additional parental 
consent required for those aged 17. The study received ethical approval 
from KU Leuven University, ensuring adherence to ethical research 
standards [SMEC; approval number is G-2023-7044-R5 (MIN)].
3.1.2 Procedure
Participants answered a range of questions using the Qualtrics 
online platform. First, they rated a list of 19 custom-made items that 
aimed to assess participants’ prototypical experience (meanings, 
reactions) when being exposed to misophonic triggers. Participants 
received the following textual instructions to rate their prototypical 
experience for each item “ Please indicate to what extent you have the

Ozuer et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1493676
Frontiers in Psychology 10 frontiersin.orgfollowing experiences when hearing sounds that other people make when 
they breathe, eat (chewing, slurping, smacking, swallowing, etc.), clear their 
throat, cough, cut their nails, sniff (pick up their nose), or when they 
repeatedly click a ballpoint pen in and out, tapping their fingers on the 
table. When hearing these sounds…. ”  Upon reading this text, participants 
were shown each item to be rated on a horizontal 0–100 visual analog 
scale, with the following labels: 0 (“not at all”), 50 (“to a certain extent”), 
and 100 (“very much”) (see Table 3  for each item). The 19 items consisted 
of 6 items reflecting meanings as identified in the thematic analysis, with 
2 items referring to the “intrusion/violation” theme (“intrusive, ” 
“violated”), 1 item referring to the “offense” theme (“offended”) and 3 
items referring to the autonomy theme (“lack of autonomy, ” “feeling 
trapped, ” “lack of control”). The primary (“anger, ” “defensive rage, ” 
“disgust”) and secondary (“afraid, ” “desire to avoid, ” “need to escape”) 
reactions were captured in 6 additional items. The 9 remaining items 
were added as explorative or slightly contrasting items, i.e., emotions that 
were not generated during the thematic analysis of study 1 (“relaxed, ” 
“guilty, ” “enthusiastic, ” “calm, ” “sad, ” “happy and excited, ” and “peaceful”).
Next, participants completed the A-Miso-S ( Schröder et al., 2013 ) 
to assess the presence and severity of their misophonia symptoms (see 
method section of study 1 for a description of the A-Miso-S).
3.1.3 Statistical analysis
To examine the association between the items (meanings and 
reactions identified in study 1) and misophonia symptom severity, 
Pearson correlations were calculated between A-Miso-S scores and 
each of the meanings, primary and secondary reactions, and 
explorative items. To investigate how the rated meanings uniquely 
related to A-Miso-S scores, a multiple regression analysis was 
conducted with participants’ answers on the 6 meaning items as 
predictors and A-Miso-S scores as the dependent variable. Next, a 
factor analysis was conducted to investigate whether the meanings and 
primary and secondary reactions could be meaningfully grouped into 
one or more underlying (latent) factors. Factors with eigenvalues >1 
were retained and an oblique rotation (quartimin) was applied.
3.2 Results
3.2.1 Descriptive statistics
Out of 431 participants, 39.7% (171) scored between 0 and 4 
(subclinical symptoms), 45.2% (195) scored between 5 and 9 (mild 
symptoms), 11.6% (50) scored between 10 and 14 (moderate 
symptoms), 2.8% (12) scored between 15 and 19 (severe symptoms), 
and 0.7% (3) scored between 20 and 24 (extreme symptoms) on the 
A-Miso-S questionnaire. The four meaning/reaction items rated 
highest were: “desire to avoid the sounds, ” “intrusion, ” “need to 
escape, ” and “anger, ” see Table  3  for the descriptive statistics of 
all items.
3.2.2 Associations of meaning items with 
meanings and A-Miso-S scores
The rated meaning items showed significant, moderately positive 
associations with A-Miso-S scores (see Figure 1 ; Table 3 ) and with 
each other (see Supplementary Tables S1, S2 ).
A multiple regression analysis was conducted to examine how 
the rated meanings (intrusion, violation, lack of autonomy, feeling 
trapped in a situation, offense, lack of control) as predictors were uniquely related to A-Miso-S scores as the dependent variable. The 
model demonstrated a significant association between the predictors 
and A-Miso-S scores [ F(6, 424) = 38.3, p < 0.001], explaining 
35.15% of the variance in A-Miso-S scores. Specifically, intrusion 
(β = 0.027, p < 0.001), lack of control ( β = 0.021, p = 0.002), 
violation ( β = 0.026, p = 0.007), feeling trapped in a situation 
(β = 0.019, p = 0.007) and lack of autonomy ( β = 0.019, p = 0.033) 
were significant predictors of A-Miso-S scores. However, offense did 
not significantly predict A-Miso-S scores ( β = 0.011, p = 0.237). The 
model’s intercept was found to be significantly different from zero 
(β = 2.013, p < 0.001).
The dataset’s suitability for factor analysis was confirmed by the 
Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin (KMO) measure (MSA = 0.92) and Bartlett’s Test 
of Sphericity ( x2 = 4547.29, p < 0.001), indicating significant common 
variance among items referring to meanings and (primary/secondary) 
reactions. Individual item MSAs ranged from 0.84 to 0.97, surpassing 
the 0.5 threshold. The scree plot identified two factors with eigenvalues 
>1 (see Figure 2 ). The eigen values for Factor 1 and Factor 2 were 5.73 
and 1.28, respectively.
An exploratory factor analysis was conducted using maximum 
likelihood estimation with oblique quartimin rotation. For the first 
factor, the three items with the highest factor loadings were “desire to 
avoid the sounds” (0.91), “intrusion” (0.61), and “disgust” (0.61). 
These loadings were also unique to factor 1, which we therefore will 
label “ Avoidance of intrusive/disgusting sounds. ” The second factor 
showed unique and high loadings on “lack of autonomy” (0.74), 
“violation” (0.72), and “offense” (0.6). This second factor will further 
be called “ Autonomy/Violation. ” Table 4  displays the complete list of 
the factor loadings on all items.
Together, the two factors explained 50% of the cumulative 
variance, with Factor 1 explaining 26% and Factor 2 explaining 24% 
of the total variance.
3.3 Discussion study 2
In study 2, we aimed to confirm our qualitative results using a 
quantitative approach. The themes (meanings, primary and secondary 
reactions) identified via the thematic analysis in study 1 were 
converted into scorable items, allowing to quantitatively explore the 
prevalence of the uncovered meanings and their association with 
misophonia symptoms severity in a larger, independent sample. 
We also explored whether factor analysis on the rated meanings and 
reactions would show an underlying, meaningful latent 
factor structure.
The responses of the 431 participants to the A-Miso-S 
questionnaire demonstrated that there was a considerable percentage 
(15.1%) of people scoring above the threshold of 10 in this unselected 
sample of young adults. This is in line with other studies investigating 
the occurrence of misophonia in students and general populations 
(e.g., Wu et al., 2014 ; Patel et al., 2023 ; Vitoratou et al., 2023 ).
The descriptive and correlational findings from study 2 generally 
confirm that in this large sample of young adults, the constructed 
meanings and reactions to misophonic stimuli as identified in study 
1 are indeed prevalent. The meaning items “intrusion” and “feeling 
trapped in a situation, ” received the highest ratings, with median 
scores of 56 and 50 on a 0–100 scale, respectively. These ratings are 
surprisingly high for our sample, in which 84.9% of the participants

Ozuer et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1493676
Frontiers in Psychology 11 frontiersin.orgscored below the cut-off of 10 for moderate misophonia symptoms 
on the A-Miso-S. Apparently, also persons with lower A-Miso-S 
scores experiencing to some extent “intrusion” and “feeling trapped 
in a situation” upon exposure to misophonic stimuli, though to a 
lesser degree than persons with more severe misophonia symptoms 
(see Figure 1  and Table 3 ). In contrast, the meaning items “lack of 
control, ” “violation, ” “loss of autonomy, ” and “offense” were scored 
generally lower and appear more unique to persons with more severe 
misophonia symptoms (see Figure 1 ). With the exception of “offense, ” 
all items referring to meanings showed a similar, significant 
moderately positive association with A-Miso-S scores and each 
contributed independently to the prediction of misophonia 
symptoms severity. This corroborates the idea that meanings linked 
to misophonic trigger stimuli are an inherent part of the misophonic 
experience. The observation that the “offense” item showed a weaker 
correlation with misophonia symptoms and was not found to be an 
independent predictor of misophonia symptom severity in the 
multiple regression, suggests that the study-1 theme “offense” as 
being a separate meaning-theme, may reflect a peculiarity of the 
persons in the focus groups that is not generalizable to others. In 
sum, the meaning themes of “intrusion/violation” and “lack of 
autonomy” seem clearly reproduced as distinct meanings that relate 
to misophonia symptoms in the large, independent sample of 
study 2.
Apart from this, findings of study 2 also support “anger” and 
“disgust” as primary reactions to misophonic stimuli, which is in line with other reports in literature (e.g., Edelstein et al., 2013 ; Cavanna 
and Seri, 2015 ; Schröder et al., 2017 ; Palumbo et al., 2018 ; Dibb and 
Golding, 2022 ). Although “disgust” had an overall higher median 
rating than “anger, ” it showed a weaker correlation with misophonia 
symptoms severity (see Table 1 ). This pattern of findings suggests that 
misophonic stimuli do trigger disgust also in persons who score low 
on misophonia symptoms, while anger seem more exclusively 
characteristic for persons suffering from more severe misophonia 
symptoms. While disgust may play a role in misophonia, our results 
imply that it may not be  as central as anger in characterizing 
the disorder.
As study 2 assessed the immediate (primary) reaction of 
participants to misophonic stimuli, the present data do not allow 
direct confirmation of our study 1’s finding that “fear” and “safety 
behaviors” are secondary reactions. Nonetheless, the low ratings of the 
fear item “afraid” confirms the finding of study 1 and other findings 
in the literature that fear is indeed not a primary reaction to 
misophonic sounds akin to phonophobia or hyperacusis ( Schröder 
et al., 2013 ). Surprisingly, the item “desire to avoid sounds” had the 
highest median rating of all rated items (76 on a 0–100 scale), which 
suggests that an avoidance tendency is also a primary reaction to 
misophonic sounds that may have been missed in the thematic 
analysis on the data of study 1. Whether “avoidance” can also be a 
secondary, less impulsive reaction, cannot be discerned from the data 
of study 2, as we did not assess secondary reactions. Important to note 
here is that the A-MISO-S has an item on avoidance as well, therefore, 
TABLE 3  Themes (meanings, reactions) identified in Study 1 translated into Items in Study 2 with their corresponding categories, means, standard 
deviations, medians, range and correlation with A-Miso-S scores across the whole sample.
Themes aItem category Items as presented to 
participantsbMean 
ratingSD Range Median A-Miso-S 
score 
correlationc
Intrusion/Violation Associated MeaningI experience the sounds as intrusive 53.32 27.54 0–100 56 0.46
I experience being violated 16.23 22.04 0–100 5 0.45
Offense Associated Meaning I feel offended 13.74 19.44 0–100 5 0.29
Lack of Autonomy Associated MeaningI experience a lack of autonomy 17.38 22.61 0–100 6 0.42
I experience a lack of control 35.28 30.95 0–100 28 0.46
I feel trapped in the situation 40.81 30.62 0–100 40 0.47
Anger/Defensive rage Primary ReactionI feel anger 44.32 30.05 0–100 45 0.52
I experience a defensive anger (rage) 29.03 29.1 0–100 20 0.51
Disgust Primary Reaction I feel disgust 43.71 30.73 0–100 49 0.27
Safety Behaviors Secondary ReactionI want to avoid the sounds 70.03 26.93 0–100 76 0.4
I experience the need to escape 49.48 30.11 0–100 50 0.4
Fear Secondary Reaction I feel afraid 7.26 15.22 0–100 1 0.29
ExploratoryI feel calm 19.12 21.39 0–100 11 −0.33
I feel relaxed 18.87 19.52 0–87 10 −0.37
I feel peaceful 11.67 16.65 0–94 4 −0.21
I feel sad 10.31 17.44 0–100 2 0.44
I feel guilty 9.27 18.44 0–100 2 0.32
I feel happy and excited 8.73 14.06 0–85 2 −0.16
I feel enthusiastic 7.32 12.15 0–56 1 −0.17
aThemes identified in Study 1.
bThemes converted into scorable items in Study 2.
cAll correlations between items and A-Miso-S scores were significant at p < 0.001.

Ozuer et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1493676
Frontiers in Psychology 12 frontiersin.orgthe high correlation of “desire to avoid sounds” and A-MISO-S scores 
is likely partially due to content overlap. Such content overlap was not 
present for the other rated items.
In addition to the items identified in the thematic analyses, 
we  included both negative and positive exploratory items in our 
questionnaire, and they correlated in the expected directions. For 
example, the negative emotions “sad” and “guilty” were positively 
correlated with misophonia severity, while positive emotions such as 
“happy and excited, ” “enthusiastic, ” “peaceful, ” “relaxed, ” and “calm” 
were inversely correlated. These findings for the negative emotions 
align with previous research indicating that misophonia sufferers also 
experience sadness and guilt because of their anger outbursts ( Wang 
et al., 2022 ; Dibb and Golding, 2022 ).
Factor analysis on the items referring to meanings, primary and 
secondary reactions further underscored the salience of themes 
identified in the initial qualitative study and how they relate to the 
reactions. Two latent factors together explaining 50% of the 
variance in the data were retained. The first factor encompassed the 
meaning item “intrusion” and had also high loadings on “desire to 
avoid sounds, ” “need to escape, ” “feeling trapped, ” “disgust, ” and 
“anger” prompting the designation of this factor as “ Avoidance of 
intrusive/disgusting sounds. ” Consistent with previous literature, 
this factor confirms that when trigger sounds are experienced as 
intrusive, persons experience disgust and anger and are strongly 
and instantaneously motivated to avoid them ( Edelstein et al., 2013 ; Schröder et al., 2017 ; Jager et al., 2020a ; Rouw and Erfanian, 2018 ). 
For the second factor “ Autonomy/Violation, ” the meaning items 
“lack of autonomy, ” “violation, ” and “offense” had the highest factor 
loadings, followed by the emotional reaction items “fear” and 
“anger/defensive rage. ” Whereas the meanings of “intrusion” and 
“violation” were collapsed in one overarching theme based on the 
thematic analysis of study 1, findings from the factor analysis 
suggest they rather reflect separate meanings that are associated 
with a different pattern of reactions. Specifically, “intrusion” relates 
uniquely to “disgust” and “avoidance” and seems also prevalent to 
some degree in persons with no or mild misophonia symptoms. 
“Violation, ” on the other hand, coincides with more extreme forms 
of “anger” and is present only in those with more severe 
misophonia symptoms.
While our study offers valuable insights into the relationships 
between the emotions and meanings attached to the trigger sounds of 
misophonia, there are several limitations to consider. Our sample was 
primarily composed of Bachelor students, with a large proportion 
being female, which may affect the generalizability of the findings to 
a more diverse population. Given that theory of mind and perspective-
taking abilities continue to evolve into late adolescence, suggesting 
ongoing development in understanding others’ thoughts and 
intentions ( Dumontheil et al., 2010 ), the age of our sample (primarily 
18-year-olds) may influence social perspective-taking and blame 
attribution, potentially impacting the emotional constructs examined 
FIGURE 1
Correlations between A-Miso-S scores and the selected rating items (meanings).

Ozuer et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1493676
Frontiers in Psychology 13 frontiersin.orgin our study and limiting the generalizability of our findings to older 
or younger populations. Therefore, more research investigating the 
onset and developmental trajectory of misophonia, is needed to better 
understand the interplay between early symptom emergence and the 
cognitive appraisal mechanisms that contribute to meaning formation 
in misophonic reactions. Of course, our research is inherently limited 
without observing the entire developmental trajectory of misophonia, highlighting the importance of longitudinal studies to fully capture 
these processes.
Additionally, terms derived from the themes’ description 
(thematic analysis study 1) were directly incorporated into custom-
made items. Despite our efforts to ensure clarity of the items, 
encapsulating these items into concise terms was challenging. 
Particularly noteworthy in this respect is the item “offense. ” In the 
focus groups, the “offense” theme primarily described being offended 
by the sound or environments where the trigger sounds might 
be  present rather than perceiving disrespect from an intentional 
source of the sound. Moreover, the theme of “offense” encompasses 
misophonia experiences such as distress from unintentional triggers, 
perceiving them as offensive, and feeling offended in environments 
considered normal and safe by others (e.g., restaurants, cinemas, 
home). The item in our questionnaire might have insufficiently 
captured all this. Furthermore, another potential limitation regarding 
the custom-made items is that “loss of control” may overlap 
conceptually with the A-Miso-S item regarding “control over thoughts 
about misophonic sounds. ” However, it is important to note the 
distinction that while the A-Miso-S item focuses on obsessive, 
intrusive thoughts in the absence of sounds, our item captures a more 
immediate loss of control over actions in response to misophonic 
triggers. We also conducted a sensitivity analysis by repeating the 
factor analysis without including “loss of control” as a variable. The 
results remained largely consistent, suggesting that the factor structure 
was stable even when this item was excluded.
In summary, findings from study 2 confirm that “intrusion, ” 
“violation, ” “offense, ” and “lack of autonomy” are core meanings 
attached to prototypical misophonic triggers and characterize the 
misophonic experience. “Disgust, ” “anger, ” and a strong “avoidance” 
tendency show up as primary reactions to trigger sounds that are 
FIGURE 2
Scree plot of eigenvalues.
TABLE 4  Factor loadings for exploratory factor analysis with the 
meanings from study 1 ( N = 431).
Item Name Factor
1 2
Intrusion 0.61 0.2
Violation 0.08 0.72
Offense −0.07 0.60
Lack of autonomy −0.04 0.74
Lack of control 0.35 0.38
Trapped in a situation 0.54 0.24
Anger 0.51 0.42
Defensive anger (rage) 0.34 0.51
Disgust 0.61 0.05
Desire to avoid the sounds 0.91 −0.16
Need to escape 0.55 0.19
Afraid −0.08 0.56
% of variance 0.26 0.24
Maximum likelihood extraction method was used with an oblique quartimin rotation. Factor 
loadings of > 0.50 are bolded.

Ozuer et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1493676
Frontiers in Psychology 14 frontiersin.orgexperienced to be intrusive, whereas more extreme forms of anger 
(“defensive rage”) are experienced when trigger-sounds signify 
“violation, ” “offense, ” and/or a “threat to one’s autonomy. ”
4 General discussion
Although misophonia is increasingly gaining attention from both 
the general public, clinicians and researchers, much remains to 
be uncovered ( Cowan et al., 2021 ; Gregory and Foster, 2023 ; Gregory 
et al., 2024 ; Norena, 2024 ; Rosenthal et al., 2023 ). The present studies 
aimed to shed light on why anger and disgust are the core primary 
reactions to misophonic triggers. We found that misophonic trigger 
stimuli convey strong and specific meanings to persons suffering from 
misophonia, namely: “intrusion, ” “violation, ” “offense, ” and “lack of 
autonomy. ” These meanings seem an integral part of a cohesive and 
debilitating emotional representation of misophonic experiences and 
seem inherently linked to the extreme anger and disgust reactions that 
characterize misophonia.
The presently identified meanings may inspire further work on 
etiological mechanisms of misophonia. Specifically, Pavlovian 
conditioning has been proposed repeatedly as an etiological 
mechanism of misophonia (e.g., Jastreboff and Jastreboff, 2002 ; 
Palumbo et al., 2018 ), but this idea has remained unsupported by 
empirical evidence. Following the conditioning account, a trigger 
stimulus would have become a conditioned stimulus (CS) evoking 
anger and disgust as a conditioned reaction (CR) via Pavlovian 
conditioning ( Jastreboff and Jastreboff, 2002 ; Dozier, 2015a ; Palumbo 
et al., 2018 ). Until now, the literature has remained surprisingly silent 
on what type of unconditional stimulus (US) could have been 
associated with the trigger stimulus (CS) in the initial learning 
experience to elicit anger and disgust (see also Cowan et al., 2021 ). 
Because of this unclarity in the US conceptualization, there is at 
present no laboratory model that can put the conditioning account of 
misophonia to the test. The present findings may offer an avenue to 
tackle this problem by hypothesizing that trigger sounds may have 
acquired the core meanings of “intrusion, ” “violation, ” “offense” and/
or “lack autonomy” via Pavlovian learning, thereby explaining why 
anger and disgust (rather than fear) constitute the core emotional 
reaction toward them ( Edelstein et al., 2013 ; Bernstein et al., 2013 ; 
Dozier, 2015a ; Muller et al., 2018 ; Potgieter et al., 2019 ; Ferrer-Torres 
and Giménez-Llort, 2022 ). The concept of referential learning, a 
particular type of Pavlovian conditioning, might provide insight on 
how meanings can get associated to stimuli. In referential learning, 
meaning aspects of the US (e.g., a parent repulsing his/her child’s need 
for autonomy by forcing the child to stay at the dinner table) are 
transferred to the CS (smacking sound of the parent at the dinner 
table) ( Baeyens and de Houwer, 1995 ; Baeyens et al., 2001 ; Ludvik 
et al., 2015 ). The best-known instance of referential learning is the 
learning of likes/dislikes, also named evaluative conditioning. In such 
learning, individuals for example learn to dislike a certain food after a 
food poisoning experience. After this type of learning, people do not 
expect to get food poisoning again when consuming similar food 
(there is no “predictive” or “signal” learning), they simply acquired a 
dislike of this food-type and find it even disgusting. Much like 
misophonia in fact, where persons do not report a particular 
expectation of an aversive event (US) to happen upon perceiving a 
trigger stimulus (CS). Instead, trigger stimuli are inherently experienced as intrusive, offensive, violating one’s borders, and give 
possibly therefore rise to instant (impulsive) anger and disgust. 
We propose referential learning  as an interesting avenue to further 
explore etiological mechanisms of misophonia. Future research might 
include the development a laboratory paradigm to model in human 
participants the transfer of meanings identified in the present study 
(intrusion, violation, offense, lack of autonomy) onto prototypical 
misophonic trigger stimuli.
Based on our findings that misophonia severity is related to 
trigger stimuli conveying particular meanings to the misophonia 
sufferer, changing those meanings seems a promising and logical 
psychological treatment avenue. A technique that is theoretically apt 
to break down meanings attached to trigger stimuli is counter 
conditioning ( Kerkhof et al., 2011 ), a procedure in which an opposing 
US is paired with the CS. This technique has been proposed and 
applied already in the context of misophonia (e.g., Dozier, 2015b ; Jager 
et al., 2020b ; Mattson et al., 2023 ), but not with the specific goal to 
break down the disabling meanings of intrusion, violation, offense, 
and lack of autonomy attached to trigger stimuli. A fictitious 
application of such counter conditioning could be creating a pleasant 
context (e.g., dinner party) where the misophonic individual 
experiences autonomy (prepared the food him- or herself, selected 
and invited guests, chose the music, walking dinner party with buffet) 
and attaches another meaning to the party guests’ eating sounds (e.g., 
“my friends really adore the food I prepared all by myself!”), thereby 
offering a strong learning opportunity that weakens the disabling 
meaning representation around, in this case, eating sounds. 
Psychological treatment strategies for misophonia seem 
predominantly directed at regulating emotions and distress, rather 
than at changing what trigger stimuli mean to the misophonia sufferer. 
As an example, mindfulness-based therapies and acceptance and 
commitment therapy (ACT) for misophonia aim to help patients 
tolerate distress and detach from misophonic reactions ( Cecilione 
et  al., 2021 ). Another proposed treatment, the Unified Protocol, 
targets both emotional regulation and cognitive flexibility, addressing 
the complex emotions triggered by sounds in misophonia ( Rosenthal 
et al., 2023 ). Also, CBT protocols for misophonia are mainly directed 
at improving emotional regulation through a variety of techniques, 
including relaxation/arousal reduction, attentional training, cognitive 
restructuring and stimulus manipulation ( Jager et al., 2020b ; Mattson 
et  al., 2023 ). Interestingly, some authors report mere exposure to 
trigger stimuli, as one would apply in fear-based pathology, to be a less 
effective treatment strategy for misophonia ( Cecilione et al., 2021 ; 
Schröder et  al., 2017 ; but see Frank and McKay, 2019 ), and to 
occasionally even increase misophonia symptoms ( Schröder et al., 
2017 ). Whereas mere exposure can effectively disconfirm fearful 
expectations (e.g., strong expectation that a dog will attack, it is less 
likely to change the triggers’ associated meanings of violation, 
intrusion, lack of autonomy, and offense). Indeed, these US-like 
meanings may present themselves with each exposure to trigger 
stimuli spontaneously, with the inherent risk of strengthening the 
disabling emotional representation. Counter conditioning of specific 
meanings conveyed by trigger stimuli may therefore constitute a better 
alternative treatment strategy that also nicely complements strategies 
aimed at improving emotional regulation.
In conclusion, the presently identified meanings of violation, 
intrusion, offense and autonomy that misophonia sufferers attach to 
their triggers, help understanding why extreme anger and disgust

Ozuer et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1493676
Frontiers in Psychology 15 frontiersin.orgconstitute the core emotional reactions characterizing misophonia. 
The identification of these meanings offers opportunities to further 
fertilize a theoretical learning account of etiological mechanisms of 
misophonia, and pave the way toward more mechanism-informed 
treatment strategies.
Data availability statement
The raw data supporting the conclusions of this article will 
be made available by the authors, without undue reservation.
Ethics statement
The studies involving humans were approved by the Social and 
Societal Ethics Committee KU Leuven. The studies were conducted in 
accordance with the local legislation and institutional requirements. 
The participants provided their written informed consent to 
participate in this study.
Author contributions
YO: Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, 
Investigation, Methodology, Visualization, Writing – original draft, 
Writing – review & editing. RC: Conceptualization, Data curation, 
Funding acquisition, Investigation, Methodology, Resources, 
Supervision, Writing – review & editing. EK: Conceptualization, Data 
curation, Writing – review & editing. ID: Conceptualization, Formal 
analysis, Funding acquisition, Methodology, Project administration, 
Resources, Supervision, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & 
editing.Funding
The author(s) declare that financial support was received for the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article. Rilana Cima 
reported a relationship with Unification of Treatments and 
Interventions for Tinnitus Patients  - UNITI, European Union’s 
Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation Programme that includes: 
funding grants. Ilse Van Diest reported a relationship with 
Methusalem Grant of the Flemish Government that includes: 
funding grants.
Conflict of interest
The authors declare that the research was conducted in the 
absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
Publisher’s note
All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors 
and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, 
or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product 
that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its 
manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.
Supplementary material
The Supplementary material for this article can be found online 
at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1493676/
full#supplementary-material
References
Baeyens, F., and De Houwer, J. (1995). Evaluative conditioning is a qualitatively 
distinct form of classical conditioning: a reply to Davey (1994). Behav. Res. Ther.  33, 
825–831. doi: 10.1016/0005-7967(95)00021-o
Baeyens, F., Vansteenwegen, D., Hermans, D., and Eelen, P . (2001). “Chilled white 
wine, when all of a sudden the doorbell rings: mere reference and evaluation versus 
expectancy and preparation in human Pavlovian learning” in Advances in psychology 
research. ed. F. Columbus, vol. 4 (Hauppauge, New Y ork, USA: Nova Science Publishers), 
241–277.
Baguley, D. M., and McFerran, D. J. (2011). Textbook of tinnitus. Springer New 
Y ork, NY , USA: Springer.
Barrett, L. F. (2017). The theory of constructed emotion: an active inference account 
of interoception and categorization. Soc. Cogn. Affect. Neurosci.  12, nsw154–nsw123. 
doi: 10.1093/scan/nsw154
Berger, J. I., Gander, P . E., and Kumar, S. (2024). A social cognition perspective on 
Misophonia. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci.  379:20230257. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2023.0257
Bernstein, R. E., Angell, K. L., and Dehle, C. M. (2013). A brief course of cognitive 
behavioral therapy for the treatment of misophonia: a case example. Cogn. Behav. Ther.  
6. doi: 10.1017/s1754470x13000172
Blanchard, D. C., Hynd, A. L., Minke, K. A., Minemoto, T., and Blanchard, R. J. (2001). 
Human defensive behaviors to threat scenarios show parallels to fear- and anxiety-
related defense patterns of non-human mammals. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev.  25, 761–770. 
doi: 10.1016/s0149-7634(01)00056-2
Braun, V ., and Clarke, V . (2006). Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qual. Res. 
Psychol.  3, 77–101. doi: 10.1191/1478088706qp063oa
Braun, V ., and Clarke, V . (2019). Reflecting on reflexive thematic analysis. Qual. Res. 
Sport, Exerc. Health  11, 589–597. doi: 10.1080/2159676x.2019.1628806Braun, V ., and Clarke, V . (2022). Toward good practice in thematic analysis: avoiding 
common problems and BE(com)ing a knowing researcher. Int. J. Transgender Health  24, 
1–6. doi: 10.1080/26895269.2022.2129597
Brout, J. J., Edelstein, M., Erfanian, M., Mannino, M., Miller, L. J., Rouw, R., et al. (2018). 
Investigating Misophonia: a review of the empirical literature, clinical implications, and a 
research agenda. Front. Neurosci.  12:36. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2018.00036
Cavanna, A. E., and Seri, S. (2015). Misophonia: current perspectives. Neuropsychiatr. 
Dis. Treat.  11, 2117–2123. doi: 10.2147/ndt.s81438
Cecilione, J. L., Hitti, S. A., and Vrana, S. R. (2021). Treating adolescent Misophonia 
with cognitive behavioral therapy: considerations for including exposure. Clin. Case 
Stud.  21, 175–191. doi: 10.1177/15346501211045707
Claiborn, J. M., Dozier, T. H., Hart, S. L., and Lee, J. (2020). Self-identified misophonia 
phenomenology, impact, and clinical correlates. Psychol. Thought  13, 349–375. doi: 
10.37708/psyct.v13i2.454
Cowan, E. N., Marks, D. R., and Pinto, A. (2021). Misophonia: a psychological model 
and proposed treatment. J. Obses. Compul. Relat. Disord.  32:100691. doi: 10.1016/j.
jocrd.2021.100691
Dibb, B., and Golding, S. E. (2022). A longitudinal investigation of quality of life and 
negative emotions in misophonia. Front. Neurosci.  16:900474. doi: 10.3389/
fnins.2022.900474
Dixon, L. J., Schadegg, M. J., Clark, H. L., Sevier, C. J., Witcraft, S. M., and Wright, A. G. 
C. (2024). Prevalence, phenomenology, and impact of Misophonia in a nationally 
representative sample of U.S. adults. J. Psychopathol. Clin. Sci.  133, 403–412. doi: 
10.1037/abn0000904
Dozier, T. H. (2015a). Etiology, composition, development and maintenance of 
Misophonia: a conditioned aversive reflex disorder. Psychol. Thought  8, 114–129. doi: 
10.5964/psyct.v8i1.132

Ozuer et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1493676
Frontiers in Psychology 16 frontiersin.orgDozier, T. H. (2015b). Counterconditioning treatment for misophonia. Clin. Case 
Stud.  14, 374–387. doi: 10.1177/1534650114566924
Dumontheil, I., Apperly, I. A., and Blakemore, S. (2010). Online usage of theory of 
mind continues to develop in late adolescence. Dev. Sci.  13, 331–338. doi: 
10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00888.x
Edelstein, M., Brang, D., Rouw, R., and Ramachandran, V . S. (2013). Misophonia: 
physiological investigations and case descriptions. Front. Hum. Neurosci.  7:296. doi: 
10.3389/fnhum.2013.00296
Ferrer-Torres, A., and Giménez-Llort, L. (2022). Misophonia: a systematic review of 
current and future trends in this emerging clinical field. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health  
19:6790. doi: 10.3390/ijerph19116790
Frank, B., and McKay, D. (2019). The suitability of an inhibitory learning approach in 
exposure when habituation fails: A clinical application to Misophonia. Cognitive and 
Behavioral Practice.  26, 130–142. doi: 10.1016/j.cbpra.2018.04.003
Goodman, W . K., Price, L. H., Rasmussen, S. A., Mazure, C., Fleischmann, R. L., 
Hill, C. L., et al. (1989). The Y ale-Brown obsessive compulsive scale. I. Development, 
use, and reliability. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry  46, 1006–1011. doi: 10.1001/
archpsyc.1989.01810110048007
Gregory, J., and Foster, C. (2023). Session-by-session change in misophonia: a 
descriptive case study using intensive CBT. Cogn. Behav. Ther.  16:s1754470x23000107. 
doi: 10.1017/s1754470x23000107
Gregory, J., Graham, T., and Hayes, B. (2024). Targeting beliefs and behaviors in 
misophonia: a case series from a UK specialist psychology service. Behav. Cogn. 
Psychother.  52, 33–48. doi: 10.1017/S1352465823000462
Guzick, A. G., Cervin, M., Smith, E. E., Clinger, J., Draper, I., Goodman, W . K., 
et al. (2023). Clinical characteristics, impairment, and psychiatric morbidity in 102 
youth with misophonia. J. Affect. Disord.  324, 395–402. doi: 10.1016/j.
jad.2022.12.083
Hansen, H. A., Leber, A. B., and Saygin, Z. M. (2021). What sound sources trigger 
misophonia? Not just chewing and breathing. J. Clin. Psychol.  77, 2609–2625. doi: 
10.1002/jclp.23196
Hansen, H. A., Stefancin, P ., Leber, A. B., and Saygin, Z. M. (2022). Neural evidence 
for non-orofacial triggers in mild misophonia. Front. Neurosci.  16:880759. doi: 10.3389/
fnins.2022.880759
Herdi, O., and Yıldırım, F. (2024). Sex-specific correlations between Misophonia 
symptoms and ADHD, OCD, and autism-related traits in adolescent outpatients. Noro 
Psikiyatr. Ars.  67, 248–254. doi: 10.29399/npa.28630
Hu, N., Yuan, M., Liu, J., Coplan, R. J., and Zhou, Y . (2021). Examining reciprocal links 
between parental autonomy-support and Children’s peer preference in mainland China. 
Children  8:508. doi: 10.3390/children8060508
Iskander, S., Barahmand, U., Soni, M., Kaur, R., and Arnero, D. (2023). 
Neurological underpinnings of psychological factors distinguishing obsessive-
compulsive disorder from Misophonia. Psychiatr. Ann.  53, 570–580. doi: 
10.3928/23258160-20231106-02
Jager, I., De Koning, P ., Bost, T., Denys, D., and Vulink, N. (2020a). Misophonia: 
phenomenology, comorbidity and demographics in a large sample. PLoS One  
15:e0231390. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0231390
Jager, I. J., Vulink, N. C. C., Bergfeld, I. O., van Loon, A. J. J. M., and Denys, D. A. J. P . 
(2020b). Cognitive behavioral therapy for misophonia: a randomized clinical trial. 
Depress. Anxiety  38, 708–718. doi: 10.1002/da.23127
Jakubovski, E., Timm, J., Obeid, I., and Storch, E. A. (2022). Prevalence and clinical 
correlates of misophonia symptoms in the general population of Germany. Front. Psych.  
13:1012424. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2022.1012424
Jastreboff, M. M., and Jastreboff, P . J. (2002). Decreased sound tolerance and tinnitus 
retraining therapy (TRT). Aust. N. Z. J. Audiol.  24, 74–84. doi: 10.1375/audi.24.2.74.31105
Jastreboff, P . J., and Jastreboff, M. M. (2015). “Decreased sound tolerance” in 
Handbook of clinical neurology. Amsterdam Netherlands: Elsevier. 375–387.
Johnson, P . L., Webber, T. A., Wu, M. S., Lewin, A. B., Murphy, T. K., and Storch, E. A. 
(2013). When selective audiovisual stimuli become unbearable: a case series on pediatric 
misophonia. Neuropsychiatry  3, 569–575. doi: 10.2217/npy.13.70
Kerkhof, I., Vansteenwegen, D., Baeyens, F., and Hermans, D. (2011). 
Counterconditioning. Exp. Psychol.  58, 31–38. doi: 10.1027/1618-3169/a000063
Kumar, S., Dheerendra, P ., Erfanian, M., Benzaquén, E., Sedley, W ., Gander, P . E., et al. 
(2021). The motor basis for Misophonia. J. Neurosci.  41, 5762–5770. doi: 10.1523/
jneurosci.0261-21.2021
Kumar, S., Tansley-Hancock, O., Sedley, W ., Winston, J. S., Callaghan, M. F., Allen, M., 
et al. (2017). The brain basis for misophonia. Curr. Biol.  27, 527–533. doi: 10.1016/j.
cub.2016.12.048
Lang, P . J. (1979). A bio-informational theory of emotional imagery. Psychophysiology  
16, 495–512. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-8986.1979.tb01511.x
Lang, P . J., Kozak, M. J., Miller, G. A., Levin, D. N., and McLean, A. (1980). Emotional 
imagery: conceptual structure and pattern of Somato-visceral response. Psychophysiology  
17, 179–192. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-8986.1980.tb00133.x
Larson, M. R., and Langer, A. W . (1997). Defensive hostility and anger expression: 
relationship to additional heart rate reactivity during active coping. Psychophysiology  34, 
177–184. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-8986.1997.tb02129.xLudvik, D., Boschen, M. J., and Neumann, D. L. (2015). Effective behavioural strategies 
for reducing disgust in contamination-related OCD: A review. Clin. Psychol. Rev.  42, 
116–129. doi: 10.1016/j.cpr.2015.07.001
Mattson, S. A., D'Souza, J., Wojcik, K. D., Guzick, A. G., Goodman, W . K., and 
Storch, E. A. (2023). A systematic review of treatments for misophonia. Pers. Med. 
Psychiatry  39-40:100104. doi: 10.1016/j.pmip.2023.100104
McMahon, K., Cassiello-Robbins, C., Greenleaf, A., Guetta, R., Frazer-Abel, E., 
Kelley, L., et al. (2024). The unified protocol for transdiagnostic treatment of emotional 
disorders for misophonia: a pilot trial exploring acceptability and efficacy. Front. Psychol.  
14:1294571. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1294571
Möllmann, A., Heinrichs, N., Illies, L., Potthast, N., and Kley, H. (2023). The central 
role of symptom severity and associated characteristics for functional impairment in 
misophonia. Front. Psych.  14:1112472. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2023.1112472
Muller, D., Khemlani-Patel, S., and Neziroglu, F. (2018). Cognitive-behavioral therapy 
for an adolescent female presenting with misophonia: a case example. Clin. Case Stud.  
17, 249–258. doi: 10.1177/1534650118782650
Naylor, J., Caimino, C., Scutt, P ., Hoare, D. J., and Baguley, D. M. (2020). The 
prevalence and severity of misophonia in a UK undergraduate medical student 
population and validation of the Amsterdam Misophonia scale. Psychiatry Q.  92, 
609–619. doi: 10.1007/s11126-020-09825-3
Neacsiu, A. D., Beynel, L., Gerlus, N., LaBar, K. S., Bukhari-Parlakturk, N., and 
Rosenthal, M. Z. (2024). An experimental examination of neurostimulation and 
cognitive restructuring as potential components for misophonia interventions. J. Affect. 
Disord.  350, 274–285. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2024.01.120
Norena, A. (2024). Did Kant suffer from misophonia? Front. Psychol.  15:1242516. doi: 
10.3389/fpsyg.2024.1242516
Palumbo, D. B., Alsalman, O., De Ridder, D., Song, J. J., and Vanneste, S. (2018). 
Misophonia and potential underlying mechanisms: a perspective. Front. Psychol.  9:953. 
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.00953
Patel, N. M., Fameen, R., Shafeek, N., and Prabhu, P . (2023). Prevalence of Misophonia 
in college going students of India: a preliminary survey. Indian J. Otolaryngol. Head and 
Neck Surg.  75, 374–378. doi: 10.1007/s12070-022-03266-z
Potgieter, I., MacDonald, C., Partridge, L., Cima, R., Sheldrake, J., and Hoare, D. J. 
(2019). Misophonia: a scoping review of research. J. Clin. Psychol.  75, 1203–1218. doi: 
10.1002/jclp.22771
Rosenthal, M. Z., Altimus, C., and Campbell, J. (2023). Advances in understanding 
the nature and features of Misophonia. Front. Res. Top.  17. doi: 
10.3389/978-2-8325-3567-7
Rouw, R., and Erfanian, M. (2018). A large-scale study of misophonia. J. Clin. Psychol.  
74, 453–479. doi: 10.1002/jclp.22500
Russell, P . S., and Giner-Sorolla, R. (2011). Social justifications for moral emotions: 
when reasons for disgust are less elaborated than for anger. Emotion  11, 637–646. doi: 
10.1037/a0022600
Schröder, A., Vulink, N., and Denys, D. (2013). Misophonia: diagnostic criteria for a 
new psychiatric disorder. PLoS One  8:e54706. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0054706
Schröder, A. E., Vulink, N. C., Van Loon, A. J., and Denys, D. A. (2017). Cognitive 
behavioral therapy is effective in misophonia: an open trial. J. Affect. Disord.  217, 
289–294. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2017.04.017
Siegel, A., and Victoroff, J. (2009). Understanding human aggression: new insights 
from neuroscience. Int. J. Law Psychiatry  32, 209–215. doi: 10.1016/j.ijlp.2009.06.001
Siepsiak, M., Śliwerski, A., and Dragan, W . Ł. (2020). Development and psychometric 
properties of MisoQuest—a new self-report questionnaire for Misophonia. Int. J. 
Environ. Res. Public Health  17:1797. doi: 10.3390/ijerph17051797
Siepsiak, M., Turek, A., Michałowska, M., Gambin, M., and Dragan, W . Ł. (2023). 
Child psychiatry and human development, risk factors, psychiatric and psychological 
correlates. Springer: Springer New Y ork, NY , USA.
Swedo, S. E., Baguley, D. M., Denys, D., Dixon, L. J., Erfanian, M., Fioretti, A., et al. 
(2022). Consensus definition of Misophonia: a Delphi study. Front. Neurosci.  16:841816. 
doi: 10.3389/fnins.2022.841816
Taylor, S. (2017). Misophonia: a new mental disorder? Med. Hypotheses  103, 109–117. 
doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2017.05.003
Vitoratou, S., Hayes, C., Uglik-Marucha, N., Pearson, O., Graham, T., and Gregory, J. 
(2023). Misophonia in the UK: prevalence and norms from the S-five in a UK 
representative sample. PLoS One  18:e0282777. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0282777
Wang, Q., Vitoratou, S., Uglik-Marucha, N., and Gregory, J. (2022). Emotion processes 
predicting outbursts and functional impact in Misophonia. Front. Psychol.  13:903142. 
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.903142
Warschburger, P ., Gmeiner, M. S., Bondü, R., Klein, A. M., Busching, R., and Elsner, B. 
(2023). Self-regulation as a resource for coping with developmental challenges during 
middle childhood and adolescence: the prospective longitudinal PIERYOUTH-study. 
BMC Psychol.  11:97. doi: 10.1186/s40359-023-01140-3
Wu, M. S., Lewin, A. B., Murphy, T. K., and Storch, E. A. (2014). Misophonia: 
incidence, phenomenology, and clinical correlates in an undergraduate student sample. 
J. Clin. Psychol.  70, 994–1007. doi: 10.1002/jclp.22098
Y oung, K., Sandman, C., and Craske, M. (2019). Positive and negative emotion 
regulation in adolescence: links to anxiety and depression. Brain Sci.  9:76. doi: 10.3390/
brainsci9040076