See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/346469309

## The Role of Sentience in the Theory of Consciousness and Medical Practice

## The Role of Sentience in the Theory of Consciousness and Medical Practice

## Alfredo Pereira Jr.

Abstract: In this target paper, I focus on the concept of sentience in relation to the theory of consciousness  and  to  practice  in  the  medical  sciences,  neurology  and  psychiatry,  regarding both diagnostics and therapy. Following authors in this field, I distinguish two modalities of consciousness:  sentience,  in  the  sense  of  being  awake  and  capable  of  feeling  (e.g.,  basic sensations of hunger and thirst, pain) and, second, cognitive consciousness,  in the sense of thinking and  elaborating  on  linguistic and  imagery  representations.  The  physiological correlates of sentience are proposed to be the systems underpinning the  dynamic control of biochemical homeostasis, while the correlates of cognitive consciousness are considered to be patterns of bioelectrical activity in neural networks. I claim that sentience needs to be taken in account,  if  better  tools  are  to  be  developed  for  medical  diagnostics  (e.g.,  by  identifying biochemical  markers)  and  therapy (e.g., using new  pharmacological  drugs  and  brain stimulation technologies targeting the correlates of sentience). The main hypothesis presented here to support this claim is that cognitive consciousness depends on sentience, but not viceversa,  implying  that  medical  practice  should  also  address  the  physiological  correlates  of sentience in the diagnostics and therapy of disorders of consciousness.

Key  Words: Sentience,  Consciousness,  Glial  Cells,  Neurology,  Psychiatry,  Homeostasis, Allostasis.

## Introduction

Theories of consciousness have attracted widespread interdisciplinary attention, aimed at delivering developments and practical applications in several fields, including neurological rehabilitation, mental disorders therapy, decision making -in economics, and artificial intelligence.  A  recent  manifesto  signed  by  58  researchers  (Michel  et  al.,  2019)  reviewed challenges  for  the  application  of  theories  of  consciousness  to  the  medical  area,  where  new therapies - such as transcranial Direct Current Stimulation (tDCS) - have presented positive results which existing theories cannot fully explain. The authors call for 'the recognition of consciousness science  as an indispensable  area of biomedical research…Achieving a better

understanding  of  consciousness  is  critical  to  multiple  medical,  scientific,  legal,  and  ethical issues, such as the detection of consciousness in anesthetized or non-communicating patients, infants, other animals, and machines; epilepsy seizure classification; the measurement of wellbeing and happiness; and the assessment of moral responsibility' (Michel et al., 2019, p. 1).

In  the  same  direction,  Adrian  Owen,  one  of  the  pioneers  in  researching  Prolonged Disorders of Consciousness, asked in a recent conference in this area: 'What does it mean to be  awake,  but  entirely  unable  to  respond,  and  what  can  this  tell  us  about  consciousness itself?'  (Owen,  2019,  p.  6).  He  reported  the  use  of  imaging  technologies  'to  detect  covert conscious awareness  in patients who  are  behaviourally entirely non-responsive  (e.g., vegetative,  comatose)  and  even  to  allow  some  of  these  individuals  to  communicate  their wishes and thoughts' (Owen, 2019, p. 6).

Owen´s  focus,  in  his  outstanding  medical  work,  was  on  'higher  level'  cognitive consciousness (e.g., higher functions involving symbolic language) but - here I claim - the understanding of the 'lower level' processing underpinning sentience (as, for example, the susceptibility to feeling pain in the presence of noxious stimulation) could be equally useful for medical diagnosis and therapy. The existence of 'two awareness networks', one related to arousal and glucose metabolism, and the other to cognitive representations of the environment,  was  mentioned  by  Laureys  (2019)  in  the  same  conference.  Seth  (2019) expanded the conceptualization of consciousness to require three categories: Level (corresponding to arousal), Content (corresponding to cognitive representation), and Self (a third category, about the person being interoceptively aware of herself).

In this paper, I focus on the conceptual relation of sentience and  cognitive consciousness,  arguing  for  their  different  physiological  correlates  and  the  relevance  of considering sentience in medical practice. The main hypothesis is that cognitive consciousness depends  on  sentience ,  implying  that  more  attention  should  be  given  to  the neural correlates of sentience in medical diagnostics and therapy. The minimal requirement for considering a person minimally conscious is, according to this line of reasoning, if she can feel basic  sensations  such  as  hunger,  thirst  and  pain.  The  capacity  of  feeling  is  here conceived  as  closely  related  to  the  capacity  of  dynamically  controlling  the  physiological processes of homeostasis.

Higher-­level  capacities  related  to  connectivity  patterns  of  bioelectrical  neuronal -activity  in  the  neocortex,  such  as  verbal  or  imagery  thinking,  the  retrieval  of  episodic

memories  and  action  planning  (e.g.,  imagining  playing  tennis,  a  technique  for  assessing residual consciousness in vegetative states; Owen et al., 2006), may not be adequate as a general standard for medical diagnosis of prolonged disorders of consciousness, since according  to  the  proposed  reasoning  -  in  many  cases  the  person  may  not  be  able  to perform these tasks but still be able to consciously experiencing basic sensations. Taking general anesthesia as an example, if the main criterion is not being able to feel pain, the goal of the procedure would be broader than the loss of cognitive consciousness. In some cases,  the  neural  correlates  of  cognitive  representations  may  not  be  the  main  target  of treatment, since they correspond to a high-level specific ability that is not necessary for lower level sentient experiences, which also deserve attention for proper medical and also bioethical reasons.

## Conceptual Issues

The  concepts  of  sentience  and  cognitive  consciousness,  as  well  as  related concepts, such as affect , feeling and qualia , have been approached historically in several different ways, resulting in their semantic ambiguity. Before embarking on the translational endeavour of relating these concepts to medical procedures, some clarifications and elaborations on how the concepts are used here is needed.

According  to  the  Merriam  Webster  Dictionary,  the  term sentience refers  to 'feeling or sensation as distinguished from perception and thought' (https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/sentience). This concept of sentience can be  understood  as potential consciousness:  the capacity to  feel  (proprioceptive  and exteroceptive sensations, emotional feelings) and to have qualitative experiences, while cognitive consciousness refers to the actual experience of thinking with mental representations. This concept of 'cognitive consciousness' stems from Baars (1988, republished  in  Baars, 2019)  and  relates  to 'resonating'  neocortical activations in the Dynamical Global Workspace that processes conscious information.

In  affective  neuroscience, sentience refers  to  the affective  drive that makes us conscious.  Conscious  affective  experiences  as  pre-reflexive  or  vague  sensations  and emotions are classified as 'anoetic consciousness' (see discussion in Almada et al., 2013; Panksepp, 2005; 2010; Vandekerckhove and Panksepp, 2009), while cognitive consciousness is  conceived  within  the  'noetic'  and  'self-noetic'  types  of  consciousness

('self-noetic' when the object of knowledge is the conscious system itself). Sentience can also be conceived as co-extensive to the (Freudian) 'unconscious', and similar to a family of  concepts  mentioned  by  consciousness  theorists,  such  as  Primary  Consciousness (Edelman,  2004)  or  the  'pre-conscious'  domain  referred  to  by  Velmans  (2002)  and Dehaene et al. (2006).

The term 'sentience' has been mostly used in studies about animal consciousness. Animal  sentience has  been  defined  as  'the minimal  capacity (italics  by  APJ)  to  have subjective experience of the qualities associated with external and internal sensations, as well  as  affective  and  motivational  states  for  phenomenal  consciousness'  (Allen  and Trestman,  2016).  According  to  this  definition,  sentience  is  not  identified  with  full conscious activity,  but  with  a  'minimal  capacity'  that  is  manifested  in  different  forms and to different degrees in different biological species, including ourselves.

The  usage  of  a  variety  of  concepts about  sentience  begins  in  Spinoza's Ethics and remains in the contemporary approaches of Panksepp (1998) and Damásio (1999). According to Spinoza, 'Between appetite and desire there is no difference, except that desire is generally related  to  men  insofar  as  they  are  conscious  of  the  appetite.  So  desire  can  be  defined  as appetite  together  with  consciousness  of  the  appetite'  (Spinoza,  Ethics,  III  Proposition  9, Scholium). In this approach, not only the appetite but all types of 'striving' (Le Buffe, 2015) are  related  to  a  general  condition,  the conatus , that  corresponds  to  the  affective  drive belonging  to  the  domain  of  sentience.  In  the  above  quotation,  the  'desire'  is  an  actual conscious  experience  (an  emotional  state  directed  to  an  object  of  thought)  in  which  the appetite is expressed. For instance, hunger is a type of 'appetite', while the 'desire' of eating, e.g.  bread  with  cheese  and  ham,  is  the  conscious  expression  of  the  'appetite'  directed  to  a cognitive object of thought (the sandwich).

Following Spinoza's distinction, I use sentience to  refer  to  the capacity of feeling ,  a dispositional state that contains a range of potentialities, of which only a subset is made actual at  each  moment  in  the  consciousness  of  a  person,  depending  on  her  interaction  with  the physical  and  social  environment.  Where  and  when  there  is  attunement  of  the  internal disposition  with  the  external  affordance,  then  a  specific  conscious  cognitive  or  emotional content is determined; in other words, the cognitive or emotional content is not determined by the  affective  drive  alone.  This  distinction  is  important  for  scientific  approaches,  because scientists can measure physiological dynamic patterns underpinning the sentient capacity but cannot measure conscious experience (including the qualitative states qualia -  attached to

mental  representations).  Information  about  first-person  conscious  experiences  depends  on verbal or non-verbal reports by the conscious subjects, to be interpreted by the scientist, on the basis of her first-person perspective. Therefore, the study of sentience is within the 'Easy Problems' conceived by Chalmers (1995), while explaining  full consciousness is the 'Hard Problem'.

In Phenomenology, sentience implies only the existence of a ' here-and-nowness ' (the term 'nowness' was used by Nunn, 2016) or a presence (Seth et al., 2012) that is able to feel , but without the structured experiences that we  find in full conscious episodes. In Neuroscience, 'feeling' (in the sense of the term 'sentience', as used here) was recently the object of a multi-author review, in which they added the qualification 'physiological' (PaceShott et al., 2019). Physiological feeling processes refer to the physiological correlates of the sentience capacity -  such as the interoceptive loops between the central nervous system and the  whole  body  interacting  with  the  environment  -  that result in  conscious  cognitive  and emotional contents. The authors arrived at the conclusion: 'changes toward and away from homeostasis, not only  within the autonomic nervous system but in  all systems of the body (e.g.,  metabolic,  cardiovascular,  immune),  contribute  interoceptive  information  to  the  CNS. The integrated output of multiple physiological systems may provide highly complex inputs to  central  mechanisms  that produce (italics  by  APJ)  the  conscious  experience  of  feelings, moods and emotions' (Pace-Shott et al., 2019, p. 294). In regard to my previous example of eating bread with cheese and ham, 'physiological feelings' correspond to the affective drive (the  'appetite'  to  eat)  while  'conscious  experience'  corresponds  to  the  actual  conscious experience;  in  the  previous  example,  eating  the  sandwich  (with  pleasure,  by  carnivorous persons, while for vegans the ham is disgusting).

It is also important to note that 'physiological feeling', or physiological correlates of sentience , in  this  context,  are not  identical to homeostasis but  relate  to the  reaction  or response of  living  systems  to changes in  homeostasis  caused  by  sensory  stimuli  or  other perturbations. The reaction of  the system leads to the formation of consciously experienced contents . My  hypothesis  is  that  conscious  cognitive  and  emotional  experiences  are  the expression of a type of temporal process in which:

- 1) There is a deviation from homeostasis caused by an internal or external stimulus,

- 2)  There  is  a  reaction  of  the  system  to  this  deviation,  on  the  basis  of  a  capacity  to recover  homeostasis  ('allostasis'). This  reaction  is  the  affective  drive that  is  typical  of sentience;
- 3)  The  reaction produces consciously  experienced qualia (sensations,  affective  and emotional states), which may be anoetic or noetic . Cognitive consciousness includes a quale called 'the feeling of knowing' (Burton, 2008);
- 4)  The  conscious  experience  motivated  by  the  above  reaction  triggers  a  process  of thinking  with  mental  representations  that  we  call cognitive  consciousness , allowing  the projection of  representations  supporting  adaptive  actions  of  the  agent  (the  'self')  in  the environment (the 'world').

While  the  complexity  of  the  concept  of  feeling  has  gone  almost  unnoticed  in consciousness  studies,  the  very  concept  of  consciousness  has  been  discussed  intensive  and extensively,  with  a  small  contribution  from  this  author  on  definitional  and  taxonomic approaches (Pereira Jr and Ricke, 2009; Pereira Jr. et al, 2010).

The  construction  of  the  'phenomenal'  domain  of  conscious  experiences,  departing from the 'cognitive consciousness' model, was developed with the 'theater' metaphor (Baars, 1997, partially reviewed in Baars, 2019). Another approach to phenomenal consciousness was constructed from the combination of Phenomenology and Neuroscience, in the Neurophenomenological approach.  According  to  one  of  the  branches  of  this  approach,  the Projective Theory (Velmans, 1990, 1993) re-elaborated by this author (Pereira Jr., 2018), the phenomenal  domain  involves  temporal  episodes  in  a  egocentric  space  structure  with qualitative  states  ( qualia ), and  structured  on  two  projected  'poles',  called Noetic and Noematic by  Husserl,  and  renamed the Sense  of  Self and the Sense  of  World (Pereira  Jr., 2018). The use of 'Noetic' here is the same of Panksepp and colleagues.

In Pereira Jr. (2018), the Sense of Self is generated within the conscious experience; the Sense of Self is the concept of  the  entity  (the  'experiencer') who feels and acts on the World.  The  Sense  of  World  is  composed  of  cognitive  representations  motivated  by  -  and attended according to - the affective drive, and then 'projected' to the world of action. The projection of the two poles by the nervous system, interacting with the environment, forms complex spatiotemporal episodes filled  with qualia .  These qualia are composed not only of the  cognitive  representations  themselves  (in  the  previous  example,  the  conceptualization  of the  properties  of  a  sandwich)  but  also  of  the expression of  the  affective  drive:  the  actual

sensations,  affective  states  and  emotional  feelings  that  guide  the  appraisal  of  the  cognitive object (the ham is tasteful for the carnivorous, and disgusting for the vegan).

According  to  my  approach  (Pereira  Jr.et  al,  2017),  the  formation  of  full  conscious episodes  requires  cognitive  and  enactive  operations,  such  as  the  binding  of  features  and decision-making. Sentience refers to the unstructured 'here-and-nowness' with many potential outcomes, while cognitive consciousness refers to structured conscious episodes with a Sense of  Self  and  a  Sense  of  World,  and  filled  with  representations  having  qualitative  properties ( qualia ).  The  consciously  experienced  qualities  ( qualia ;  e.g.  perceptual  multimodal  scenes) are properties of the World in the first-person perspective of the Self. For instance, my feeling of tooth pain is a property of the world as it is sensed by me; in this case, the 'world' includes parts  of  my  body  and  everything  else  that  I  am  conscious  of,  except  my  inner  Self  who experiences them.

On  a  side  comment,  I  note  that  the  above  concept  of  cognitive  consciousness  is contextual or 'embedded', because the projection of the Self and the World require the 'hereand-nowness' being to be able to 'feel what happens' (Damásio´s expression) in the domain of interaction with the environment, co-generating cognitive contents by means of perceptual processes,  and/or  representing  possible  worlds  on  the  basis  of  memories  of  previous experiences. This view overcomes the controversy of Internalism against Externalism in  the Philosophy of Mind (reviewed in Wilson, 2017).

On  the  basis  of  the  above  clarifications  and  conceptual  elaborations,  in  the  next section  I  address  the  physiological  correlates  of  sentience,  preparing  the  terrain  for  the proposal formulated in the following sections.

## Psychophysiology of Sentience

Recent progress in neurobiological research has pointed to the following operational structure of Sentience in the animal brain:

Stimulation-&gt;  Sensory  processing  in  neurons-&gt;  Activation  of  the  astrocyte  network  -&gt; Control of the homeostasis of the extracellular 'Chemical Soup'-&gt; Physiological Feelings (Sentience) -&gt; Feedback on the neuronal network-&gt; Behavior.

This  dynamics  of  sentience  is  adaptive,  not  restricted  to  the  Central  Nervous System (CNS), but composed of whole-body interoceptive cycles that involve, in the

human species, the enteric and cardiac nervous systems (Azzalini et al., 2019) with their inputs from and outputs to the CNS, and active striate muscles with kinesthetic sensors. Somatic Marker Theory (Damásio, 1994) and the Adaptive Homeostasis Theory (Shin et al., 2009) refer to whole body -processes activated in the interaction with the environment.  These  theories  contrast  with  the  traditional  Cannon-Bard  view  of  neural regulation  of  body-energy  homeostasis,  which  is  focused  on  internal  feedback  signals integrated in the hypothalamus and brainstem (Shin et al., 2009). In the broader approach of  Shin  et  al.  (2009)  to  energy  homeostasis,  besides  the  activation  of  behavioral, autonomic, and endocrine pathways, 'these internal signals encoding energy status have much  wider  effects  on  the  brain,  particularly  sensory  and  cortico limbic  systems  that -process  information  from  the  outside  world  by  detecting  and  interpreting  food  cues, forming,  storing,  and  recalling  representations  of  experience  with  food,  and  assigning hedonic and motivational value' (Shin et al., 2009). Agreeing with this statement, I also claim that sentience is not limited to subcortical structures, or to neocortical structures; rather it involves cycles of homeostatic control in the whole neural tissue, by means of an action on the 'chemical soup' in which it is bathed (considering that in current usage by biologists 'neural' refers to the whole tissue formed by both neuronal and glial cells, also including the extracellular fluid and matrix).

Central to the control of homeostasis, in plants and animals, is the role of ionic waves. They are generated by changes in electrochemical brain activity, and feedback on the activity (see Busikla et al., 2019). Although plants do not have specialized neuronal or glial cells, they display similar adaptive homeostatic mechanisms: glutamate-induced calcium waves around the xylem and phloem (Toyota et al., 2018). These waves compose the 'plant neural system' that controls adaptive processes.

The  control  of homeostasis  in  animals,  generating  'physiological feelings', involves a large signaling network, which includes interoceptive somatic loops by means of blood flow signaling, as indicated in Figure 1.

Figure 1: Physiology of Sentience in Neural Tissues. The 'Chemical Soup' includes Ions, Water, Transmitters, Neuromodulators, Hormones, Neuropeptides and the Extracellular Matrix. The homeostasis of the Extracellular Chemical Soup is controlled by the Ionic Waves. Allostasis occurs in the domain of the dynamical rapport of  these two subsystems integrating signals from the whole circuits. Legend: a) Green: Structures and functions involved in basic processes of sentience, common to all multicellular living systems and colonies of unicellular living beings; b)  Orange:  Structures  and  processes involved  in  sentient  processes  proper  to  animals,  based  on  blood  flow  interoceptive looping, and c) Blue:  Structures  and  processes involved  in  cognitive  processes based on neuromuscular loops and - in the human species - the capacity for inhibitory control of the epigenetic affective drive by neocortical circuits. Original figure made by APJ.

My  concept of 'sentience', resulting from such structural and functional considerations, has strong psychophysiological foundations, formulated in four statements below:

1) Sentience is a type of dynamics in living tissues. The process has three phases: basal homeostasis (a stable state), the deviation from homeostasis caused by external or internal stimuli, and the recovery of homeostasis (called  'allostasis'; see Copstead and Banasik, 2013  and  Pace-Shott  et al., 2019). Sentience is not identical to basal homeostasis, neither to the recovery of homeostasis; rather sentience is the capacity of controlling  the  system  to  promote  the  recovery  of  homeostasis,  or,  in  other  words, sentience is the capacity of allostasis ;

2) For evolutionary adaptive reasons, the exercise of the sentient capacity, besides its  functional  roles, also  generates  conscious  feelings .  Following  Baldwin  (1896),  I

propose that sentience  and the resulting  conscious feelings  of  pleasure  and  pain  guide adaptive behavior in response to changes in the body and environment. For instance, the experience of pain protects us from aggravating an injury, and the experience of pleasure guide  us  towards  survival  and  reproductive  behaviors.  Cannon  (1915)  further  related emotion  to  the  action  of  chemicals  that  control  homeostasis  in  neural  tissue  (e.g. noradrenaline).  Giving  an  example,  I  mention  thirst  and  satiation  (Saker  et  al.,  2014). Decrease  of  water  concentrations  in  the  body  and  proportional  increase  of  salt  in  the blood leads to signaling to neural tissue that generates the thirst sensation, which guides the system to drinking behaviors and then the recovery of water-salt homeostasis. The ingestion of water up to satiation is accompanied by a pleasant conscious experience;

3)  Ions  are  the  vehicle  for  (biochemical)  allostasis  in  neural  tissue  (and  other tissues),  as  reviewed  by  Rasmussen  et  al.  (2020):  'interstitial  cations  (K+,  Ca2+  and Mg2+) are not static quantities but change dynamically across states such as sleep and locomotion…these state-dependent changes are capable of sculpting  neuronal activity; for example, changing the local interstitial ion composition in the cortex is sufficient for modulating the prevalence of slow-frequency  neuronal  oscillations,  or  potentiating  the gain of visually evoked responses… the brain uses interstitial ion signaling as a global mechanism  to  coordinate  its  complex  activity  patterns,  and  ion  homeostasis  failure contributes to central nervous system diseases affecting cognitive functions and behavior' (Rasmussen et al., 2020);

4) Astrocyte transporters, astrocyte ionic (Ca+/Na+) intracellular waves and their extracellular effects (on  K+  concentrations,  Glu,  GABA,  and  others)  compose  a mechanism that controls brain tissue homeostasis (Verkhratsky and Nedergaard, 2019). The release of calcium ions from the endoplasmic reticulum of astrocytes is central to the formation  of  these  waves.  The  concept  of Hydro-Ionic  Waves (Pereira  Jr.,  2017)  was proposed as an explanatory mechanism for the formation and propagation of bioelectric waves in neural tissues, corresponding to a psychophysiological substrate of sentience.

Although it is well known that the triggering of some sensations and feelings is made by specialized structures  -  e.g.  fear  is  related  to  the  activation  of  the  amygdala (LeDoux, 2000), and pain to the activation of parts of the insula (Isnard et al., 2011) the four above statements imply a systemic effect, involving neuro-astroglial signaling networks  and  ionic  waves  crossing  living  tissues.  In  the  next  sections,  the  above

scientific  concepts  of  sentience  and  physiological  substrates  are  applied  to  practical issues in Neurology and Psychiatry.

## Sentience in Neurology

The distinction between sentience and cognitive consciousness, beyond conceptual issues and semantical and terminological implications, has important scientific and practical implications for Neurology. In the previous section I have briefly reviewed recent results in Physiology that support the claim that sentience relates to the control of chemical homeostasis, promoting allostasis (the recovery of homeostasis after perturbations).  In  this  section,  I  suggest  several  applications  of  this  knowledge  in Neurology.

When  we  are  awake  and  sentient,  physiological  mechanisms  such  as  glial transporters and calcium waves control chemical homeostasis, making available substances  like  lactate,  glutamate,  noradrenaline,  acetylcholine,  dopamine,  serotonin, neuropeptides  and  many  others,  in  concentrations  that  allow  dynamic  responses  to stimulation. The state of this complex biochemical system is critical for the possibility of formation of bioelectrical patterns necessary for conscious experience, as the synchronization of neuronal activity following a proportional distribution of EEG wave frequencies. For instance, the dominance of delta waves is typical of unconscious states in deep sleep, while a combination of faster rhythms and amplitude modulation in time as revealed by event-related potentials - is typical of conscious states (Pereira Jr. et al., 2017).

As the proper correlates of consciousness extend beyond the most basic correlates of  sentience,  the  former  cannot  be  taken  as  a  general  parameter  for  the  detection  and intervention  on  the  latter. A  major  concern  of  medical  procedures  during  general anesthesia, palliative care and clinical interventions to improve the quality of life is if the person being treated can feel pain in the presence of a noxious stimulus. The capacity of the  person  to  feel  pain,  even  if  there  is  no  noxious  stimulus  (and  she  is  not  consciously experiencing pain) belongs to sentience, while the cognitive and emotional experiences of actually  feeling  pain  belong  to  the  'phenomenal'  domain  of  consciousness.  In  the  same vein, the capacity to feel hunger - if there is a lack of food - or to feel thirst - if there is a

lack of water - indicates that the person is sentient, while actually experiencing the qualia of some food or drink belongs to conscious experience.

Additionally, if  the  object  of  experience  is  cognitively represented,  it  is  a  case  of noetic or  cognitive  consciousness.  If  it  is not cognitively  represented,  as  in  the  case  of vague feelings or emotions, then we have an instance of anoetic consciousness, but once we  give  a  name  to  the  feeling  or  emotion,  it  becomes  a  posteriori -  attached  to  a representation.  This  philosophical  issue  is  relevant  for  Neurology  in  situations  when  a person is asked  to  describe  what  she  felt  during  a  surgery under  general  anesthesia.  She may give a cognitive report, naming her sensations, on the basis of the memory that was formed and retrieved, although she had no cognitive representation of the feelings at  the occasion she experienced them.

The  representation  of  the  object  of  experience  (e.g.  bread  with  cheese  and  ham) belongs  to  the  narrow  branch  of  experience  called  'cognitive  consciousness'.  This  highorder phenomenon cannot be taken as the general standard for neurological diagnostic and treatment, because  it covers  only  part  of the physiological  processes  of  conscious experience. Taking sentience as the most basic capacity necessary for conscious experience allows a broader medical approach to the physiological processes that make consciousness possible.

General anaesthesia is often characterized as a loss of (cognitive) consciousness , for example, as the incapacity of forming memories of pain during a surgery. However, if the main  criterion  is  not  being  capable  of feeling  pain ,  then  its  effects  extend  beyond  the absence of cognitive conscious experience of the medical event (e.g., invasive surgery) and episodic memory about what happened during the event. In other words, the goal of general anesthesia  -  abolishing  for  some  time,  during  a  surgery,  the  capacity  of  feeling  pain  would be broader and  more important  than  the  absence  of  cognitive  consciousness;  'not being able to feel pain' in the presence of a strong noxious stimulation implies not only the absence  of  cognitive  representations  of  the  pain,  but the  absence  of  any  conscious  pain sensation or emotion .

An important finding in regard to the physiological correlates of general anaesthesia and the corresponding loss of sentience is the role of glial cells in continuous transmission of hydro-ionic waves in neural tissue. Most researchers agree that cognitive consciousness in  human  neurobiology  involves  neocortical  circuits  of  spiking  neurons;  however,  the

action  of  three  common  anaesthetics  is  mostly  on  glial  cells,  specifically  the  astrocytes (Thrane et al., 2012). An additional finding implying that sentience is a tissue phenomenon relatively independent of the neuronal spiking is the discovery that tissue electromagnetic waves related to sentience can propagate without neuronal axonal transmission, pointing to the  involvement  of  the  astrocyte  network  (Chiang  et  al.,  2019;  Martinez-Banaclocha, 2020).

Astroglial dysfunction, such as the defective propagation of ionic waves, implies the incapacity to control the deviations from basal homeostasis towards recovering stability or, in other  words,  the  incapacity  for  allostasis  -  corresponding,  in  the  theoretical framework introduced here to a loss of sentience. The , astrocytic syncytium is the network composed by large populations of astrocytes inter-connected by gap junctions, forming a continuum 'master hub' in which ionic waves propagate (Pereira Jr. and Furlan, 2010). The isopotentiality of the astrocytic syncytium, allowing the flow of ions in all directions upon local stimulation, is crucial for allostasis (Ma et al., 2016; Kiyoshi et al., 2018). If the flow is not isopotential, the consequence is that some parts of the brain are not integrated in the allostatic  process,  while  other  parts  are  overloaded. Considering  the  central  role  of astrocytes  in  brain  allostasis,  Verkhratsky  et  al.  (2016)  concluded  for  'the  pathogenic potential of astrocytes in a variety of disorders, ranging from neurotrauma, infection, toxic damage, stroke, epilepsy, neurodevelopmental, neurodegenerative and psychiatric disorders, Alexander disease to neoplastic changes seen in gliomas'.

One important neurobiological feature of energy usage in the brain is the fact that the glucose carried in arterial blood flow is mostly delivered to astrocytes, not directly to neurons. Astroglial cells process glucose from the blood into the 'lactate shuttle' (Pellerin et  al.,  1998;  2007)  and  deliver  the  product  (the  lactate)  to  neurons,  where  it  is  further processed into ATP and cyclical AMP, for consumption in cellular metabolism and in the dynamic  control  of  homeostasis.  This  astroglial  function  is  central  to  the  differential circadian cycle delivery of energy to neurons, corresponding to the functional distinction of non-dreaming sleep and wakefulness. Research on neuron-astrocyte interactions in the last two  decades  has  produced  experimental  evidence  that  the  lactate  that  circulates  in  the extracellular milieu and reaches neurons (Petit and Magistretti, 2006) supports the waking state  and  related  sentience.  Considerations  about  how  useful  energy  is  processed  in  the brain  and  used  to  reduce  thermodynamic  entropy  are  central  to  the  understanding  of  the psychophysiological states of sleeping and dreaming (Hobson and Friston, 2012). The role

of  astrocytes  in  energy  metabolism  is  part  of  a  larger  process  of  energy  consumption related  to  neurological  recovery  (Stender  et  al.,  2016).  According  to  Bojarskaitė  et  al. (2020), calcium signaling in astrocytes is 'sleep-wake state specific', which suggests that the lactate shuttle and the resulting amplitude-increased calcium waves (up to a threshold, beyond which an epileptic seizure may happen) can be taken together as a biomarker for sentience. Ingiosi  et  al.  (2020)  registered  changes  in  astroglial  calcium  waves  in  REM, Non-REM  sleep  and  wakefulness,  showing  (in  three  videos) a  sharp  increase  in  the amplitude and synchronization of the waves in the sleep-wakefulness transition.

In  the  transition  from  sleep  to  wakefulness,  there  is  a  sharp  rise  on  the amplitude (vibrational kinetic energy) of calcium waves, as shown in videos 1 and 2 of the cited paper (Ingiosi et al., 2020), making the system able to feel ( sentient ).    This  phase indicates that the system can 'feel what happens' but is not itself the correlate of a specific experienced feeling.  The  correlates  of  specific  feeling  experiences  appear  in  the  next  phases  of  the calcium  signaling  during  wakefulness,  as  in  the  case  of  conscious  tasting  experiences registered with calcium imaging using two-photon microscopy and implanted microprisms (Chen et al., 2020.)

The  above  findings  have  important  implications  for  neurological  diagnostics  and therapy. The connection between lactate, astroglial calcium waves and the control of neural homeostasis (Verkhratsky and Needergaard, 2019) is still  not well known in the medical community but opens new possibilities of intervention. For instance, lactate concentrations in  cerebrospinal fluid  (CSF) samples can be used in medical practice as a biomarker for sentience. Needergaard and colleagues found evidence for what they called the 'glympathic'  system,  composed  of  channels  for  the  circulation  of  cerebrospinal  fluid  in neural tissues, contacting glial cells in the brain. The above-mentioned 'lactate shuttle' is carried  by  this  system.  While  we  are  awake  and  sentient  there  is  an  increase  of  lactate levels  in  glympathic  pathways, while  the  lactate concentration decreases when we are in deep sleep (Lundgaard et al., 2017). This system is critical for neurological evaluation of the  capacity  of  generating  conscious  states  and  experiences,  because  a  defective  flow  of lactate in the glympathic system would impair sentience, while adequate levels of lactate during wakefulness imply that sentience is intact.

Lactate  concentrations  as  biomarkers  for  sentience  provide  a  new  technique  to measure the minimal level of activity necessary for conscious experience, for people in the 'vegetative'  state.  In  a  recent  study  the  authors  say  that  'We  are  establishing  a  biobank

(blood, cerebrospinal fluid and brain tissue, where available) to facilitate future genomic and microbiomic research to search for signatures of consciousness recovery' (Skibsted et al.,  2018).  While  there  is  a  positive  correlation  between  increase  in  lactate  concentration levels  and  sentience,  changes  in  concentration  of  other  CSF  macromolecules  (such  as melatonin and adrenaline) do not seem to be directly and specifically related to sentience but - of course - further investigations are needed to find the best combination of signals to serve  as a biomarker.  As  a  working  hypothesis,  adequate  lactate  concentrations  in 'vegetative' state patients would indicate greater probability of recovering full consciousness.

'Absence epilepsy' refers to the loss of sentience causing a loss of consciousness, determined by events in the domain of neuron-astrocyte interactions (Diaz Verdugo et al., 2019).  These  events  involve  a  defective  function  of  GABA  transporters  in  astrocytes (Crunelli et al., 2013), accompanied by an increase in calcium waves (Fellin et al., 2006) and  slow  outward  currents  of  calcium  from  astrocytes  to  neurons  (Kozlov  et  al.,  2006). These factors generate  an increase  in the  amplitude of dendritic potentials  and  in  axonal firing  rates  that  result  in  the  well-known  'spike  and  wave'  bioelectrical  phenomenon  in epilepsy  (an  increase  in  the  amplitude  in  scalp  EEG  registers,  displaying  bioelectrical peaks), clinically and experimentally measured for more than half a century. These findings have inspired the suggestion of new treatments for epilepsy (Crunelli et al., 2015) - as well as for degenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's and Parkinson's (Finsterwald et al., 2015) -targeting the astrocyte network . The rationale for these proposals is that astroglia provide far more than a supportive system for neurons, having psychophysiological functions such as supporting wakefulness, providing the control of homeostasis (or allostasis ), generating affective states experienced by the agent, and generating motivation for action.

One  of  the  major  challengers  in  neurological  therapy  is  the  suppression  of  CNS processing  of  somatic  chronic  pain.  Acupuncture  is  widely  used  for  this  purpose  but  its therapeutic  pathways  remain  controversial  (Vickers  et  al.,  2018);  possibly,  the  type  of energy  involved  in  the  procedures  interferes  with  hydro-ionic  waves  in  the  CNS.  With more explicit scientific foundations, but still poorly understood, the treatment of somatic pain with Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation (tDCE) also implies dynamic events in neural tissue. Considering that the 'chemical soup' is a bioelectrical conductive medium, the  transmission  of  a  current  from  two  distant  scalp  sites  implies  the  induction  of interferences  between  the  exogenous  electric  current  and  the  endogenous  hydro-ionic

waves. In tDCE, the part of the electric current that is not conducted by the skin or the skull is assumed to pass through the CNS tissue, moving from one scalp location to another, thus interfering  with  the  dynamic  patterns  of  ionic  waves  and  having  other  effects  (e.g.  on protein conformation) to generate the desired therapeutic results. The type of interference caused by the current is not well-known but there are good morphological and physiological  reasons  to  believe  that  the  transmission  is  not  mediated  by  neurons,  since these cells do not form a continuum; they are rather separated by synaptic clefts, in which the transmission of signals is chemical. The  transmission of bioelectrical currents exclusively by the 'chemical  soup'  would  be  not  sufficient to explain long-range directional  phenomena.  Therefore,  as  the  tDCE  current  find  ways  to  move  between (relatively) long distances through neural tissue, the most probable pathway is through the chemical  soup  reaching  the  astroglial  network  (Monai  et  al.,  2016;  Monai  and  Hirase, 2018), because these cells, contrary to neurons, are connected by gap junctions forming a continuum (Kiyoshi et al, 2020).

There  are  many  findings  about  the  application  of  tDCE  for  the  treatment  of neuropathic pain (for a review, see David et al., 2018) and somatic abdominal pain (e.g., Bayer  et  al.,  2019).  These  treatments  do  not  target  the  neocortical  specialized  circuits thought of as being the neural correlates of cognitive representations; they instead interfere with dynamic bioelectric waveforms present in neural tissue.

In  neurological  rehabilitation, targeting the  whole  neural tissue  is also implied by the  use  of  rotating  magnets  in  the  treatment  of  ischaemia  and  stroke.  The  effect  of rotating magnets on brain activity was discovered by Ross Adey in the 1950's (his work was  reviewed  by  Oransky,  2004).  Adey  tried  several  types  of  noninvasive  magnetic stimulation,  but  only  moving  magnets  caused  a  consciously  detectable  effect.  This finding was forgotten for a long time but deserves to be recalled after a research group from  the  Methodist  Hospital  in  Houston  (Texas,  USA)  found  that  powerful  rotating magnets are effective in the treatment of stroke and ischaemia (Helekar et al., 2018). The inference that can be  made is that the rotating magnets, although  possibly  not directly affecting conscious cognitive representations, do impact the structures and functions of neural tissue that support sentience, thus making possible the recovery of full conscious functions. This is not a conclusive result, but a promising new area of investigation that deserves further investigation, possibly leading to new, portable technological tools for neurological therapy that can be used at home - an advance in comparison with the big

and  heavy  coils  for  transcranial  magnetic  stimulation,  which  are  available  only  at  the specialized hospital.

Sentience, in this perspective, becomes co-extensive to arousal (Duffy, 1972), the basal  activity  referred  to  by  Seth  (2019)  as  the  lower  level  of  consciousness,  but not necessarily implying  a  'general  arousal  pattern'  of  activity,  or  a  CNS  state  devoid  of specific physiological correlates for each emotion. The latter view is proposed by theorists who  understand  that  the  specification  of  an  emotional  state  is  made  by  external  social factors. Instead of a 'general arousal pattern', I argue for the existence of different types of 'central states', corresponding to each type of consciously experienced emotional phenomenon; in other words, for every type of emotion there should be a specific dynamic electrochemical  pattern  being  instantiated  in  the  CNS.  This  relation  between  mental  and physiological states is, of course, a philosophical issue, but the conception that is assumed influences how emotional processes are interpreted and treated in medical practice.

Barrett  (2017)  has  argued,  against  the  'central  states'  view,  that  the  specificity  of emotions results from the social contexts where and when they are elicited. I agree with her about  the  relevance  of  social  interactions  for  the  generation  of  specific  emotions,  while holding  that  the affective  drive of each  species  and  individual  includes  'templates' (ontogenetic patterns) for the expression of emotions. The interaction with the environment selects which template becomes actual at each moment. For instance, the fear of scorpion is somehow hard-wired in human individuals, even those born in urban concentrations - who have never interacted with scorpions in their whole lives. The medical concept of arousal, in the perspective assumed in the theoretical framework proposed here, includes a range of specific possibilities for emotional expression, which may become actual depending on the specifics of the interaction of the agent with the social context.

Only when we are sentient, awake-and-feeling, can we be conscious of ourselves and of the world, but sentience itself is not a consciously experienced feature ; it is a hereand-nowness with a range of possibilities to be actualized and filled, in normal conditions, with cognitive and emotional conscious features related to the interaction with the physical and social environment. In abnormal conditions caused by neurological conditions, there may  be  sentient  arousal  without  the  formation  of  fully  structured  conscious  episodes . Should  the  human  person  in  this  condition  be  considered  less  valuable  or  deserving  of treatment, than in the state of elaborating on conscious cognitive representations?

## Sentience in Psychiatry

During general anaesthesia, as during coma, absence epilepsy, or, more frequently, during dreamless slow-wave sleep, there is a loss of sentience. When we are awake,  we  are  sentient  -  but  may  not  be  fully  conscious  or  may  suffer  from  mental disorders  that  affect  how  we  construct  conscious  episodes.  While  neurological  lesions and  dysfunctions  have  their  basis  in  the  impairment  or  loss  of  sentience,  disorders  of conscious  functioning  involve  other  physiological  correlates  and  corresponding  mental phenomena.  However,  as  consciousness  is  dependent  on  sentience,  changes  in  the personal ways of feeling - the individual's 'affective drive' - should have an impact on psychiatric disorders. For instance, in anxiety disorders there is a phenomenon that may metaphorically  be  conceived  of  as  a  'shrinking'  of  the here-and-nowness , possibly corresponding to a  decreased capacity to control  homeostasis. In  bipolar disorders,  the mechanism of action of lithium (which is, physically, a substitute for endogenous cations) putatively impacts the physiological correlates of sentience, facilitating the induction of allostasis by  the  astroglial  calcium  wave  (Rivera  and  Butt,  2019),  thus  reducing  the intensity of euphoric and depressive phases.

According  to  this  perspective,  disorders  of  mood  and  anxiety  are  primarily disorders of sentience. The manifestation of 'symptoms' is shaped by the personal history and cultural patterns, both of which influence how the ways of feeling are consolidated in each  person  and  then  operate  unconsciously.  As  the  mechanisms  of  sentience  are  not under direct conscious cognitive control, the treatment of disorders requires the resources of physical (e.g. magnetic stimulation) and biological (e.g. pharmacological) therapies, as well as the resources of psychodynamics and behavioral training.

Even  though  sentience  (which  is  key  to  psychiatric  symptoms)  is  not  under conscious control, it is impacted by past conscious experiences related to, for instance, religious  faith  and  socioeconomic  hardship.  It  is  primed  by  psychosomatic,  religious, spiritual, economic and political experience in complex ways that can be approached in several  branches  of  Psychology,  as  the  Jungian  concept  of  a  'collective  unconscious' (Hunt, 2012). The influence of such priming on the interplay of conscious emotions and cognition  is  central  to  all  types  of  psychiatric  disorders.  In  Freudian  psychotherapy,  the ways of sentience are classically understood as unconscious processes of the Id and  Ego that influence emotional states and behavior (Freud, 1923). The influence is more salient in

mood and anxiety disorders, but also identifiable in personality disorders and schizophrenia (for the role of glial cells in the latter, see Dietz et al., 2020).

In  the  perspective  I  have  adopted  here,  cognitive  representations  cannot  be  fully understood without considering affective  aspects of the history of the  individual and  the interplay  with  emotional  processes  (as  discussed  in  my  supplementary  paper  in  this  JCS issue  about  the dizziness I  experienced  during  a  virtual  reality  roller-coaster  ride).  These affective influences on cognition are claimed to underpin individual differences in visual and  auditory  processing.  Depending  on  the  previous  experience  and  the  motivation  of different people, the vertigo they experience during a roller-coaster ride may be strong or practically non-existent.

This proposed approach to psychiatric disorders contradicts current assumptions in Cognitive  Neuroscience,  for  which  the  brain  correlates  of  cognitive  consciousness (patterns  of  neuron  connectivity  and  firing  that  instantiate  mental  representations)  are conceived,  for  practical  purposes,  as  independent  from  the  processes  of  sentience. Cognitive representations are studied as the differential activation of neuronal circuits, or changes in neuron synaptic connectivity above a given excitatory threshold, as detected by  functional  magnetic  resonance  imaging  and  electroencephalography  registers.  This type of data is often assumed to be sufficient to explain the neural correlates of conscious cognition.  The  necessity  of  having  a  sentient  being  experiencing  the  representation  for the representation to be conscious is often neglected.

Contrasting with this assumption, in the classical concept of 'knowledge' criticized  by  Plato,  the  existence  of beliefs about  the  representation  (and  its  linguistic expression) is considered a necessary component. The belief in a proposition is a sentient motivation for human linguistic behavior. Burton (2008) has argued, on an experimental basis, that the 'feeling of knowing' is the main psychological component of a person's belief of knowing, even when what is believed is false.

The  argument  for  the  necessity  of  sentience  for  cognitive  representations  to become conscious can be formulated as follows. Any knowledge acquisition is a triadic phenomenon, composed of:

- 1) A mental representation, in the form of a statement, image or symbol;
- 2) The subject who experiences the representation as a cognitive intentional object; and
- 3) The referent, or the 'real' object the representation is about.

Assuming the below premises:

- 1) Sentience  is  constitutive  of  the being  who  elaborates  and  experiences  mental representations;
- 2) The motivation that drives attention to focus on the referent depends on the person's affective drive guiding the process; and
- 3)  There  is  no  knowledge  without  the  knowing  person  focusing  her  attention  on  the referent,

then sentience is necessary for consciousness.

On the other hand, consciousness is not necessary for sentience; the proof of this statement is in the fact that the event of changing our representations about an issue has limited  or  no  effect  on  changing  the  ontogenetic,  personal  ways  of  sentience.  For instance, becoming conscious of chemical imbalances underlying a mental disorder is not sufficient to change the physiological correlates of sentience and promote rehabilitation. The  relevance  of  sentience  in  psychiatric  treatment  implies  the  need  to  take  into consideration the problems regarding the proper functioning of  physiological correlates that impair or distort the formation of conscious cognitive and emotional experiences or interfere with the desired interaction of cognitive and emotional processes.

Assuming the validity of the above argument, the understanding of the physiology of  sentience  becomes  relevant  to  Psychiatry.  As  the  control  of  homeostasis  in  neural tissue is mediated by astrocytes (Verkhratsky and Needergaard, 2019), effective physical and  biological  therapies  for  psychiatric  disorders  should  target  the  physiology  of astrocytes. According to Kim et al. (2018), ' general findings indicate decreased astrocyte cellular features and gene expression in depression, chronic stress and anxiety'.

Therapies  targeting  astrocytes  (Peng  et  al.,  2014)  are  likely  to  complement existing therapies based on pharmacological drugs that bind to neuronal receptors, but it should also be taken into consideration that astrocytes have the same receptors and may be  activated  by  current  drugs  designed  to  target  neurons.  A  typical  case  is  ketamine, which  has  long  been  known  to  exert  a  dose-dependent  strong  effect  on  consciousness (Pereira  Jr.  and  Johnson,  2003),  generating  hallucinations  (in  low  doses)  and  general anesthesia (in higher ones). These effects are likely to be mediated by binding with both astroglial and neuronal receptors, but until recently only the latter have been focused in scientific research.

Stenovec et al. (2020) discovered a neuro-astroglial mechanism of the antidepressant  action  of  ketamine  through  the  activation  of  the  inositol  triphosphate pathway inducing astroglial calcium waves, which prompt the action of potassium ions on neuronal membranes. It is well known that neurotransmitter transporters (proteins  that carry macromolecules through membranes and/or to specific cellular compartments) are important in Biological Psychiatry (Iversen, 2006). New types of drug can be designed to target astroglial transporters  (for  their  structural  position,  see  the  diagram  of  Fig.  1), opening  the  doors  to  a  new  field  of  research  and  pharmacological  intervention:  the medical treatment of mental disorders acting on astrocytes and neuro-astroglial interactions (for a review, see Pereira Jr., 2017), as well as on other glial cells (tanycytes, microglia and oligodendrocytes - see Garcia-Caceres et al., 2019).

I  hope the line of reasoning pursued in this section leads the reader to delve further into  the  emerging field of  glial Biological  Psychiatry; for an  overview of glial cells in medicine, the reader is referred to Douglas Fields (2009).

## Concluding Remarks

The main contributions intended in this target paper are:

- 1) The conceptual distinction of sentience and cognitive consciousness;
- 2) Identifying their different neural correlates, and
- 3) Arguing for medical approaches that take sentience into consideration.

As a result of these developments, I hope to make the case that sentience could be an important operational concept in Neurology and Psychiatry.

Although  sentience  is  the  basis  for  consciousness,  philosophically  speaking  the concepts refer to two different modes of being .  Sentience is  a dispositional category,  while Consciousness is actual . Conscious contents (sensations, emotions and cognitive representations  with  qualia)  are expressions of  the  potentialities  of  sentience.  For  instance, hunger (the capacity of feeling hungry) belongs to sentience, while the experience of feeling hungry (because there is a stimulus operating - an empty gut signaling to the brain) belongs to consciousness. When we think with mental representations about the objects and processes of experience (as in the case of the desire of eating a sandwich of cheese and ham), then there is

cognitive  consciousness.  If  there  is  also  an  emotion  attached  to  the  representation  (e.g. pleasure), then there is full consciousness with both cognitive and emotional experiences.

Another difference that is relevant to Epistemology concerns the method  of investigation  of  the  related  phenomena.  On  the  one  hand,  sentience,  as  the  capacity  of controlling homeostasis with the generation of adaptive feelings, can be studied by means of biological  structures  and  functions ,  as  empirical  registers  of  ionic  waves  and  the  lactate biomarker.  On  the  other  hand,  conscious  first-person  experiences  in  episodes  containing mental  representations  and  with  attached qualia cannot  be  reduced  to  their  biological correlates,  neuron  firings  and  patterns  of  connectivity,  as  famously  claimed  by  Chalmers (1995). They can be accessed by means of qualitative reports by the subjects, but this source of information is lost or reduced in neurological and psychiatric conditions.

Distinguishing the physiological  correlates  of  sentience  and  cognitive  consciousness has important medical implications for the ways of diagnostics and treatment in medicine for patients in 'vegetative' states. The claim that the capacity of elaborating mental representations is less fundamental to the evaluation of conscious activity than the capacity for  sentience,  if  true,  could  have  a  significant  impact  in  medical  practice  and  bioethical considerations. The minimal requirement for considering a person conscious is, according to this line of reasoning, if she is capable of feeling basic sensations such as hunger, thirst and pain.  Higher-level  capacities,  such  as  imagining  playing  tennis  (a  technique  for  assessing residual  consciousness  in  vegetative  states  -  Owen  et  al.,  2006),  may  not  be  adequate  as  a general standard for medical diagnosis of disorders of consciousness, since - according to the proposed reasoning - in many cases the person may not be able to perform well in these tasks, but  still  be  capable  of  consciously  experiencing  basic  sensations  such  as  hunger,  thirst  and pain, in the presence of the corresponding endogenous or exogenous stimulation. As a result, instead of 10% of persons in a vegetative state being conscious (Monti et al., 2010), there may  be  far  more  of  them  being  sentient.  This  possibility  has  important  bioethical implications.

Focusing on sentience implies that there may be biomarkers useful for diagnosis, and new  ways  of treating disorders of sentience (such as chronic pain) and emotional consciousness (such as depression and anxiety) by means of electric and magnetic stimulation addressing the glial network. Another possibility is the development of new chemicals to be delivered  through  the  glympathic  system,  addressing  glia  instead  of  neurons.  In  sum,  the development  of  this  field  of  investigation  in  Neurology  and  Psychiatry  can  bring  new

methods for diagnosis and therapies addressing the neural correlates of sentience and its conscious - cognitive and emotional - expressions.

Acknowledgment: FAPESP  (São  Paulo  -  Brazil)  for  funding  this  research,  Devin Terhune (Goldsmiths, Univ. of London) for criticism, and to JCS editors, reviewers and invited commenters.

## References

- Allen,  C.  &amp;  Trestman,  M.  (2016)  Animal  Consciousness.  In  E.  N.  Zalta  (Ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter Edition).
- Almada L.F., Pereira Jr. and Carrara-Augustenborg C. (2013) What affective neuroscience means for a science of consciousness. Mens Sana Monogr. 11(1):253-73. doi: 10.4103/0973-1229.100409.
- Azzalini D, Rebollo I, Tallon-Baudry C. (2019) Visceral Signals Shape Brain Dynamics and Cognition. Trends Cogn Sci . 23(6): 488-509. DOI:10.1016/j.tics.2019.03.007
- Baars  B.  (1988). A  Cognitive  Theory  of  Consciousness. New  York:  Cambridge  University Press.
- Baars B. (1997). In the Theater of Consciousness: The Workspace of the Mind .  New York: Oxford University Press.

Baars, B. (2019) On Consciousness: Science and Subjectivity . New York: Nautilus Press.

- Baldwin, J.M. (1896) Consciousness and Evolution. Psychological Review 3(3), 300 309.
- Barrett,  L.  (2017)  The  theory  of  constructed  emotion:  an  active  inference  account  of interoception and categorization. Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience ,  2017, 1-23.
- Bayer, K. Neeb, L. Bayer, A. Wiese, J. Siegmund, B. and Prüß, M. (2019) Reduction of intra-abdominal  pain  through  transcranial  direct  current  stimulation:  A  systematic review. Medicine . 98. e17017. 10.1097/MD.0000000000017017.

Bojarskaitė. L et al. (2020) Ca 2+ signaling in astrocytes is sleep-wake state specific and modulates sleep. Preprint in Research Gate . DOI: 10.1101/750281

Burton, RA. (2008) On Being Certain: Believing You Are Right Even When You're Not New York City: Macmillan Publishers/St. Martin's Press.

Buskila,  Y.,  Saez,  A.B.  and  Morley,  J.W.  (2019)  Generating  Brain  Waves,  the  Power  of Astrocytes. Frontiers in Neuroscience 13, 1125. DOI: 10.3389/fnins.2019.01125

Cannon WB. (1915) Bodily Changes in Pain, Hunger, Fear and Rage. New York, NY: D. Appleton &amp; Company.

- Chalmers, DJ. (1995) Facing up to the problem of consciousness. J. Consc. Stud . 2, 200219.

| Chen, K., Kogan, J.F. and Fontanini, A, (2020) Spatially Distributed Representation of Taste Quality in the Gustatory Insular Cortex of Behaving Mice. Current Biology. Ahead of print DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2020.10.014                                                                                                  |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Chiang CC, Shivacharan RS, Wei X, Gonzalez-­Reyes - LE, Durand DM. (2019) Slow periodic activity in the longitudinal hippocampal slice can self-­ - propagate non- ­ - synaptically by a mechanism consistent with ephaptic coupling. J Physiol. 597(1): 249-­ - 269. doi: 10.1113/JP276904.                                               |
| Copstead, L-E and Banasik, J. (2013). Pathophysiology (5th ed.). St Louis, Missouri: Elsevier Saunders.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                |
| Crunelli V, Carmignoto G, Steinhäuser C. (2015) Novel astrocyte targets: new avenues for the therapeutic treatment of epilepsy. Neuroscientist 21(1): 62-83. doi: 10.1177/1073858414523320.                                                                                                                                            |
| Damásio, A. (1994) Descartes' Error: Emotion, Reason, and the Human Brain. New York: Grosset/Putnam.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| Damásio, A. (1999) The Feeling of What Happens: Body and Emotion in the Making of Consciousness . New York: Harcourt.                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| David MC, Moraes AA, Costa ML, Franco CI. (2018) Transcranial direct current stimulation in the modulation of neuropathic pain: a systematic review. Neurol Res. 40(7):555-563. doi:10.1080/01616412.2018.1453190                                                                                                                      |
| Dehaene S, Changeux JP, Naccache L, Sackur J, Sergent C. (2006) Conscious, preconscious, and subliminal processing: a testable taxonomy. Trends Cogn Sci. 10(5):204-211. doi:10.1016/j.tics.2006.03.007                                                                                                                                |
| Diaz Verdugo C, Myren-Svelstad S, Aydin E, Van Hoeymissen E, Deneubourg C, Vanderhaeghe S, Vancraeynest J, Pelgrims R, Cosacak MI, Muto A, Kizil C, Kawakami K, Jurisch-Yaksi N, Yaksi E. (2019) Glia-neuron interactions underlie state transitions to generalized seizures. Nat Commun. 10(1):3830. doi:10.1038/s41467- 019-11739-z. |
| Dietz AG, Goldman SA, Nedergaard M. (2020) Glial cells in schizophrenia: a unified hypothesis. Lancet Psychiatry 7(3):272-281. doi: 10.1016/S2215-0366(19)30302-5.                                                                                                                                                                     |
| Douglas Fields, R. (2009) The Other Brain: From dementia to schizophrenia, how new discoveries about the brain are revolutionizing medicine and science . Simon and Schuster: New York, USA                                                                                                                                            |
| Duffy, E. (1972) Activation. In: Greenfield,N.S.,Sternbach,R.A.(Eds.), Handbook of Psychophysiology . Holt, Rinehart &Winston:,New York City, NY, pp.577 -622.                                                                                                                                                                         |
| Edelman, G. (2004). Wider than the sky: The phenomenal gift of consciousness . Yale Univ Pr.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           |
| Fellin T, Gomez-Gonzalo M, Gobbo S, Carmignoto G, Haydon PG. (2006) Astrocytic glutamate is not necessary for the generation of epileptiform neuronal activity in hippocampal slices . J Neurosci 26:9312-22.                                                                                                                          |
| Finsterwald C, Magistretti PJ, Lengacher S (2015) Astrocytes: New Targets for the Treatment of Neurodegenerative Diseases. Curr Pharm Des. 21 (25): 3570-81.                                                                                                                                                                           |
| Freud S. (1923). The Ego and the Id . Standard Edn Vol. XIX. London: Hogarth.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |

García-Cáceres  C,  Balland  E,  Prevot  V,  et  al.  (2019)  Role  of  astrocytes,  microglia,  and tanycytes in brain control of systemic metabolism. Nat Neurosci. 22(1):7-14. doi:10.1038/s41593-018-0286-y

Helekar SA, Convento S, Nguyen L, John BS, Patel A, Yau JM, Voss HU. (2018) The strength  and  spread  of  the  electric  field  induced  by  transcranial  rotating  permanent magnet  stimulation  in  comparison  with      conventional      transcranial      magnetic stimulation. J Neurosci Methods 309:153-­160. -doi: 10.1016/j.jneumeth.2018.09.002.

Hobson JA, Friston KJ. (2012) Waking and dreaming consciousness: neurobiological and functional considerations. Prog Neurobiol. 98(1):82-98. doi:10.1016/j.pneurobio.2012.05.003

Hunt HT. (2012) A collective unconscious reconsidered: Jung's archetypal imagination in the light of contemporary psychology and social science. J Anal Psychol. 57(1):76-98. doi:10.1111/j.1468-5922.2011.01952.x

- Isnard J, Magnin M, Jung J, Mauguière F, Garcia-Larrea L. (2011) Does the insula tell our brain that we are in pain?. Pain 152(4): 946-951. doi:10.1016/j.pain.2010.12.025

Kim R, Healey KL, Sepulveda-Orengo MT, Reissner KJ. (2018) Astroglial correlates of neuropsychiatric disease: From astrocytopathy to astrogliosis. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 87(Pt A):126-146. doi:10.1016/j.pnpbp.2017.10.002

Kozlov AS, Angulo MC, Audinat E, Charpak S. (2006) Target cell-specific modulation of neuronal activity by astrocytes. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 103:10058-63.

LeBuffe,  M.  (2015)  "Spinoza's  Psychological  Theory", The  Stanford  Encyclopedia  of Philosophy (Spring 2015 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = &lt;https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2015/entries/spinoza-psychological/&gt;.

Lundgaard I, Lu ML, Yang E, Peng W, Mestre H, Hitomi E, Deane R, Nedergaard M. (2017) Glymphatic  clearance  controls  state-dependent  changes  in  brain  lactate  concentration. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab . 37(6):2112-2124. doi:10.1177/0271678X16661202.

Ingiosi  AM, Hayworth CR, Harvey DO, Singletary KG, Rempe MJ, Wisor JP, Frank MG. (2020) A Role for Astroglial  Calcium  in  Mammalian Sleep and Sleep Regulation. Curr Biol. S0960-9822(20)31242-2. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2020.08.052.

- Iversen  L.  (2006)  Neurotransmitter  transporters  and  their  impact  on  the  development  of psychopharmacology. Br J Pharmacol . 147 Suppl 1(Suppl 1):S82-S88. doi:10.1038/sj.bjp.0706428

Kiyoshi  CM,  Du  Y,  Zhong  S,  et  al.  (2018)  Syncytial  isopotentiality:  A  system-wide electrical feature of astrocytic networks in the brain. Glia 66(12):2756-2769. doi:10.1002/glia.23525

Laureys, S. (2019) Can Science Explain Consciousness? Lessons from coma and related states. Prolonged  Disorders  of  Consciousness Conference Abstract.  October  2019. London: HCAHealthcare.

LeBuffe, M. (2015) Spinoza's Psychological Theory. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Available at: https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/spinoza-psychological/

LeDoux  JE.  (2000)  Emotion  circuits  in  the  brain. Annu  Rev  Neurosci . 23:  155-184. doi:10.1146/annurev.neuro.23.1.155

Ma B, Buckalew R, Du Y, et al. (2016) Gap junction coupling confers isopotentiality on astrocyte syncytium. Glia 64(2):214-226. doi:10.1002/glia.22924

Martinez-Banaclocha M. (2020) Astroglial Isopotentiality and Calcium-Associated Biomagnetic  Field  Effects  on  Cortical  Neuronal  Coupling. Cells 9(2)  pii:  E439.  doi: 10.3390/cells9020439.

Michel M, Beck D, Block N, Blumenfeld H, Brown R, Carmel D, Carrasco M, Chirimuuta M, Chun M, Cleeremans A, Dehaene S, Fleming SM, Frith C, Haggard P, He BJ,  Heyes  C, Goodale    MA,    Irvine    L,    Kawato  M,  Kentridge  R,  King  JR,  Knight  RT,  Kouider  S, Lamme V, Lamy D, Lau H,  Laureys  S,  LeDoux J,  Lin    YT,    Liu    K,    Macknik    SL, Martinez-­Conde    S,    Mashour    GA,    Melloni    L,    Miracchi    L,    Mylopoulos    M, -Naccache  L,  Owen  AM,  Passingham  RE,  Pessoa  L,  Peters  MAK,  Rahnev  D,  Ro  T, Rosenthal D, Sasaki Y, Sergent  C,  Solovey  G,  Schiff  ND,  Seth  A,  Tallon-­Baudry  C, -Tamietto M, Tong F, van Gaal S, Vlassova A, Watanabe T, Weisberg J, Yan K, Yoshida M.  (2019)  Opportunities  and  challenges  for  a  maturing  science  of  consciousness. Nat Hum Behav . 3(2):104-­ 107. doi: 10.1038/s41562-­019-­0531-­ 8. ----

Monai H., Ohkura M., Tanaka M., Oe Y., Konno A., Hirai H., Mikoshiba K., Itohara S., Nakai J., Iwai Y. and Hirase H. (2016) Calcium imaging reveals glial involvement in transcranial  direct  current  stimulation-­induced                plasticity                in                mouse -brain. Nature Communications 7: 11100. doi:10.1038/ncomms11100

Monai H, Hirase H. (2018) Astrocytes as a target of transcranial  direct  current  stimulation (tDCS) to treat depression. Neurosci Res. 126:15-21. doi: 10.1016/j.neures.2017.08.012.

Monti MM, Vanhaudenhuyse A, Coleman MR, Boly M, Pickard JD, Tshibanda L, Owen AM,  Laureys S. (2010) Willful modulation of brain activity in disorders of consciousness. N Engl J Med. 362(7):579-­89. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0905370. -

Nunn, C. (2016) New Directions in Consciousness Studies: SoS Theory and the Nature of Time, London: Routledge.

Pace-Schott  EF,  Amole  MC,  Aue  T,  Balconi  M,  Bylsma  LM,  Critchley  H,  Demaree  HA, Friedman  BH,  Gooding  AEK,  Gosseries  O,  Jovanovic  T,  Kirby  LAJ,  Kozlowska  K, Laureys S, Lowe L, Magee K, Marin MF, Merner AR, Robinson JL, Smith RC, Spangler DP, Van Overveld M, VanElzakker MB. (2019) Physiological feelings . Neurosci Biobehav Rev . 103:267-304. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2019.05.002.

Panksepp,  J.  (1998) Affective  Neuroscience:  The  Foundations  of  Human  and  Animal Emotions . New York: Oxford University Press.

- Panksepp  J.  (2005)  Affective  consciousness:  Core  emotional  feelings  in  animals  and humans. Conscious Cogn. 14(1):30-80.
- Panksepp J. (2010) Affective consciousness in animals: perspectives on dimensional and primary process emotion approaches. Proc Biol Sci. 277(1696):2905-7. doi: 10.1098/rspb.2010.1017.

Pellerin L., Pellegri G., Bittar PG., Charnay Y., Bouras C., Martin JL., Stella N., Magistretti PJ.  (1998)  Evidence  supporting  the  existence  of  an  activity-dependent  astrocyte-neuron lactate shuttle. Dev Neurosci. 20 (4-5): 291-9.

Pellerin L., Bouzier-Sore AK., Aubert A., Serres S., Merle M, Costalat R., Magistretti PJ. (2007) Activity-dependent regulation of energy metabolism by astrocytes: an update. Glia 55(12): 1251-62.

| Peng L, Parpura V, Diseases: An Underappreciated Target for Therapeutic Intervention. Neuropharmacol.                                                                                                                                                                            | Verkhratsky A. (2014) Neuroglia as a Central Element of Neurological Curr 12(4):303-307. doi:10.2174/1570159X12999140829152550                                                                                                                                                   |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Pereira Jr. A, Johnson G (2003) Towards an Understanding of the Genesis of Ketamine- Induced Perceptual Distortions and Hallucinatory States. Brain and Mind 4, (3), p. 307- 326, 2003.                                                                                          | Pereira Jr. A, Johnson G (2003) Towards an Understanding of the Genesis of Ketamine- Induced Perceptual Distortions and Hallucinatory States. Brain and Mind 4, (3), p. 307- 326, 2003.                                                                                          |
| Pereira Jr. A, Ricke, H. (2009) What is consciousness? Towards a preliminary definition. Journal of Consciousness Studies , v. 16, n. 5: p. 28-45.                                                                                                                               | Pereira Jr. A, Ricke, H. (2009) What is consciousness? Towards a preliminary definition. Journal of Consciousness Studies , v. 16, n. 5: p. 28-45.                                                                                                                               |
| Pereira Jr. A, Edwards, J., Nunn, C., Trehub, A., and Velmans, M. (2010) Understanding consciousness: a collaborative attempt to elucidate contemporary theories. Journal of Consciousness Studies , v. 17, n. 5/6, p. 213- 219.                                                 | Pereira Jr. A, Edwards, J., Nunn, C., Trehub, A., and Velmans, M. (2010) Understanding consciousness: a collaborative attempt to elucidate contemporary theories. Journal of Consciousness Studies , v. 17, n. 5/6, p. 213- 219.                                                 |
| Pereira Jr A., Furlan FA. (2010) Astrocytes and Human Cognition: modeling information integration and modulation of neuronal activity. Progress in Neurobiology 92: 405- 420.                                                                                                    | Pereira Jr A., Furlan FA. (2010) Astrocytes and Human Cognition: modeling information integration and modulation of neuronal activity. Progress in Neurobiology 92: 405- 420.                                                                                                    |
| Pereira Jr., A. (2017) Astroglial hydro-­ionic - waves guided by the extracellular matrix: An exploratory model. Journal of Integrative Neuroscience 16, pp. 1-­ - 16.                                                                                                             | Pereira Jr., A. (2017) Astroglial hydro-­ionic - waves guided by the extracellular matrix: An exploratory model. Journal of Integrative Neuroscience 16, pp. 1-­ - 16.                                                                                                             |
| Pereira Jr., A., Foz, F.B. & Rocha, A.F. (2017) The dynamical signature of conscious processing: From modality-specific percepts to complex episodes. Psychology of Consciousness 4 (2), pp. 230-247.                                                                            | Pereira Jr., A., Foz, F.B. & Rocha, A.F. (2017) The dynamical signature of conscious processing: From modality-specific percepts to complex episodes. Psychology of Consciousness 4 (2), pp. 230-247.                                                                            |
| Pereira Jr., A. (2018). The Projective Theory of Consciousness: from Neuroscience to Philosophical Psychology. Trans/Form/Ação 41 (spe), 199-­232. - https://dx.doi.org/10.1590/0101-­ - 3173.2018.v41esp.11.p199                                                                  | Pereira Jr., A. (2018). The Projective Theory of Consciousness: from Neuroscience to Philosophical Psychology. Trans/Form/Ação 41 (spe), 199-­232. - https://dx.doi.org/10.1590/0101-­ - 3173.2018.v41esp.11.p199                                                                  |
| Petit JM. and Magistretti PJ. (2016) Regulation of neuron-astrocyte metabolic coupling across the sleep-wake cycle. Neuroscience. 2016;323: 135-156. doi:10.1016/j.neuroscience.2015.12.007                                                                                      | Petit JM. and Magistretti PJ. (2016) Regulation of neuron-astrocyte metabolic coupling across the sleep-wake cycle. Neuroscience. 2016;323: 135-156. doi:10.1016/j.neuroscience.2015.12.007                                                                                      |
| Owen, A.M. (2019) Into the Gray Zone: Accessing residual cognitive function in disorders of consciousness. Prolonged Disorders of Consciousness Conference Abstract. October 2019. London: HCAHealthcare.                                                                        | Owen, A.M. (2019) Into the Gray Zone: Accessing residual cognitive function in disorders of consciousness. Prolonged Disorders of Consciousness Conference Abstract. October 2019. London: HCAHealthcare.                                                                        |
| Owen AM, Coleman MR, Boly M, Davis MH, Laureys S, Pickard JD. (2006) Detecting awareness in the vegetative state . Science 313(5792): 1402.                                                                                                                                      | Owen AM, Coleman MR, Boly M, Davis MH, Laureys S, Pickard JD. (2006) Detecting awareness in the vegetative state . Science 313(5792): 1402.                                                                                                                                      |
| Oransky I. (2004) Obituary: William Ross Adey. Lancet 17-­ - 23; 364(9430): 242.                                                                                                                                                                                                  | Oransky I. (2004) Obituary: William Ross Adey. Lancet 17-­ - 23; 364(9430): 242.                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
| Rasmussen R., O'Donnell J., Ding F., and Nedergaard M. (2020) Interstitial ions: A key regulator of state-dependent neural activity?, Progress in Neurobiology 193, 101802. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pneurobio.2020.101802                                                      | Rasmussen R., O'Donnell J., Ding F., and Nedergaard M. (2020) Interstitial ions: A key regulator of state-dependent neural activity?, Progress in Neurobiology 193, 101802. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pneurobio.2020.101802                                                      |
| Rivera AD, Butt AM. (2019) Astrocytes are direct cellular targets of lithium treatment: novel roles for lysyl oxidase and peroxisome-­proliferator - activated receptor-­ - γ as astroglial targets of lithium. Transl Psychiatry 9(1): 211. doi: 10.1038/s41398-­019-­0542-­2. - - - | Rivera AD, Butt AM. (2019) Astrocytes are direct cellular targets of lithium treatment: novel roles for lysyl oxidase and peroxisome-­proliferator - activated receptor-­ - γ as astroglial targets of lithium. Transl Psychiatry 9(1): 211. doi: 10.1038/s41398-­019-­0542-­2. - - - |
| Saker P, Farrell MJ, Adib FR, Egan GF, McKinley MJ, Denton DA. (2014) Regional brain responses associated with drinking water during thirst and after its satiation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 111(14):5379-5384. doi:10.1073/pnas.1403382111                                    | Saker P, Farrell MJ, Adib FR, Egan GF, McKinley MJ, Denton DA. (2014) Regional brain responses associated with drinking water during thirst and after its satiation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 111(14):5379-5384. doi:10.1073/pnas.1403382111                                    |
| Seth, A. (2019) Disorders of HCAHealthcare.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      | Detecting Consciousness in Practice and in Principle. Prolonged Consciousness Conference Abstract. October 2019. London:                                                                                                                                                         |

| Seth A., Suzuki K. and Critchley H. (2012) An Interoceptive Predictive Coding Model of Conscious Presence. Frontiers in Psychology 2: 395 . DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2011.00395                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Shin AC, Zheng H, Berthoud HR. (2009) An expanded view of energy homeostasis: neural integration of metabolic, cognitive, and emotional drives to eat. Physiol Behav. (5):572-­ - 80.                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
| Skibsted AP, Amiri M, Fisher PM, Sidaros A, Hribljan MC, Larsen VA, Højgaard, JLS, Nikolic M, Hauerberg J, Fabricius ME, Knudsen GM, Møller K, Kondziella D. (2018) Consciousness in Neurocritical Care Cohort Study Using fMRI and EEG (CONNECT- ME): Protocol for a Longitudinal Prospective Study and a Tertiary Clinical Care Service. Front Neurol. 9:1012. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2018.01012. |
| Stender J, Mortensen KN, Thibaut A, et al. (2016) The Minimal Energetic Requirement of Sustained Awareness after Brain Injury. Curr Biol. 26(11):1494-1499. doi:10.1016/j.cub.2016.04.024                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
| Stenovec M, Li B, Verkhratsky A, Zorec R. (2020) Astrocytes in rapid ketamine antidepressant action. Neuropharmacology 173: 108158. doi:10.1016/j.neuropharm.2020.108158                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
| Toyota, M., Spencer, D., Sawai-Toyota, S., Jiaqi, W., Zhang, T., Koo, A.J., Howe, G.A., Gilroy, S. (2018) Glutamate triggers long-distance, calcium-based plant defense signaling. Science 361 (6407): 1112-1115. doi: 10.1126/science.aat7744.                                                                                                                                                 |
| Thrane, A.S., Thrane, V.R., Zeppenfeld, D., Lou, N., Xu, Q., Nagelhus, E.A. & Nedergaard, M. (2012). General anesthesia selectively disrupts astrocyte calcium signaling in the awake mouse cortex. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 109, 18974-18979.                                                                                                                                                  |
| Vandekerckhove M and Panksepp J. (2009) The flow of anoetic to noetic and autonoetic consciousness: a vision of unknowing (anoetic) and knowing (noetic) consciousness in the remembrance of things past and imagined futures. Conscious Cogn. 18(4): 1018-28.                                                                                                                                  |
| Velmans, M. (1990) Consciousness, brain and the physical world. Philosophical Psychology 3 (1), 1990, 77-­ - 99.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 |
| Velmans, M. (1993) A Reflexive Science of Consciousness, in G. Bock & J. Marsh (eds.), Experimental and Theoretical Studies of Consciousness , Chichester: John Wiley.                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
| Velmans, M. (2002) How could conscious experiences affect brains? Journal of Consciousness Studies , 9(11), 3-29.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
| Verkhratsky A, Steardo L, Parpura V, and Montana V (2016) Translational potential of astrocytes in brain disorders. Prog Neurobiol . 144:188-205. doi: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2015.09.003.                                                                                                                                                                                                         |
| Verkhratsky A, Nedergaard (2018) M. Physiology of Astroglia. Physiol Rev . 98(1):239- ­ - 389.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| Vickers AJ, Vertosick EA, Lewith G, et al. (2018) Acupuncture for Chronic Pain: Update of an Individual Patient Data Meta-Analysis. J Pain 19(5):455-474. doi:10.1016/j.jpain.2017.11.005                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
| Wilson, R. A. (2017) Externalism and Internalism in the Philosophy of Mind. Oxford Bibliographies . DOI: 10.1093/OBO/9780195396577-0352                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |