Processed by Minitex on:

2/24/2023 9:46:28 AM

This material comes to you from the University of Minnesota collection or another participating library of the Minitex Library Information Network.

Patrons: please contact your library for help accessing this document.

Library staff: for issues or assistance with this document, please email: mtx-edel@umn.edu and provide the following information:

-  Article ID : MIH 01MNPALSIHC0009850
-  Patron email address

____________________________________________________________________________________

Title: Cultural studies, critical methodologies. ArticleTitle: The Performative "I" ArticleAuthor: Della Pollock Vol: 7 No: 3 Date: 2007 Pages: 239-255 OCLC - 47221382; LCN - 2004214789; Source: LibKeyNomad Copyright: CCL

____________________________________________________________________________________

## NOTICE CONCERNING COPYRIGHT RESTRICTIONS:

The copyright law of the United States [Title 17, United StatesCode] governs the making of photocopies or other reproductions of copyrighted materials.

Under certain conditions specified in the law, libraries and archives are authorized to furnish a photocopy or other reproduction. One of these specific conditions is that the photocopy is not to be "used for any purpose other than private study, scholarship, or research." If a user makes a request for, or later uses, a photocopy or reproduction for purposes in excess of "fair use," that user may be liable for copyright infringement.

This institution reserves the right to refuse to accept a copying order if, in its judgment, fulfillment of that order would involve violation of copyright law.

## The Performative 'I'

## Della Pollock

University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

Although claims to revive the first person in scholarly writing remain compelling, efforts to fulfill them have been less so. Few have survived the problems of authenticity, authority, and advocacy identified by Joan Scott and Linda Kauffman, among others. Following the model of 'stunting' offered by the feminist theorist, Mary Russo, this article proposes a view toward a 'performative 'I'' that invites error, disorder, and difference into the world of citationality or compulsive reiteration. The article builds its proposal on readings of two live performances and three short passages from selected texts. At their intersection, it imagines the displacement of a modernist 'I' by a subjectivity defined by an ethics of sensuous coalition and a politics of errant possibility.

Keywords: performance; performativity; writing

Several years ago I was teaching a course on the politics of performance and was struggling to explain classical Marxist theory to a group of advanced undergraduates. They had to understand alienation to understand so many playwrights' and  practitioners'  dream  of  unalienated  experience.  They  were  trying  hard. However, conventional examples of a rationalized labor process didn't seem to catch. The idea of a repeated, segmented activity like screwing on lugs or plucking  chickens  all  day  either  was  too  distant  or  too  familiar  or  seemed  quaintly obsolete in their superdigital, hyperreal worlds.

I reached for an example closer to home and found myself asking: what about your papers for class? Almost immediately I felt that rare and wonderful shift in the very air quality in the room that comes with understanding. Their eyes widened, cheeks softened. They became eager to relate to the change from a craft to an industrial mode of production, to the division of labor under the law of efficiency and the concomitant division of the subject from the object of his or her labor, to the reproduction of ideologies to which they felt in hock; as they expressed it: the paper as grade as commodity whose surplus value lay in job interviews and entry-level salaries. They felt the evacuation of their role as artist and/or craftsperson in the

Author's Note: Earlier versions of this essay were presented at the Conference on College Composition and Communication in New York, 2002 and at Southern Illinois University, 2006. Many thanks to D. Soyini Madison and Brian Rusted for their generous critique of subsequent drafts.

Cultural Studies

↔

Critical Methodologies, Volume 7 Number 3, 2007 239-255

DOI: 10.1177/1532708606288649

© 2007 Sage Publications

writing process. They understood their low-level resentment of me as the 'boss,' the owner of the means of production (caught in the constant refrain: 'I don't know if this is what you're looking for but . . .'). They even seized on the gap between whining about the particular grades they got and the larger injustice of a system that kept them so divided against themselves and isolated from each other that they could not make larger, more searing complaints. Even the idea that they were gaining symbolic capital began to feel illusory. They wanted out.

I was using writing assignments to explain Marxist theory; I now use Marxist theory to talk with students about writing assignments. Each time they seem surprised, a little sad, but mostly relieved-to be able to name their intellectual alienation, to have something of a diagnostic for why they can't seem to get passionate about a project even when they want to, for why a paper seems already 'out of their hands' before they have even laid finger to keyboard.

I can't begin to address the resulting malaise with the full scope of pedagogical attention it deserves. My concern for the moment will be the problem of subjectivity this situation poses, the problem of the embodied self diminished by separation from the object of his or her writing labor. The classroom is a spatial matrix of practices that generally reiterates value hierarchies consistent with a Derridean deconstruction of speech and/or writing and classical antitheatrical biases. Here, I want to stake  one  view  toward  possibilities  for  performing  writing  in  the  toll  paid  by students  who  consequently  continually  find  they  are  writing  themselves  out  of themselves. In the following pages, I can only gesture toward a pedagogy of reading through performance toward writing differently. I'll do so by linking a claim on the discursive excesses of performance with instances of scholarly writing selves somewhat less alienated from performing selves, or instances of what I will call a 'performative  I.'  My  aim  is  to  think  beyond  the  use  of  the  first  person  to  ways  of writing in the abjected self of modernity, of enfolding in writing the 'I' modernity and postmodernity generally cut up and cut out: the passionate, excessive, errant, collective, and often exuberantly irregular 'I' excluded by the systematic reproduction of sameness.

We have tried to answer this situation by reviving the first person. This isn't working as well as it might.

Helene Cixous, Nancy Miller, bell hooks, James Clifford, Donna Haraway, among others jolted us out of the enchantment of 'objectivity,' requiring as much as inviting new configurations of the personal and the political in scholarly writing. 1 However, almost as quickly as the 'I' emerged it was buried again, mired in issues of authority, authenticity, and advocacy.

In the early 1990s, Joan Scott (1992) dispensed with the authority of the 'I,' deconstructing the foundational category of experience, and making it next to impossible to argue from experience or by the evidentiary logic of eyewitnessby which truth rests on the sovereignty of an empirically stable I/eye: I am, I was there, I saw: it's true. For Scott, experience is discursively conditioned. The 'it' to which the I/eye pays witness is the naturalized discourse in which the subject/self is immersed. 'Experience' as such thus turns back on the ocular-centered I, displacing its security by contingency and its truths by situated partiality.

At about the same time, Linda Kauffman (1993) pilloried personal testimony in an essay that first drew us into an intriguing tale of her childhood life as a grifter and then abruptly revealed that it was all made up: a fiction we bought because, well,  we  want to believe that where there is scandalous revelation there is truth. 'Personal testimony can sometimes be eloquent,' she argued, 'but it is not an infinitely exhaustible genre. T oo often it reinforces the blind belief that we are all intrinsically  interesting,  unique,  that  we  deserve  to  be  happy'  (p.  274).  Kauffman tantalized the reader-voyeur with the prospect of a transparently revealed self that nonetheless also served as a mirror and/or confirmation of the reader's own individuality and potential for narrative redemption.

Although this is, for Kauffman, a reason to distrust 'personal' writing, it also underscores the fictiveness of any 'I.' It's not just that Kauffman managed to get away with a lie because we wanted it; she dramatized the lie in language, the signifying opacity of linguistic figures like I , me , you , him -all of which are materially embedded in language systems that, then, are as much given to lies as they are to truth, or are essentially fictive. The projected or, for that matter, effaced 'I' is thus always a creative self-fashioning that the desirous reader, the reader hungry for truths produced by the impression of scandalous rupture, willingly ignores.

Swimming hard against these deconstructive  and  realist  currents  are  feminist claims to 'owning' voice and story. Powerful gestures in feminist consciousness raising and the affective consolidation of political alliances, 'owning' and 'owning up' to one's past can nonetheless backfire. 'That's my story' often seems to come with a  warning  tag:  don't  touch,  no  trespassing,  private  property  (turn  back  now!). Indeed, the ownership model is rank with democracy as rugged individualism and free market economies, infamously leading The New Yorker Magazine dance critic, Arlene Croce (1995), for instance, to insist that it wasn't necessary to attend Bill T . Jones' production, Still/Here (based on workshops with people living with cancer and HIV/AIDS) to pan it as 'victim art'-why see what you know (or think you know) you won't be able to critique: people telling their 'own' stories of cancer and illness? In the same way that we may feel no one has a right to tell me what to do with my property, we feel prohibited from 'doing anything' with someone's else's story-as-property.

Briefly returning to a pedagogical scene: A graduate student submitted a seminar paper reflecting on the normative treatment of epilepsy in which she repeatedly interrupted a linear argument with performances of epileptic consciousness as she knew it. She pursued a critique that took force, in part, from its alarming juxtaposition of scholarly and medical discourses, on the one hand, and evocations of the body fallen out of syntax, on the other-of normative scholarly practice  and  the  a-normative  subject.  She  wrote  in  to  her  critique  the  chaotic body-subject the discourses she was addressing (and, to some extent, using) would have written out. Her professor responded with an A and no comments other than  swift  insistence  that  she  couldn't-or  wouldn't-comment.  In  effect,  she marked this textual body with a scarlet A and refused to get any closer. 2

Does the first person exempt writing from critique? Does it operate outside the scope of power and resistance-or is it just convenient to act as if it does? Is it the

reader or the writer who 'uses' the first person to foreclose on possibilities for critical dialogue? In so many of these instances, I want to say that the reader chickens out, refusing to be part of the relational drama initiated by the writer's breach in scholarly decorum, scared off in part by the proximity of the body that emerges in the breach.

More generously: We don't have sufficient protocols for reading or writing the first person in scholarly discourse 3 and are all too often left regarding it as incontestably determined or merely arbitrary, absolute or relative, esoterically remote or toxically close, and, either way: untouchable. This then radically delimits possibilities  for  practicing  new  subjectivities,  for  beginning  to  do  in  and  through writing what theories of hybrid, multivoiced, engaged, and embodied social subjectivities have encouraged us to imagine.

The 'I' is pretty much stuck in self-reference. We've got it cornered. In the next few pages, I want to think about ways to draw out the self-subject through performance and performativity, to write and read a performative 'I' that is bigger, more bracing, and more beautiful-productive and self-productive-than we have, for the most part, allowed the first person to be.

I'll do so by continuing in the mixed mode of theoretical inquiry, pedagogical example, and critical-speculative argument I've begun here. I'll offer a very brief introduction to the theory and problem of performativity to pose some working premises for thinking about performance . I'll turn then to the suggestive promise of just two instances of live performance. Reading these under the rubric of Mary Russo's (1994) vision for 'critical stunting,' I argue that performance may help us not only to write but to read writing better. I proceed then to read three, short examples of scholarly writing in which what I will call a performative 'I' seems to  open  and  enter  into  new  fields  of  subjectivity,  specifically:  a  subjectivity grounded in an ethics of error forecasting a politics of possibility.

* * * * *

Judith Butler has drawn us into a vortex of performativity (see Butler, 1990, 1993). Through her particular revision of Austin through Derrida she argues that identity  is  neither  essential  nor  constructed  exactly:  It  is  the  material  effect  of embodied repetitions. Gender, she argues, is 'an identity tenuously constituted in time,  instituted  in  an  exterior  space  through  a stylized  repetition  of  acts '  (140, italics in original). It is 'the mundane way in which bodily gestures, movements, and  styles  of  various  kinds'-tuned  to  the  rhythm  of  prevailing  norms,  discourses, and disciplinary structures-'constitute the illusion of an abiding self' (p. 140).

Butler finds hope in failure. If the illusion of selfhood depends on repeated acts in time, then the possibilities of gender transformation are to be found precisely in the arbitrary relation between such acts, in the possibility of a failure to repeat, de-formity, or a parodic repetition that exposes the phantasmatic effect of abiding identity as a politically tenuous construction. (Butler, 1990, p. 141)

Elin Diamond (1996) characterizes the particular tension between repetition of the same and the tremulous moment in which repetition-because it occurs in time and space-is different as a tension between the thing done and the doing, between  performativity  and  performance  as  a  counterweight  embedded  in,  in effect, doing the thing done.

Although I rely on Butler's reclamation of the embodied self, and the pressure Diamond puts on performativity through performance, failure is not enough. It is not enough to reveal the phantasmatic nature of identity or to see, as Diamond does,  the  tension  between  the  thing  done  and  the  doing  of  it  as  primarily  an opportunity for (as yet idealist) critique.

For Butler and Diamond, performance remains performativity's weak sistera  kind  of  incidental  tremor  in  a  system  that  depends  on  live  repetition  for  its upkeep. I want to claim more power for performance: to think about the tension between the thing done and doing as a collision of past and present producing the excess of what's as yet undone, what's yet to be done. I want to think about how performance propels us forward into a future perfect world, a world full of dangerous and fantastic possibilities. 4 What I am imagining here is doing the thing done so vigorously as to undo it and simultaneously to call down the gaping grace of what else might be done.

A couple of performances in which this seemed to occur:

******

More than 20 years ago now, two friends took me to see Carol Channing in Hello  Dolly at  the  Auditorium  Theatre  in  Chicago. 5 I  don't  know  how  many people the Auditorium seats. Memory would suggest it was in the tens of thousands. The theatre was full. You could hear the first notes of the title song. Our collective gut string drew taut. Then: there she was, at the top of the winding staircase,  one  long  gloved  hand  laid  along  the  white  balustrade:  she  was  every dame, mame, belle who had ever descended (or had ever wanted to descend) a wide, winding staircase to a waiting chorus of high-kicking men. She and we relished every wigged, lip-sticked, and sequined step, each timed so perfectly that she  arrived  on  the  stage  apron  with  the  final  crescendo  of  the  music,  which seemed to rise on our cue, as we rose to clap and clap and clap, performing a standing ovation literally to beat the band. And then that grin was moving toward us. This wasn't in the script. And yet, this was still Dolly-or was it Carol? Well, Dolly/Carol was now gently and elegantly gesturing for quiet. When a stunned hush  finally  reigned,  Carol/Dolly-Dolly/Carol  took  one  more  carefully  balanced step toward us, bent slightly at the hip as if about to share a secret, each gloved hand now melting into the sparkling flow of white fabric covering each thigh: she spoke with glowing, exaggerated precision, in an absolutely delicious stage whisper-as if alone to each of the thousands in attendance: 'Shall we do that again?'

The moment of shocked silence that followed was as deafening as the subsequent roar. Somehow she was suddenly back at the top of those stairs. Somehow,

magically, we heard again the first teasing strains of Hello Dolly! Well, hello Dolly! And this time, well, this time, it was different because it was unbelievably the same all over again! This doesn't happen! For all the talk of 'you never know what will happen in a live performance,' it never meant this. Maybe a misstep. A lost line. A particularly good night. But not the diva's reclamation of the power to do it again, oh, just do it again. This was the same with a difference. It was more of the same and more than the same: it was performance exceeding performativity, repetition  breaking  out  of  reproduction.  Carol/Dolly  violated-for  all  of  us  it seemed-the supreme law of stage and vernacular theatre: don't break character.

Repetition, for Butler, is meant to secure the illusion of 'character' or identity under disciplinary threat. In this breakout performance, Channing was doing the thing done-repeating grin for grin, slide for twirl-the established and explicitly scripted protocols of the musical play. She did so, however, to the point of almost unbearable excess, revealing and reveling in the repetition at the core of a performance aesthetic, in the process undoing what could have become merely mechanical  reproduction,  abandoning  all  of  us  to  the  ever-more  human  pleasures  of repetition. 6 Her understated 'Shall we do that again?' suggested an invitation to dance, to take another stroll around the block, to play. She and I in immediate, intimate relation are going to do this again. 'Again' of course evokes the child's pleasure in repetition: do it again-again-again ('again again' seems generally reserved for testing the claims of gravity and human form against flight, as in: swing me up high again, spin me around again, flip me upside down and over again). 7 I am pure kid: giddy with pleasure not in the fact that we're going to get to see this again but in the act of stalling out, topping out the mechanisms of reproduction with production. We are in thrall to Channing's tender, comic redistribution of power, making repetition part of a performance of 'as if' collective choice: shall we do that again?: of course we will. And of course the amazing thing is that we/they can do it again, the same, all over again. They are, and we are now with them, magicians in our shared ability (rather than compulsion) to repeat exactly. And so, with Channing's mock invitation, the performance launches onto or, more precisely, off of a new plane of repetition: now, repetition that exceeds both the thing done and the doing of it in the production beyond reproduction of an errant, sassy, vast subjectivity embodied in the collective triumph of virtuosity over form (see Hamera, 2000).

Another New York story-although this one far from Yonkers and further still from Broadway. In the spring of 2002, I was teaching a graduate seminar on the performance of memory. In the spirit of remembering, at the end of the term I asked the students to repeat the initial assignment: remember someone.

We arrived at class one day to find that the desks had been shaped into a loose arc. Kate was at the front of the room, busily arranging cheese on one of those tin platters  you  can  buy  in  the  grocery  store  for  a  potluck  or  last  minute  party. Someone had left U.S. flag transparencies on all of the windows. I tried to ignore them until I realized that we each had a small flag on a wooden stick at our respective  desks  and  that  the  edge  of  a  flag  bandanna  was  falling  out  of  Kate's  jeans

jacket pocket. I have to admit: I was just cringing. Not Kate, I thought; she hasn't succumbed or I haven't misunderstood her this badly. This must all be left over from something. A routine public speaking class. Somebody's bad performance of a patriotic poem. This was the time when Bin Laden 'wanted posters' decorated the back windows of pick-ups. When patriotism was bought and sold in the form of just about anything red, white, and blue. In a town given to team rivalry, uniforms, and logos, all of this seemed to me a faint reprisal of kitschy fandom run amuck.

But there was Kate, now just as cheerfully passing the cheese and crackers, handing out napkins, a truly generous hostess inviting us into conviviality; now pouring each of us a glass of wine! Something starts to play in the background. Classical music. A recorded interview of some kind. Kate removes a flag-wrapped object from her pocket and bends to place it carefully on the floor. She stomps. I hear a familiar, muffled crunch: the sound of a light bulb breaking, the bulb often substituted  for  the  designated  wine  glass  in  the  Jewish  wedding  ceremony  (it works just as well to insert the sound of sorrow into a time of festive celebration). Kate gently shakes the glass shards off the scarf, leaving them at her feet; she ties the scarf around her neck and slowly rises. We snack on. The music gently swells. She grasps another wine bottle in one hand, a wine glass in the other, and-with what fingers she could wriggle free-she awkwardly (no big band virtuosity here) draws the bandanna up over her eyes, blindfold-style. She extends her arms out (still holding the wine bottle and glass) into an inverted 'V' . . . she is . . . oh yes, Blind Justice now. What is she up to? Slowly raising the wine glass in her right hand-higher, higher yet; her arm stretches to its full length: the glass is now Liberty's torch. She raises the open wine bottle to the lip of the glass and begins to pour.

She meant to pour herself a glass, she tells me later. T o offer a toast. Something else  happens.  She  pours  and  pours.  She  doesn't  stop. The  red  wine  is  spilling, sloshing over the sides of the glass. It winds down her arm, twisting around it like a vine, dripping off her elbow, falling in splotches off her clothes, in a slow steady run from the bottle to the glass across her body to the floor where it washes up the scattered glint of glass shards. This is a libation and a blood sacrifice. Kate stands in the pool of wine that spreads now toward our toes, that has spattered our bodies and clothes, and that we have each sipped. There have been no words that I can recall. We wait in anxious repose for Kate to release her arm.

Like Channing, Kate made a perfect mess of the performance space: endlessly repeating the discourses of conventional patriotism in the images of the flag and Lady Justice/Lady Liberty, and even in her performance of gendered hospitality, she did what's done and what was at the time driving us to war in Iraq: with lady-like decorum, she performed protocols of patriotism. However, much to our mutual surprise, she kept doing the thing done: she kept pouring and pouring from what seemed  an  inexhaustible  source.  Acting  far  beyond  intentionality,  Kate  became subject to her own performance. Overtaken by invention, she was reinvented. The

ego-'I' who planned all kinds of things was displaced by a becoming-'I' (on the verge of [a] becoming 'we') who traveled on the currents of improvisation and reinvention into a place of strange joy and greater grief than most of us had ever dared imagine.

The performance immediately called to mind variations on this 'cup runneth over.' I like the biblical magnitude of the metaphor and its ironic understatement of the literal size of this spill. At the same time, I am frustrated by its neat location of the performance event within a given Judaeo-Christian mythos, especially to the extent to which Kate's performance, her doing, surpassed reproduction of the same. The performance refused the discursive hold even a biblical phrase cited ironically might have on it. For me, it recalled a more ancient past in the classical libation for the war dead and called down a more perfect future, a future perfect in which blood and hope spill over rank nationalism, a future we touched and tasted and felt, even as we felt the stain of discourse on our return performance of passive witness.

This was how Kate remembered her dear friend, Herman Sandler, a great supporter of classical music in New York, who died in the World Trade Center disaster. It was also a way in which her memory became incorporated into our own, even insofar as the next presenter insisted on leaving the spilled wine where it was, and sitting, stained, at its pooling center, while proceeding to recall her deceased grandmother. 8

******

In  very  different  ways,  Kate  and  Channing  performed  stunts.  They  risked complete disaster in spectacular display, in doing the thing done until it-and we-were almost undone. Both recalled the critical practice Mary Russo (1994) calls 'stunting.' The practice of stunting, for Russo, 'belongs to the improvisational, to the realm of the possible' (p. 24). It is a tactical maneuver she associates  with  female  stunt  pilots  and  the  'doubled,  dwarfed,  distorted  (stunted) creatures of the sideshow which stand in as the representatives of a well-known cultural presentation of the female body' (p. 22). Joining these two versions of female exceptionalism, Russo reclaims the female grotesque as 'an embodiment of  possibility  and  of  error.'  She  poses  feminine  possibility  against  the  logic  of modernist progress, acknowledging that where there is possibility there is error: the mistake, imperfection, or transgression that challenges the normative repetition of the same and so invites correction, punishment, and recrimination. The thrill of flight, for Russo, is heightened by the chance of falling, of getting things terribly wrong, by risking death or its semiotic correlate, abjection. 9

And yet where there is error there is possibility-even the impossible possibility of human flight, of just taking off, breaking through, achieving all new heights and forms of human being and, in the process, creating new alliances of embodied subjectivities, what Russo (1994) calls 'new political aggregates-provisional, uncomfortable, even conflictual coalitions of bodies which both respect the concept of situated knowledges and refuse to keep every body in its place' (p. 16).

Russo (1994) uses stunting to describe her own critical practice, one based on the startling juxtaposition of seemingly incongruous images, and the process of reading them off of each other for their 'invisible potential' (p. 41). She takes the acrobat as the model for the feminist scholar who achieves the 'aerial sublime,' who-in the spirit of Kate and Channing's performances-answers the fundamental question: 'what are the possibilities of reinhabiting the old in a way that will alter it' (p. 30) by substituting the pleasures and power of improvisational error for anything like 'failure' to do things right?

What would this mean for writing?

First of all, it would mean inviting apparently fixed forms into the realm of the improvisational and the possible.

It might mean, then, 'stunting' on established grammars of meaning, making writing 'grotesque' at least in the sense that it is characterized by the perils of error, that it risks error in the name of possibility.

It would mean, in turn, enjoying the subject that emerges as a writing self, not a writer or author per se but a figure of semiosis-in-process, a becoming I/we, that may then be full of surprises.

And it would mean reading the self that emerges from un/doing writing as a possible  self,  an  'I'  that  performs  beyond  the  contractual  terms  of  veracity  or authenticity, a subjunctive of what could be or might be or might as well be-a remembered or imagined identity written 'as if' it were real. This 'I' enjoys neither the presumption of a foundational ontology nor the convenience of conventional claims to authenticity. It is (only) possibly real. It is made real through the performance of writing. Accordingly, its reality is never fixed or stable. T o the very extent that it is written, it is always already about to fly off the page into being and becoming.

Ideally, this self is a mess of errors. She is not so much unruly as superruly, surpassing convention and form on a dare. Errant, playful, and beautiful: she is Kate and Carol striking awe into our hearts; she is the student writer whose epileptic body and/or consciousness is not put under the erasure of an institutional A ; she is the female stunt pilot outdoing the straight line of modernist progress by performing the wild twists and turns of impossible possibilities.

But what if the pilot falls out of the air? What if the show didn't go on? What if we all became drenched in blood and wine? What I want to call performative writing substitutes the open, dangerous, even grotesque range of 'what if?' for the closed,  causal  logic  of  'if,  then.' 10 The  latter  is  the  logic  of  progress,  holding advancement to the premise of prior achievements. It is a citational logic, locked in to what's come before, or: repetition as reproduction. 'What if' opens a space between what is and what might be, answering what John Fiske (1993) called the 'tyranny of the indicative' with possibility (p. 119). This is an ethical space: a space of mobilizing the difference between imagined and entrenched realities; and it is a performance space: a space of mobilizing the difference in repetition for ethical ends.

I can only begin to point to some examples of scholarly writing in which I find a trace of this performing/becoming 'I.' And I'm well aware that these examples may  pale  next  to  Dolly-again  or  even  the  wine-soaked  seminar  performance. However, let me suggest in retrospect that, in each of these cases, what was large began small. The performances turned on a dime. In a matter of seconds and only five words, Channing changed what might have been just one more among thousands of wonderful Dollies into the performance of a lifetime; and whatever held Kate's pouring arm up changed her seminar presentation from what might have been  a  conceptually  sound,  well-planned  but  slightly  gimmicky  event  into  a metaphorical plunge into pools of remembering from which I have yet to emerge. These were tiny shifts  that  made  all  the  difference.  In  each  case,  performance wreaked havoc on less than a moment's notice.

So, reading for the miniature 'stunt' (sublimity charged by a sudden, potentially wrong turn), I'll begin by asking: what if the writer-scholar makes a mistake? 11

******

In her virtuosic essay, 'What a Rag Rug Means,' Steedman (2001) reflects on a trick of memory-on how she transposed her recollection of a rag rug on a hearth from Richard Hoggart's description of his working-class home in Uses of Literacy into an account of Elizabeth Gaskell's novel, Mary Barton . In fact, there wasn't a rag rug on the Bartons' hearth and yet, she says, 'I remember a rag rug.' More to the point: she wanted a rag rug to warm that hearth. Steedman offers her error as a reflexive performance of the tendency to dehistoricize working-class domestic lifeto  'remember'  it  as  common  and  quaint  across  eras-and  of  her  wish  to  write memory and desire into working-class history, and so to historicize history. This essay is not about how memory can trap you or how to watch out for error bred of desire. T o the contrary, Steedman locates history in the vicissitudes of memory and desire. She articulates the subjective labor of the historian with the ostensible objects of his or her research, dissolving the lines conventionally dividing not only psychoanalysis  and  labor  history,  literary  analysis  and  cultural  theory,  but  subject  and object as the definitional parameters of 'doing' even the most scrupulous archival work.  Desire  moves  and  exceeds  the  performance  of  history.  It  spills  over  even Steedman's  slow  and  careful  writing/making  of  the  errant  self  at  its  core.  For Steedman, history may be most telling in the errors desire yields. 12

What if an invisible 'I' is similarly partial? In the opening of Call to Home , Carol Stack (1996) invites us to reimagine the massive migration of African Americans from the North to the South in the 1970s and 1980s through one family's story. Here, in fact, there is no 'I' other than the one implied by seeing what a body could and/or would see rounding the bend, returning home in the company of an as yet unnamed  descendant  of  the  former  sharecropper,  Samuel  Bishop,  disappearing almost  entirely  into  the  tenuous  rhythms  of  identification  with  and  respect  for Bishop's family and its homeplace. Stack writes through the intimacies of others' recollection of Samuel. She reflects her vision and admiration of him in minute attention to the details of the land through which she passes 'as if' in real time, as she draws us into the provisional landscape of Burdy's Bend:

Upstream from the land that Samuel Bishop lived and died for, the water moves dark and slow in the creek bed. The course of the creek twists, doubles back and redoubles, and works itself almost into knots, writing out the territory like anxious knuckles squeezing a sponge. But at the edge of Samuel's sixty acres, land and waterway suddenly seem to sort themselves out, as though a hand of God had just then and there reached down to do the work of the Third Day of creation; the creek swings out deep and wide, cutting a broad arc, and the ground lifts back and away from a fringe of cypress and gum trees up gently through all the acres of fields. Samuel was born on this land, though hardly born to it; it belonged to the white folk, and there was more than half a century of fretting and sweating before he could claim it all for his family, free and clear.

This land in a loop of creek has always been called Burdy's Bend. On the highest ground, in the neck of the land, sits the house where Samuel was born in 1922, where he and Pearl lived their married life and raised their ten children. Pearl still lives  there;  she  has  running  water  now  in  her  kitchen,  pumped  from  the  well through a hose, installed by her grandson Sammy, that snakes across the backyard and pokes into a hole in the kitchen wall. Maybe it was never much of a house, but after all these years its tin roof has buckled and gapped, and the framing has pulled back from the windowsills, leaving cracks big enough for cats. Pearl's blankets shade the windows. But the number of children over the years who came to call this house home, and to call Pearl Bishop 'Miss Pearl,' is almost beyond counting: there were Pearl and Samuel's own ten, and all the nieces and nephews sent back and forth by parents in New York, and there were the two little cousins who came after their mother passed-fourteen children at least at many a time, and sometimes seventeen,  sometimes  more. There  are  still  children  in  the  house,  grandchildren  now. Pearl is still Miss Pearl. (pp. 1-2)

Coming into the projected present where 'Pearl is still Miss Pearl,' Stack proceeds to imagine with us Pearl's sense of Samuel, writing in something like the indirect discourse of narrative fiction:

Pearl always worried about Samuel when he was up north: she fretted that someone or something might grab onto him and keep him in New York and she fretted even more that he might drink away that fat New York paycheck of his. Around home, he would go and have a drink, but up north he was a drinking man, a man who headed straight to Horace's every day after work and sat till closing time in the company of dozens upon dozens of his once and future neighbors, people he had first gotten to know back in Burdy's Bend and New Jericho. Every time he left home he swore to Pearl that the day the job was over he'd come straight home to her, bearing money for the land-and the kind of man he was, he always kept his promise.

That was Samuel for you: when he set out to do something, he was just going to do it. He went straight at it and stuck to it and did it, and then he made sure you knew just what he'd done and how he'd done it so that when the time came, you could do it for yourself, in his image. In your muscles, down to the bone, you'd feel just how he would have moved and done a thing, and even deeper than the bone would be the resonations of his voice and his spirit. (p. 4)

Stack performs Samuel's legacy. She embodies in writing the extent to which 'in your muscles, down to the bone, you'd feel just how he would have moved and done a thing, and even deeper than the bone would be the resonations of his voice and his spirit' (p. 4). She moves into and through this landscape of family relations and raced history the way 'he would have moved and done a thing,'

echoing  yet  again-creating  'resonations'  far  beyond  Burdy's  Bend-Samuel's relationship with the land and people he called home.

In between the stacked jars and folded sheets of Stack's, Pearl's, and Samuel's viewpoints, we might ask: Did Pearl actually say this? What if she had? What if she were to? The effect would be much the same: 13 to give us a deepened sense of how Samuel's character is passed through muscle and bone and spirit, even as his story is  passed through Pearl through Stack to us. We become then part of the 'you' who'd 'feel just how he would have moved and done a thing' so that when the time came 'you could do it for yourself, in his image.' You/I/we could do things the way that Samuel did them, repeating his performance of self, race, and labor as part of the generations that spread out after him, in the hard wake of industrial development. I marvel at who 'I' become every time I read this novelistic passage. 'I' cease to be 'I' in any kind of denominative sense, the sheathing of 'my' identity slipping away with each step further into this landscape and world, as 'I' am finally enfolded in Samuel's steadfast way of doing things. I can feel in my muscles and bones not only the possibility but the imperative to do the thing done, to reenact and to reinvent the traditions Samuel set in motion. At the same time, and out of the same well of performative propulsion (as opposed to Butler's compulsion), I feel drawn past repetition toward revision of whats been done from which these bodies of knowing and doing have been so radically abjected. Accordingly, I would have to say that Stack performs history to excess. In her process of 'doing the thing done,' she gently  undoes  it,  infusing  'home'  with  the  provisional  time  and/or space of what's as yet undone, of what's yet to be done.

What if writing  buried  the  sensuous  reality  of  its  object  in  the  folds  of  an emerging subject? Could their twin becomingness comprise a less alienated practice of performative knowing? This is Julie Taylor's project in Paper Tangos (1998), an ethnographic reflection on the paradoxical status of the tango in Argentina. Taylor writes herself into and through the process of realizing that she had to learn and practice the tango to write it. Her emerging subjectivity begins in collective identification with others reentering the world after the demise of the Junta in 1979, rising through a scrapheap of notes and streets into and through dialogic composition:

In the effervescent release from fear at the fall of the Junta, we timidly began to recreate our social worlds and to compare notes. The exiles into which Argentines had been thrust became familiar episodes-internal exile, as it was known, as well as external. We had been engaged in the lonely task of inventing Argentine culture on our own, often far from Argentina, investing memories and customs with the meaning we each pulled out of our pasts. Nostalgic as we were, many bits and pieces of everyday life had been permeated with longing for a lost peace: food, trivial news and gossip, and the tango. . . .

On one of the city's sunny but cold July winter days, I found myself alone in downtown Buenos Aires. My son was away on a visit. I was between tasks. My bags were all packed, as I had moved out of one apartment but was unable to move into the next. Startled, I realized that I was free to look for the addresses that, for years, I had jotted down one by one, never really believing I would someday be able to

follow them out-to people who taught the tango and to places it was danced. I pulled innumerable scraps of paper from notebooks, pockets, and handbags and began by making my way through miles of ramshackle corridors to find a tiny set of offices whose bemused inhabitants gave me mimeographed sheets of addresses of neighborhood cultural programs that included tango. The night of that same day, in my first class, other students and onlookers praised and criticized teachers and dancers, providing information that sent me on more journeys all over the city, piecing together a universe I had not known existed. The rhythm of my classes and practices rapidly accelerated.

'But why do you do all this dancing?' an acquaintance asked in conversation with several unbelieving Argentines. Another member of the group, who had initially expressed some bewilderment, suddenly lit up. She announced to the rest of the group in the Italian understood on porteno streets, 'Perche la piace!' Because she likes it. And she was right. I was in a world deeply familiar from my years as a dancer, a world that gave me back my body and the modes of learning with it and from it that had formed my earliest perceptions. As the tango threw all this sharply into focus, I recuperated something that had been obliterated by years of rational argument. I recuperated ways of knowing, ways of knowing art, ways of knowing violence, ways of knowing fear-ways of knowing them to be bound up together in a body to which I could lay a tentative claim. (pp. 18-20)

Through the course of the book, Taylor becomes more subject than self: a visceral register of national and cultural power, a body of understanding to which she can lay a claim and yet only a 'tentative' one. As much as she 'recuperated ways of knowing,' she does not own them-any more than does the tango or the nation own her. Whatever sense of self gains is a function of being pierced into recognition or re-knowing by others' perspectives and bodies of experience.

In this last paragraph, the authorial self is jarred out of and into knowing by an acquaintance who takes over textual as well as subjective and/or social space with her demanding question: 'But why do you do all this dancing?' The question is echoed in the faces of other 'unbelieving' witnesses. Taylor seems at a loss for an answer. The question ricochets such that 'another member of the group, who  had  initially  expressed  some  bewilderment,  suddenly  lit  up.'  She  then answers in the Italian patois of the street, not only answering but answering back to the circle of suspicious power of which she had previously been a part, 'Perche la piace!' Taylor translates, referring to herself in the third person: 'Because she likes  it.'  And  translates  again,  this  time  into  her  own  language,  now  saturated with at least three others: 'And she was right.'

Through  the  kind  of  hard  dialogue  by  which  the  authorial  'I'  is  initially, entirely overcome by unauthorized others, Taylor becomes a knowing subject. She writes herself having been written into new ways of knowing, of now knowing art, violence, and fear in and through the passionate vulnerability of embodiment, of which tango is a literal process and a vibrant metaphor, carrying with it its own dialogic force. It is tango that 'threw all of this into sharp focus.'

******

In each of these examples, the writer reinhabits the old in ways that alter it, recounting or suggesting ways in which she is altered in turn. Each recalls research

to the realm of 'the improvisational, the realm of the possible,' reclaiming the foundations of knowledge in bodily error and contradiction. In each case, the writing 'I' gains authority less by proprietary claims on experience than by dispersion in and through the representation of experiences that produce a changed and changing subject. In each case, the ego-identified or intentional self disappears into reflexivity, story, boundless otherness, other times and places, embodied  knowledges,  unspeakable  violence,  and  discovery  itself  as  a  really  great mistake.  In  each  case,  moreover,  the  abject  returns  with  the  performed  self  in process and radical contingency; in the sensuous body-in all of its pleasure and terror; and in embodied difference-raced, gendered, sexed, and classed.

This performative 'I' thus has a politics and an ethics. Performing displacement by error, intimacy, others, it moves beyond the atomization, alienation, and reproduction  of  the  authorial  self  toward  new  points  of  identification  and alliance. Following Russo, a mobile, performative 'I' may thus also produce 'new political  aggregates-provisional,  uncomfortable,  even  conflictual  coalitions  of bodies.' The student moving into or as yet renting space in this subjective habitus may find herself wildly confused, without ready means of textual housekeeping. And yet, to the very extent that-disorderly, aberrant, accident-prone, and uncompromising in her embrace of what might otherwise make us cringe-the reader and/or writer as female stunt pilot makes a perfect mess of conventional scholarly forms, she renews our contract with possibility.

## Notes

- 1. I am referring here to only a few of the founding texts in the cross-disciplinary challenge to conventional critical writing, texts directly related to the so-called crisis in representation in the social sciences and to feminist claims on 'voice,' both of which are tied to changing conceptions of the scholar and/or researcher's relation to truth. See, in particular, Cixous (1976), Clifford (1986), Haraway (1991), hooks (1989), and Miller (1991). For general review of what has come to be called 'performative writing,' see especially the essays by Pollock (1998) and Sedgwick (1998).
- 2. Paper discussed with the student's permission.
- 3. The problem of evaluative protocol for 'literary' ethnography is explicitly addressed by Richardson (2000). See also Bochner's (2001) response to the dismissal of personal narratives of suffering.
- 4. For a similar elaboration of Diamond, see Sandoval-Sanchez and Sternbach (2001), p.  97.  On  performance  and  possibility,  see  Madison  (1998)  and,  for  example,  Pollock (1999) on the performance of a 'possible real.'
- 5. See Schneider's (2001) brilliant reflection on the relation between reproduction, cloning, and various Dollies.
- 6. Walter  Benjamin's  (1968)  essay,  'The  Work  of  Art  in  the  Age  of  Mechanical Reproduction' (appropriately continues to frame discussion here; Peggy Phelan (1993) has provocatively raised the possibility that performance may be a mode of representation without reproduction.

- 7. Re: the ludic implications here, see, for example, T urner (1982).
- 8. Performance discussed with the student's permission. I do not mean in any way to suggest that this is a definitive critique or eulogy, and recognize that the performance event did not directly address any number of related issues. What I can say, however, is that the performance-and  stories  of  it-have  spurred  ongoing  discussion  about  performance, 9/11, the war on Iraq, and memory and memorialization, among other topics. It left a strong trace in subsequent reckonings of which this is but one.
- 9. See Kristeva's (1982) founding discussion of abjection.
- 10. Accordingly, I have encouraged students to assume a 'what if' stance in critical discussion of others' work. Undergraduate students in particular seem particularly stricken by the need to keep their 'hands off' others' work, especially if it in any way explicitly entails first person subjectivity. Evaluative critique rests on an 'if, then' logic: if you did this, then this would be better. Although I don't wish to abandon evaluation, what if seems an effective way to circumvent students' reservations about criticizing their peers (often defended in playground variations on rank relativism: 'that's his story; I can't say'; 'that's my interpretation; you can't say!') and to reinvigorate evaluation with ethics. I consequently shift the classroom discourse slightly toward possibility: what if he or she did this or that?, to the extent that, in at least one recent class, students began to raise their hands to indicate: 'I have a 'what if': what if he or she did this or that?'
- 11. None of the texts I address are typically identified with 'new' or 'auto' ethnography, nor are they explicitly or experimental critical or 'performative' writing.
- 12. This is in many ways what is happening in a book such as Beverly Skeggs' (1995) edited collection, Feminist Cultural Theory: Process and Production -in which the contributors perform their reflexive consciousness about the process of completing major scholarly works. They reflect on the seedy underside of scholarship: the problems, the fixes, the knots, the error of their ways, showing how they got driven into a certain corner by a method or theory, or how they found a rabbit hole and jumped in. They also imagine alternative routes: what else they might have done or might do. In this sense, they undo the completeness of prior work, drowning it in process-past and present, dramatizing the perilous possibilities that hide out in the otherwise smooth surfaces of scholarly achievement.
- 13. Re: narrative truth, see T rinh (1989), especially 119-121.

## References

Benjamin,  W.  (1968).  The  work  of  art  in  the  age  of  mechanical  reproduction.  In Illuminations (H. Zohn, Trans., pp. 217-252). New York: Schocken Books.

Bochner, A. (2001). Narrative's virtues. Qualitative Inquiry , 7 (2), 131-157.

Butler,  J.  (1990). Gender  trouble:  Feminism  and  the  subversion  of  identity .  New  York: Routledge.

Butler, J. (1993). Bodies that matter: On the discursive limits of 'sex.' New York: Routledge. Cixous, H. (1976). The laugh of the medusa (K. Cohen &amp; P . Cohen, Trans). Signs: Journal of Women and Culture in Society , 1 (4), 875-893.

Clifford,  J.  (1986).  Introduction:  Partial  truths.  In  J.  Clifford  &amp;  G.  E.  Marcus  (Eds.), Writing culture: The poetics and politics of ethnography (pp. 1-26). Berkeley: University of California Press.

Croce, A. (1995, December 26). Discussing the undiscussable. The New Yorker .

Diamond, E. (Ed.). (1996).

Performance and cultural politics

. New York: Routledge.

Fiske, J. (1993).

Power plays, power works

. New York: Verso.

Hamera, J. (2000). The romance of monsters: Theorizing the virtuoso body in performance. Theatre Topics, 10 (2), 145-153.

Haraway, D. (1991). Situated knowledges: The science question and the privilege of partial perspective.  In Simians,  cyborgs,  and  women: The  reinvention  of  nature (pp. 183-201). New York: Routledge.

hooks, b. (1989). Talking back: Thinking feminist, thinking black . Boston: South End. Kauffman, L. S. (1993). The long goodbye: Against personal testimony, or an infant grifter grows up. In L. S. Kauffman (Ed.), American feminist thought at century's end: A reader (pp. 258-270). Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.

Kristeva, J. (1982). Powers of horror: An essay on abjection . New York: Columbia University Press.

Madison, D. S. (1998). Performance, personal narratives, and the politics of possibility. In S. J. Dailey (Ed.), The future of performance studies: Visions and revisions (pp. 276-286). Washington DC: National Communication Association.

Miller, N. K. (1991). Getting personal: Feminist occasions and other autobiographical acts . New York: Routledge.

Phelan, P . (1993). Unmarked: The politics of performance . New York: Routledge.

Pollock, D. (1998). Performing writing. In P . Phelan &amp; J. Lane (Eds.), The ends of performance (pp. 73-103). New York: New York University Press.

Pollock, D. (1999). Telling bodies performing birth . New York: Columbia University Press. Richardson, L. (2000). Evaluating ethnography. Qualitative Inquiry, 6 (2), 253-255.

Russo, M. (1994). The female grotesque: Risk, excess, and modernity . New York: Routledge. Sandoval-Sanchez, A., &amp; Sternbach, N. S. (2001). Stages of life: Transcultural performance and identity in U.S. Latina theater . T ucson: University of Arizona Press.

Schneider,  R.  (2001).  Hello  Dolly  well  hello  Dolly:  The  double  and  its  theatre.  In P. Campbell &amp; A. Kear (Eds.), Psychoanalysis and performance (pp. 94-114). New York: Routledge.

Scott, J. W. (1992). Experience. In J. Butler &amp; J. W. Scott (Eds.), Feminists theorize the political (pp. 22-40). New York: Routledge.

Sedgwick, E. K. (1998). Teaching 'experimental critical writing.' In P . Phelan &amp; J. Lane (Eds.), The ends of performance (pp. 104-115). New York: New York University Press. Skeggs,  B.  (Ed.).  (1995). Feminist  cultural  theory:  Process  and  production .  New  York: Manchester University Press.

Stack, C. (1996). Call to home: African Americans reclaim the rural south . New York: Basic Books.

Steedman, C. (2001). What a rag rug means. In Dust: The archive and cultural history . New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.

Taylor, J. (1998). Paper tangos. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

- Trinh, T . M. (1989). Woman, native, other: Writing postcoloniality and feminism . Bloomington: Indiana University Press.

Turner, V . (1982). Liminal to liminoid, in play, flow, and ritual. In From ritual to theatre: The human seriousness of play (pp. 20-60). New York: Performing Arts Journal Publications.

Della  Pollock is  a  professor  in  the  Department  of  Communication  Studies  at Chapel Hill, teaching in the areas of performance and cultural studies. She is the author of Telling Bodies Performing Birth (1999) and editor of Remembering: Oral History  Performance (2005)  and Exceptional  Spaces:  Essays  in  Performance  and History (1998).