



THE ESSENTIAL WORKS OF 
MICHEL FOUCAULT 
1954-1984 
PAUL RABINOW 
SERIES EDITOR 
Ethics, 
Edited by Paul Rabinow

MICHEL FOUCAULT 
ETHICS 
SUBJECTIVITY AND TRUTH 
Ediled by 
PAUL RABINOW 
Translated by 
ROBERT HURLEY AND OTHERS 
THE ESSENTIAL WORKS OF 
MICHEL FOUCAULT 
1954-1984 
VOLUME ONE 
THE NEW PRESS 
NEW YORK

© 1994 by Editions Gallimard. Compilation, introduction, and new 
translations © 1997 by The New Press. All rights reserved. 
No part of this book may be reproduced, in any form, without written 
permission from the publisher. The publisher is grateful for 
pennission to reprint the following copyrighted material: 
English translations of "Friendship as a Way of Ufe" and "The Ethic of 
the Concern for the Self as a Practice of Freedom" reprinted from 
Foucault Live: fnteroiews 1961-1984, Lotringer, ed. (New York, 
Autonomedia, Ig89), by pennission. English translations of "Sexual 
Choice, Sexual Act" and "The Masked Philosopher" reprinted from 
Michel Foucault: Politics, Philosophy, Culture, Lawrence D. Katzman, 
ed. (1988), by permission of the publisher, Routledge, New York 
and London. "Sex, Power and the Politics of Identity" reprinted from 
The Advocate no. 400, August 7, 1984, by permission. "Sexuality 
and Solitude" reprinted from the London Review of Books, 
vol. Ill, no. g, May !2:1-June 5, 1981. English translation of "The Battle 
for Chastity" reprinted from Western Sexuality, Aries, Bejin, eds., 
with permission from the publisher, Blackwell Publishers. 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Foucault, Michel. 
[Selections. English. 1997l 
Ethics: subjectivity and truth / by Michel Foucault; edited by Paul 
Rabinow; translated by Robert Hurley and others. 
p. cm.-(The essential works of Michel Foucault, 1954-1984; v. 1) 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
ISBN 1-56584-352-5 
I. Ethics. I. Rainbow, Paul. II. Title. Ill. Series: Foucault, Michel. 
Oit et ecrits. English. Selections; v. 1. 
82430.F722E5 1997 
194-dc20 
Originally published as Dits and &rits, 1954-1988, 
in 1994 by Editions Gallimard, Paris 
Published in the United States by The New Press, New York 
Distributed by W. W. Norton & Company, Inc., New York 
The New Press was established in 1990 as a not-for-profit alternative 
to the large, commercial publishing houses currently dominating the 
book publishing industry. The New Press operates in the public interest 
rather than for private gain, and is committed to publishing, in inno­
vative ways, works of educational, cultural, and community value that 
might not normally be commercially viable. 
The New Press is grateful for support for this publication from the 
French Ministry of Culture. 
Book design by Paul Carlos 
Production management by Kim Waymer 
Printed in the United States of America 
9 8 7 6 5 432 I

CONTENTS 
Series Preface 
VII 
Acknowledgments 
IX 
Introduction: The History of Systems of Thought by Paul Rabinow 
XI 
Note on Terms and Translations 
XLIII 
PART ONE 
THE COURSES 
3 
Candidacy Presentation: College de France, 1969 
5 
The Will to Knowledge 
11 
Penal Theories and Institutions 
17 
The Punitive Society 
23 
Psychiatric Power 
39 
The Abnormals 
51 
Society Must Be Defended 
59 
Security, Territory, and Population 
67 
The Birth of Biopolitics 
73 
On the Government of the Living 
81 
Subjectivity and Truth 
87 
The Hermeneutic of the Subject 
93

PART TWO 
ETHICS 
109 
Polemics, Politics, and Problematizations 
III 
An Interview by Stephen Riggins 
121 
Friendship as a Way of Life 
135 
Sexual Choice, Sexual Act 
141 
The Social Triumph of the Sexual Will 
157 
Sex, Power, and the Politics of Identity 
163 
Sexuality and Solitude 
175 
The Battle for Chastity 
185 
Preface to The History of Sexuality, Volume Two 
199 
Self Writing 
207 
Technologies of the Self 
223 
On the Genealogy of Ethics: An Overview of Work in Progress 
253 
The Ethics of the Concern for Self as a Practice of Freedom 
281 
What is Enlightenment? 
303 
The Masked Philosopher 
321 
Index 
329

SERIES PREFACE 
Michel Foucault provides a splendid definition of work: "That which is 
susceptible of introducing a significant difference in the field of knowl­
edge, at the cost of a certain difficulty for the author and the reader, 
with, however, the eventual recompense of a certain pleasure, that is 
to say of access to another figure of truth."1 Diverse factors shape 
the emergence, articulation, and circulation of a work and its effects. 
Foucault gave us intellectual tools to understand these phenomena. In 
Michel Foucault: Essential Works, we use these very tools to understand 
his own work. Though he intended his books to be the core of his intel­
lectual production, he is also well known for having made strategic use 
of a number of genres-the book and the article to be sure, but also 
the lecture and the interview. Indeed, few modern thinkers have used 
such a wide array of forms in so skillful a fashion, making them an 
integral component in the development and presentation of their work. 
In this light, our aim in this series is to assemble a compelling and rep­
resentative collection of Foucault's written and spoken words outside 
those included in his books. 
Foucault died on June 25, '1984, at age fifty-seven, of AIDS, just days 
after receiving the first reviews of the second and third volumes of The 
History if Sexuality in the hospital. A year previous to his death, when 
he was showing no signs of illness, he had written a letter indicating 
that he wanted no posthumous publications; through the course of com­
plex negotiations between those legally responsible to him, intellectu­
ally engaged with him, and emotionally close to him, it was decided 
that this letter constituted his will. He left behind, as far as we know, 
no cache of unpublished texts; we must conclude, then, that his papers 
were "in order." Ten years later, Editions Gallimard published Dits et 
ecrits, well over three thousand pages of texts, organized chronologi­
cally. The editors sought to collect all Foucault's published texts (pref­
aces, introductions, presentations, interviews, articles, interventions, 
lectures, and so on) not included in his books. We have made a selec­
tion, eliminating overlapping or repetition of different versions of sim­
ilar materials. Likewise, a number of the lectures and courses will in 
time be published separately in English.

VIII Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
What we have included in this and the following two volumes are 
the writings that seemed to us central to the evolution of Foucault's 
thought. We have organized them thematically. Selecting from this cor­
pus was a formidable responsibility that proved to be a challenge and 
a pleasure. Many of these texts were previously unavailable in English. 
In broad lines, the organization of the series follows one proposed by 
Foucault himself when he wrote: "My objective has been to create a 
history of the different modes by which, in our culture, human beings 
are made subjects. My work has dealt with three modes of objectifi­
cation which transform human beings into subjects."2 In Volume One, 
following his course summaries from the College de France, which pro­
vide a powerful synoptic view of his many unfinished projects, the texts 
address "the way a human being turns him-or herself into a subject."5 
Volume Two is organized around Foucault's analysis of "the modes of 
inquiry which try to give themselves the status of the sciences."4 Sci­
ence, for Foucault, was a domain of practices constitutive of experience 
as well as of knowledge. Consequently, this volume treats the diverse 
modes of representations, of signs, and of discourse. Finally, Volume 
Three contains texts treating "the objectivizing of the subject in divid­
ing pratices,"5 or, more generally, power relations. 
NOTES 
I Foucault, "Des Travaux," in Dits et ecrits (Paris: Gallimard, 1994), vol. 4, p. 367. 
2 Foucault, "The Subject and Power," in Michel Foucault: Beyond Structuralism and Hermeneutics, 
2d ed., Hubert Dreyfus and Paul Rabinow (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1983), p. 208. 
3 Idem. 
4 Idem. 
5 Idem.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Thanks for their detailed reading and comments to Joao Biehl and 
James Faubion. The support and/or comments of Judith Butler, Didier 
Eribon, Claude Imbert, Mike Panisiui, Marc Rabinow, Andre Schiffrin, 
Marilyn Seid, and Arpad Szakolczai are much appreciated.



THE HISTORY OF SYSTEMS OF THOUGHT 
Michel Foucault delivered his first lecture at the College de France, 
France's most prestigious academic institution, on December 2, 1970, 
at the age of forty-four. I He named his chair at the College "The His­
tory of Systems of Thought." "Systems of thought," he wrote, "are the 
forms in which, during a given period of time, knowledges [savoirs] 
individualize, achieve an equilibrium, and enter into communication."* 
Foucault divided his work on the history of systems of thought into 
three interrelated parts, the "re-examination of knowledge, the con­
ditions of knowledge, and the knowing subject."2 Faithful to the broad 
contours of this program, he moved increasingly in the last decade or so 
of his life toward an emphasis on the third term, the knowing subject. 
As part of his application to the College de France, Foucault had sub­
mitted a project of instruction and research, on "the knowledge [savoir] 
of heredity" as a system of thought. The choice of heredity as a research 
topic is fully in line with the work he had carried out in cooperation 
with Georges Canguilhem, the historian and philosopher of the life 
sciences with whom he was working during this period. The project's 
goal was to expand the analYSis of natural history and biology, which 
Foucault had undertaken in The Order if Things. How did it happen, he 
asked, that a nonprestigious set of knowledges, such as those surround­
ing breeding, eventually took the form and function of a science-une 
connaissance scientifique-as important as genetics? In what specific 
fashion did this particular science "take up" more general historical 
events and enter into relations with other structures? The answers to 
these questions, Foucault held, would require philosophical concepts 
and detailed empirical inquiry. He wrote that, whenever possible, he 
would employ "a concrete example" to "serve as a testing ground for 
analysis." This deceptively simple rule of thumb provided him with 
a powerful means to counterbalance the weaknesses and to multiply 
the strengths of standard historical and philosophical approaches. 
He drew on existing resources, putting them to new uses. From the 
great French tradition of the Annales school of historical analysis, he 
*See p. 5 of this volume. Hereafter, all page citations given in parentheses are to this 
volume.

XII Introduction: The History cifSystems of Though! 
retained an tradition of the Annales school of historical analysis, he 
retained an emphasis on long-term and impersonal economic and 
social trends; from the equally distinctive French lineage of the his­
tory of science, he adopted an emphasis on concepts and epistemologi­
cal rupture points. One could say, to simplify, that he sought to work 
at the nexus where the history of practices met the history of concepts. 
In 1966, Foucault had ended his most famous book, The Order of 
Things, impatiently awaiting the dispersal of the episteme of Man, 
thinking he discerned glimmers of an imminent reassemblage of lan­
guage into a new form. In his inaugural lecture at the College, "The 
Order of Discourse," he looked back to the sixth century B.C. For him, 
it had been a time of "Greek poets [speaking] true discourse ... inspir­
ing respect and terror ... meting out justice, weaving into the fabric of 
fate," before the tragic rupture, "a century later [when] Truth moved 
from the ritualized act-potent and just-to settle on what was enun­
ciated: its meaning, its form, its object, and its relation to what it 
referred to."3 He solemnly announced that his project-and the goal 
of his work-was "to question our will to truth, to restore to discourse 
its character as an event; to abolish the sovereignty of the signifier."4 
However, he would shortly abandon this nostalgia for a union of power, 
justice, and discourse. In order to rethink the goal of overcoming the 
will to truth, he would abandon his attempt to look back to the time 
of the Greek poets-just as he would foresake his state of alert, ever­
attentive to signs of a coming episteme. Nevertheless, he continued to 
think about how to move beyond sovereign regimes of power and dis­
course to question the will to truth. 
Earlier in the inaugural lecture, Foucault wondered, "what has been, 
what still is, throughout our discourse, this will to truth which has sur­
vived throughout so many centuries of our history; or if we ask what 
is, in its very general form, the kind of division governing our will to 
knowledge"? He answered, "we may discern something like a system 
of exclusion (historical, modifiable, institutionally constraining) in the 
process of development."5 This formulation is vintage Foucault. From 
his earliest publications, he had identified and analyzed the functions 
of systems of exclusions variously linked to scientific categorizations. 
He continued to produce analyses of the will to knowledge, but they 
gradually came to be situated within a different framework. The will to 
truth, on the other hand, maintains a rather obscure presence through­
out his work. At times, he strongly contrasts the will to truth with the

Introduction: The History-cifSystems of Thought XIII 
will to knowledge; however, almost simultaneously, it frequently seems 
to be totally enveloped by it. Apparently, at this point, as he entered 
the College de France, Foucault had not established an adequate con­
ceptual framework within which to develop this opposition. 
The Courses 
The submission of "course summaries" was one of the few bureaucratic 
requirements at the College. The summaries Foucault submitted are 
remarkably straightforward, even didactic. The courses themselves 
shared this pedagogical quality, although they were often presented 
with exuberant humor and theatrical flair. They provide a series of pre­
liminary sketches of extraordinary vitality and lucidity. It is essential 
to emphasize that the courses at the College were works in progress­
philosophical-historical expeditions in search of new objects and new 
ways of relating to things. The courses can best be seen as exercises, 
not final performances. 
His inaugural course was entitled "The Will to Knowledge" (p. ll). 
He promised to explore, "fragment by fragment," the "morphology of 
the will to knowledge," through alternating historical inquiries and the­
oretical questioning. The first year's course would provide an initial test 
of the place and role played by the will to knowledge in the history of 
the systems of thought. He began by attempting to clarify a set of dis­
tinctions: "between knowledge [savoir] and learning [connaissance]; 
the differences between the will to knowledge [savoir] and the will to 
truth [verite]; the position of the subject, or subjects, in relation to that 
will." His reference to "that will" is mysterious, given that he has just 
distinguished two types. Although grammatically the referent is "the 
will to truth," Foucault immediately turned the course to "the will 
to knowledge."6 
This condensation of the two "wills" arises in part from the figures 
Foucault chose to compare, Aristotle and Nietzsche, and the manner 
in which he cast the comparison, as exemplars, extreme and opposed 
cases. Foucault interpreted Aristotle as representing the universal and 
naturalistic pole. For Aristotle, there is an essential pregiven harmony 
between sensation, pleasure, knowing, and truth. Our perceptual appa­
ratus is constituted in such a way that it establishes a link of pleasure 
and of (above all visual) knowledge, even when such a link serves no 
direct utilitarian purpose. The same economy extends all the way up

X I V Introduction: The History of Systems of Thought 
Lhe hierarchy through to the highest form of knowing, contemplation. 
As posited in the famous opening lines of the Metaphysics, the desire 
to know is essential to who we are, and is ours "by nature." Our nature 
is to seek knowledge, and we take pleasure through doing so. He offers 
Nietzsche's The Gay Science, on the other hand, as a total contrast to 
Aristotle's naturalism. Nietzsche's knowledge (connaissance) is not 
an appropriation of universals but an invention that masks the basest 
instincts, interests, desires, and fears.7 There is no preestablished 
harmony of these drives and the world-just the contingent, tempo­
rary, and malicious products of deceitful wills, striving for advantage, 
fighting for survival and engaged in a ceaseless effort to forcefully 
impose their will on each other. Knowledge is not a natural faculty 
but a series of struggles, a weapon in the universal war of domination 
and submission. Knowledge is always secondary to those more primary 
struggles. It is linked not to pleasure in flourishing but harnessed to 
hatred and struggle. Truth is our longest lie, our most intimate ally 
and enemy. 
The interpretation Foucault gives of both thinkers at this moment, 
because it provides such an absolute contrast, does not allow for a fruit­
ful distinction between the will to knowledge and the will to truth. He 
seems to affirm their functional identity in Western history, a distinc­
tion without a difference. Had Foucault chosen Aristotle's Ethics rather 
than his Metaphysics as his paradigmatic text, these same relations of 
pleasure, knowledge, and the body would have been present, but they 
would have taken a different form. Over the course of the next decade, 
he would reexamine the elements of his interpretation of both Aristotle 
and Nietzsche and recombine them differently. Later on Foucault would 
indeed come a good deal closer to posing the relations of pleasure, 
friendship, and practices of truth as a problem, in a way reminiscent 
of the Ethics, although he would never adopt Aristotle's answers, or 
his metaphysics. 
The Move Toward Power 
During the early seventies, for reasons his biographers have sought to 
explain in terms of his personal life, Foucault began to move away from 
these philosophical themes as well as the project on heredity. Rather, 
he devoted his courses to material directly related to technologies of 
power. These themes will be treated more fully in Volume Three of this

Introduction: The History of Systems of Thought xv 
series; however, it is vital to an understanding of his eventual thoughts 
on ethics to underline several key changes here. In 1975-76, he entitled 
his course "Society Must Be Defended" (p. 59). The course began with 
a despondent, almost despairing apology for what he characterized as 
his thinking's directionless drift. While he had intended to bring the 
work of recent years to completion in his current lectures, he was at a 
loss on how to do so. He lamented that "[t]hough these researches were 
very closely related to each other, they have failed to develop into any 
continuous or coherent whole."8 This confession seems severe given the 
publication of Discipline and Punish in 1975 and in 1976 The History 
of Sexuality, vol. 1. 
Obliged to continue teaching, Foucault decided to take up the ques­
tion of power relations. According to him, we lacked an adequate under­
standing of power as something other than a reflection of economic 
structures. Two alternatives were available: one that equates mecha­
nisms of power with repression, another that locates "the basis of the 
relationship of power in the hostile engagement of forces .... For con­
venience, I shall call this Nietzsche's hypothesis."9 The first model, 
associated with the eighteenth-century philosophes and their precur­
sors, proceeds from the social contract in which individuals give up 
their natural rights to a sovereign in a contractual agreement for peace 
and prosperity. The model contains explicit normative limits; when the 
sovereign extends his power beyond the contractual stipulations, then 
his use of power can be called oppression. Legitimate power is finite.lO 
In the contrastive model (the couplet war-domination), power is under­
stood as a perpetual relationship of force whose only goal is submis­
sion, the norm of power has no internal limitation: power seeks only 
victory. "It is obvious," Foucault told his audience, "that all my work 
in recent years has been couched in terms of" the second model. How­
ever, "I have been forced to reconsider [it] both because it is insuffi­
cient" and because its key notions "must be considerably modified if 
not ultimately abandoned." This forced reconsideration follows from 
the conclusion that "it is wholly inadequate to the analysis of the mech­
anisms and effects of power that it is so pervasively used to character­
ize today." 11 
A problem was coming into focus. By the end of the year, Foucault 
submitted a crisp course summary: "In order to pursue the concrete 
analysis of power relations one must abandon the juridical model of 
sovereignty; a model that assumes the individual as the subject of nat-

x V I Introduction: The History 0/ Systems of Thought 
IIl"al rights or primitive powers" (p. 59). Foucault never seriously enter­
tained a view of the individual as bearer of natural rights. There is an 
analogy between the figure of the individual endowed with primitive 
powers and the Nietzschean subject Foucault had invoked as the con­
trastive and polar opposite to Aristotle in his first year of lectures at the 
College. To the extent that the Nietzschean subject had itself been insuf­
ficiently submitted to genealogical scrutiny, it needed to be rethought. 
The questions Foucault posed in his 1975-76 lectures lend support 
to this reexamination. How and when, Foucault asked, did we mod­
erns begin to interpret (dechiffrer) power relations as examples of 
warfare? Is warfare the general model for all social relations? How 
did an interpretation emerge that viewed the subject as endowed with 
primitive powers of antagonism, proclivities for war, mutual antago­
nism? When and where did a historico-political discourse of war sub­
stitute for a philosophico-juridical discourse of sovereignty? How is 
it that truths came to function as arms? How did it come to be that 
within such a discourse, there emerged a subject for whom universal 
truth and natural law (droit general) came to be seen as illusions or 
snares? How did this somber, critical, and intensely mythical form of 
self-understanding and practice emerge? Under what conditions did 
this figure arise who refuses the role of mediator, of neutral arbiter, 
a role philosophers have assigned to themselves from Solon to Kant 
to Habermas? How should we analyze a principle of interpretation 
that proceeds from violence, hatred, passions, revenge, that makes 
brute givens such as vigor, physique, force, and temperament the 
underpinnings of thought; that views history as a series of chance 
events? What has been the trajectory of such a historical discourse 
that can be advanced both by bearers of aristocratic nostalgia as well 
as popular revenge? Pursuing this line of inquiry would make it pos­
sible not only to answer the question of how von Clausewitz became 
possible but, more unexpectedly, to pose the question of how Nietzsche 
became possible. 
By the publication of "The Will to Knowledge" in 1976, Foucault 
had reshaped his understanding of power relations. He was also on the 
road to transforming his understanding of knowledge and the subject. 
Foucault coined the phrase the "speaker's benefit" for those who com­
bined "a discourse in which sex, the revelation of truth, the overturning 
of global laws, the proclamation of a new day to come, and the prom­
ise of a certain felicity are linked together. "12 Foucault's sarcasm about

Introduction: The History if Systems of Thought xv I I 
this longing for a space of knowledge simultaneously outside forma­
tions of power and yet capable of undermining them all reaches its rue­
ful culmination in the closing lines of the first volume of The History 
of Sexuality: "The irony of this deployment is in having us believe that 
our 'liberation' is in the balance."13 The highest form of irony is self­
irony. Although the main target of the speaker's benefit was the reign­
ing militant orthodoxy in France, Foucault was equally looking back 
over a path he himself had traveled. His true problem, he began to 
think, was "the subject" and its relations to the will to truth. 
Over the next four years, Foucault carried out a major recasting and 
consolidation of his core conceptual tools. The details of this complex 
rethinking will receive extended treatment in the introduction to Vol­
ume Three of this series. Nevertheless, it is again crucial to underline a 
central shift in his views on power relations, for it situates the problems 
that his later thought sought to address. During the courses of the late 
seventies, Foucault further refined his view of power relations. Simply 
and schematically, he concluded: "It seems to me we must distinguish 
between power relations understood as strategic games between liber­
ties-in which some try to control the conduct of others, who in turn 
try to avoid allowing their conduct to be controlled or try to control the 
conduct of others-and the states of domination that people ordinar­
ily call 'power.' And between the two, between games of power and 
states of domination, you have technologies of government-under­
stood, of course, in a very broad sense .... " To denote this broad under­
standing of government, Foucault used the term govern mentality. It 
implies, he continued, "the relationship of the self to itself, and ... 
[covers] the range of practices that constitute, define, organize and 
instrumentalize the strategies which individuals in their freedom can 
use in dealing with each other. I believe that the concept of govern­
mentality makes it possible to bring out the freedom of the subject and 
its relationship to others-which constitutes the very stuff [matiere] of 
ethics." Beginning from this premise, Foucault understands thought as 
the exercise of freedom. 14 
SIGNS OF EXISTENCE 
In 1979, Foucault reviewed The Era of Ruptures by his friend Jean 
Daniel, the editor of a Parisian weekly, Le Nouvel observateur, to 
which Foucault had regularly contributed political commentary. His

XVIII Introduction: The History of Systems of Thought 
review, "Pour une Morale de l'inconfort"15 (best translated as "For an 
Ethic of Discomfort" for reasons that will be elucidated below), is a 
kind of editorial-a combination of praise, reflection, and advocacy­
addressed to the journal's urbane, leftist audience at a time when their 
political and intellectual hopes were rather dampened. Foucault set 
forth several guiding principles and themes, to which he would return 
incessantly in the remaining years of his life, albeit in different con­
texts and using different forms (see, for example, "What is Enlighten­
ment?" p. 505). He began by invoking a question posed in 1784 by the 
Berlinische Monatsschrift to a number of leading Aujkliirer, includ­
ing Kant: "What is Enlightenment?" The question, as well as Kant's 
response, would preoccupy Foucault over the next several years. These 
reflections provided him with a starting point from which to transform 
the newspaper's question and Kant's answer into a different question­
"What is modernity?"-or, as he posed it in his book review, "who are 
we in the present, what is this fragile moment from which we can't 
detach our identity and which will carry that identity away with itself?" 
Good journalism required a passion for stalking the elusive singu­
larity of the present. More challenging yet was the task of observing 
oneself, with a certain distance, in the process of practicing this metier, 
midst the hurly-burly of everyday events, crises, deadlines, and myr­
iad pressing demands. Foucault was intrigued by the fact that some 
journalists were better suited than philosophers and political activists 
for the task of sustaining a supple, yet critical, stance in the swirl of 
passing scenes, of resisting the temptation to always have a "position." 
Foucault praised Jean Daniel for his deft handling of this ever-renewed 
demand on the left to have a firm, well-defended, vantage point for 
anchoring one's analysis. Vantage point, after all, is a military term 
connoting an overall perspective from afar, the proverbial bird's-eye­
view-but strategic advantage, however, does not necessarily provide 
understanding. For Foucault, in order to establish the right relationship 
to the present-to things, to others, to oneself-one must stay close to 
events, experience them, be willing to be effected and affected by them. 
Foucault was not singing the praises of vacillation and indecision, or 
of a total refusal of perspective. Banality of thought, resolute oppor­
tunism, or a program of deconstruction and transgression as ends in 
themselves all seemed to him to be equally dubious. "The demand 
[ex(genceJ for an identity," he insisted, "and the injunction to break 
that identity, both feel, in the same way, abusive."16 Such demands are

Introduction: The History if Systems of Thought XIX 
abusive because they assume in advance what one is, what one must 
do, what one always must be closed to, which side one must be on. He 
sought not so much to resist as to evade this installed dichotomy. One 
might say he refused the blackmail of having to choose between a uni­
fied, unchanging identity and a stance of perpetual and obligatory trans­
gression. "One's way [faqonJ of no longer remaining the same," he 
wrote, "is, by definition, the most singular part of who I am." However, 
that singularity was never a blanket negation: if one knew in advance 
that everything, including one's self and the current state of affairs, was 
bad, what would there be to learn? What would be the sense of act­
ing? Why think? A life without the possibility of error would not be 
conceivable. One migHt say, following Georges Canguilhem, such a life 
would not be alive. . 
Who one is, Foucault wrote, emerges acutely out of the problems 
with which one struggles. In the review, he phrased his approach in a 
manner so as to distance it from Sartre and his version of the commit­
ted intellectual: "Experience with ... rather than engagement in ... " 
Privileging experience over engagement makes it increasingly difficult 
to remain "absolutely in accord with oneself," for identities are defined 
by trajectories, not by position taking. Such an attitude is an uncom­
fortable one insofar as one risks being mistaken and is vulnerable to 
the perfect hindsight of those who adopt firm positions (especially after 
events have passed) or who speak assuredly of universals as though the 
singular were secondary. To that extent, one could say, adopting a dis­
tinction Foucault developed in his work leading up to the second vol­
ume of The History of Sexuality, The Uses of Pleasure, that this attitude 
is rooted in an ethics and not a morality, a practice rather than a van­
tage point, an active experience rather than a passive waiting. 
The challenge is not to replace one certitude (evidence) with another 
but to cultivate an attention to the conditions under which things become 
"evident," ceasing to be objects of our attention and therefore seem­
ingly fixed, necessary, and unchangeable. A few pages later in the 
review, Foucault approvingly invoked Maurice Merleau-Ponty's defini­
tion of the task of philosophy, "to never consent to be completely at ease 
with what seems evident to oneself." What seems so new, if we are 
attentive, often can be seen to have been around, at the back of our 
minds, at the corner of our vision, at the edge of things we almost, but 
never quite, saw or said. "The most fragile of passing moments has its 
antecedents. There is a whole ethics of an alert certitude [evidence]

xx Introduction: The History of Systems if Thought 
which doesn't exclude a rigorous economy of Truth and Falsity, far 
from it, but isn't summed up by that economy either. "17 Philosophy is 
a practice and an ethos, a state or condition of character, not detached 
observation and legislation. "What is philosophy after all? if not a 
means of reflecting on not so much on what is true or false but on our 
relation to truth? How, given that relation to truth, should we act?" 
("The Masked Philosopher," p. 321) In this formulation, we see the 
thinker as nominalist engaged in a reexamination of knowledge, the 
conditions of knowledge, and the knowing subject. 
The Masked Philosopher 
Foucault's exasperation with what he continued to see and feel as politi­
cal posturing and lack of imagination in France found another articu­
lation in an anonymous interview he gave in April 1980 to the leading 
French daily, Le Monde, which was interviewing leading thinkers about 
their views on the current scene. He refused to join in this vogue of 
condemning "intellectuals," which was sweeping Paris as a part of 
rejection of the media and its supposed destructive influence on French 
political and intellectual culture: "I've never met any intellectuals. I 
have met people who write novels, and others who treat the sick; 
people who work in economics and others who compose electronic 
music. I've met people who teach, people who paint and people of 
whom I have never really understood what they do. But intellectuals? 
Never" (p. 321). His sarcasm was aimed at what he saw as the reigning 
style of criticism, one based on denunciation, condemnation, judgment 
of guilt, and attempts to silence and ultimately to destroy the object of 
criticism. He lyrically but pointedly evoked an alternative: "I can't help 
but dream about a kind of criticism that would try not to judge but to 
bring an oeuvre, a sentence, an idea to life; it would light fires, watch 
the grass grow, listen to the wind, and catch the sea foam in the breeze 
and scatter it. It would multiply not judgments but signs of existence; 
it would summon them, drag them from their sleep .... It would bear 
the lightning of possible storms." We should remember that he agreed 
to the interview on condition that he remain anonymous, that he be 
referred to simply as "the masked philosopher." Apparently not many 
readers guessed that Foucault-whom many thought of as "the nihil­
ist," "the deconstructionist"-had spoken these words. 
Well and good, the interviewer persisted, but isn't the present, after

Introduction: The History of Systems of Thought XXI 
all, a time of mediocrity and lowered expectations? Foucault responded 
with an emphatic no to that commonplace as well. Quite the contrary, 
he insisted: it is a propitious time. "There is an overabundance of things 
to be known: fundamental, terrible, wonderful, funny, insignificant, and 
crucial at the same time. And there is an enormous curiosity, a need, 
a desire to know .... Curiosity is seen as futility. However, ... it evokes 
"care"; it evokes the care one takes of what exists and what might exist; 
a sharpened sense of reality, but one that is never immobilized before 
it; a readiness to find what surrounds us strange and odd; a certain 
determination to throw off familiar ways of thought and to look at the 
same things in a different way; a passion for seizing what is happen­
ing now and what is disappearing; a lack of respect for traditional hier­
archies of what is important and fundamental. I dream of a new age 
of curiosity. We have the technical means; the desire is there; there is 
an infinity of things to know; the people capable of doing such work 
exist" (p. 521). Curiosity: a simple little thing. 
At this time, one of Foucault's cherished projects was to create a 
different kind of publishing in France. After Editions Gallimard, the 
prestigious house that published his major books in huge print runs, 
refused his offer to edit a small series of books, Foucault (along with 
Paul Veyne and Fran<;;ois Wahl) succeeded in convincing another dis­
tinguished Parisian publisher, Les Editions du Seuil, to initiate a series 
entitled "Works" (Des Travaux). The purpose of the series was to 
/ publish works that might be considered too long and difficult-hence 
lacking an immediate audience-but that over time would show their 
importance, short pieces outlining the main points of future work to 
be developed over time, and translations of important foreign works 
with no large market in France. Foucault and friends provided a trench­
ant definition of "work" as "that which is susceptible of introducing a 
meaningful difference in the field of knowledge, albeit with a certain 
demand placed on the author and reader, but with the eventual rec­
ompense of a certain pleasure, that is to say of an access to another 
figure of truth. "18 
Arenas: Iran, Poland, USA 
"Where are we today?" Foucault asked his readers to ask themselves in 
1979.19 At a moment of the globalization ofthe economy? "Certainly." At 
a moment of global geopolitics as well. But, he wondered, was thought

x X II Introduction: The History if Systems o/Thought 
also ill a globalizing moment? It seemed to him that the answer was 
no: he discerned no indications of an emergent universal philosophy 
or political consciousness. In France, in his view, this contradictory 
conjuncture had yielded a stifling combination of ever-more empty 
rhetorical allegiance to the receding utopia of a universal revolution, 
accompanied by a pervasive social conservatism. How then, to "tear 
oneself away from" that predicament? His almost vis~eral rejection of 
French bourgeois moeurs was a long-standing one that he shared with 
other French writers he admired, such as Flaubert. A young Canadian 
interviewer's assertion that France held an enduring attraction for 
North Americans elicited this retort: "Yes, but now I don't think they 
come to Paris any longer for freedom. They come to have a taste of an 
old traditional culture. They come to France as painters went to Italy 
in the seventeenth century, to see a dying civilization" (p. 163). That 
is why, he explained, he had lived in Sweden, in Poland, in Germany, 
in Tunisia, and in the United States and had made repeated trips to 
Brazil and Japan. 
During the late seventies and early eighties, Foucault's main areas 
of political and social activity were outside France. He went to Iran for 
an Italian newspaper as an eyewitness to the period leading up to the 
fall of the Shah and the triumph of the Khomeini regime. Surely he 
had in mind a maxim he had applied approvingly to Jean Daniel's 
work, that of not giving "our unhesitant support [confiance] to any rev­
olution, even if one can understand each revolt. "20 He was fascinated 
by the type of political action taking place, the massive presence of an 
underarmed populace in the streets facing a police force and army 
among the world's most brutal and omnipresent. A revolution was tak­
ing place, but it was one that made the European Left uneasy. It was 
hard to identify class dynamics, social divisions, a vanguard party, or 
political ideology as the driving force; these "lacks" intrigued Foucault. 
He was intrigued by the question of the role of religion in political life, 
of the unexpected and resurgent role it was playing. He reminded his 
European readers that the sentence . preceding Marx's famous phrase 
about religion being the opium of the people, spoke of "the spirit of a 
world without spirit." He saw or felt-or thought he saw-hints of such 
a spirit, and of a possible role it might have in forming the self in a 
different relationship to politics. 
Foucault mused that until his visit to Iran he had only read about 
the collective will. In Iran, it seemed that he had encountered it in the

Introduction: The History if Systems of Thought XXIII 
streets, focused in determined opposition to the Shah. He wondered 
what to make of "the vocabulary, the ceremonial, the timeless drama 
into which one could fit the historical drama of a people that pitted its 
very existence against that of the sovereign. "21 Foucault was fascinated, 
perhaps above all, by what he saw as a demand for a new subjectivity. 
He felt he discerned an imperative that went beyond overthrowing yet 
another corrupt, Western-supported authoritarian regime, an impera­
tive he formulated thus: "above all we have to change ourselves. Our way 
of being, our relationships with others, with things, with eternity, with 
God. "22 He grappled with this intuition, repeating a similar hypothe­
sis on several occasions. "What is the meaning for these people, to seek 
out, at the price of their lives, that thing whose very possibility we Euro­
peans have forgotten at least since the Renaissance and the period of 
the great crises of Christianity-a spirituality. I can hear the French 
laughing at these words, but they are making a mistake."23 Foucault 
intended to examine this issue of political spirituality and its changing 
relationships with self-fashioning as soon as he finished the seemingly 
interminable rewriting of the "Greek and Christian books." In the early 
eighties, he proposed a two-pronged research project with colleagues 
and students at Berkeley-on political spirituality and self-fashioning 
in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, and the arts of socialist govern­
mentality in the twenties. 
The latter project was linked to a dialogue he had undertaken with 
representatives of the main noncommunist labor union, the Confede­
ration Franc;;aise des Travailleurs Democratique (CFDT), on such mat­
ters as the future of the social security system. He was intrigued by the 
spirit of the seemingly futile efforts of Solidarity in Poland, which he 
actively supported and with whom the CFDT forged close ties. Foucault 
went to Poland on a number of occasions, not just to meet and discuss 
the situation with various participants but to seek out rather humble 
work as a bookkeeper. When mmtiallaw was imposed in December 
1981, France's Socialist government made only perfunctory protests. 
Foucault, like many others, took to the streets. And as Iran faded from 
Western public attention, and Poland endured in the gray night of mar­
tial law, Foucault seriously considered working anonymously with the 
humanitarian group Medecins Sans Frontieres (Doctors Without Bor­
ders), or of retiring to the countryside to practice spiritual exercises and 
tend his garden. Although he did not pursue either of these escape fan­
tasies, his increasing preoccupation with the theme of "the care of the

x X I V Introduction: The History of Systems cifThought 
self" dovetailed with his efforts to bring the later volumes of The His­
tory of Sexuality to completion. 
During this period, he made frequent visits to California and New 
York. Until the late seventies, he had been openly, if discreetly, homo­
sexual in the then current French style.z4 In the context of his work on 
the care of the self, though, he began to rethink publicly homosexual and 
homosocial relationships, embarking on a distinctive series of explo­
rations and reflections on emergent forms of pleasure, sociality, and 
thought. In California, his explorations and reflections on gay life in 
San Francisco are well known; less has been made of the fact that, 
when in California, he spent his days at the University of California in 
Berkeley, working in the libraries, talking with colleagues, holding sem­
inars, and meeting students. It seems fair to say that Foucault was 
experimenting in his own life with the twin imperatives to "know thy­
self" and to "care for thyself." 
A MODERN ETHOS 
Max Weber, Foucault argued, had placed the following question on the 
historical, sociological, and ethical agenda: "If one wants to behave 
rationally and regulate one's action according to true principles, what 
part of one's self should one renounce? What is the ascetic price of rea­
son?" He continued, "For my part, I have posed the opposite question: 
How have certain kinds of interdictions become the price required for 
attaining certain kinds of knowledge [savoir] about oneself? What must 
one know [connaitre] about oneself in order to be willing to accept such 
renunciation?" The latter formulation is a guiding thread in Foucault's 
historical work in the second and third volumes of The History if Sex­
uality, as well as in the unpublished fourth volume, Confessions of the 
Flesh. Despite his reformulation of Weber's question, Foucault's core 
concern applies equally well to Foucault himself-what is the place of 
asceticism in a philosophic life? If asceticism is taken as "exercise" and 
not as renunciation (and this is precisely how Foucault takes it up in 
his later work), then the question becomes: How is reason exercised? 
How is reason practiced? 
One of the main themes Foucault explored in the early eighties was 
"the care of the self." The nearly complete uncoupling of this impera­
tive from its twin, "know yourself," is an essential element of his diag­
nosis of modernity, in which the latter imperative was gradually to

Introduction: The History of Systems of Thought xxv 
eclipse the fonner as a philosophical object. From Descartes to Husserl, 
the imperative to "know thyself" increasingly predominated over that to 
"take care of thyself." As the "care of the self" had traditionally passed 
through or entailed relationships with others, this disproportionate 
weighting of knowledge has contributed to the "universal unbrotherli­
ness" that caused Weber so much pain and which he lacked the tools to 
do more than decry. For Foucault the equation of philosophical askesis 
with renunciation of feeling, solidarity, and care for one's self and for 
others-as the price of knowledge-was one of our biggest wrong turn­
ings. However, reversing such a course is not merely a matter of will­
ing or desiring it to be otherwise. What could be more self-delusional 
than the recent heralding of a reenchantment of the world, or that we 
have actually never been modem? As this trajectory became clearer to 
him, Foucault aimed at rethinking this separation. Rather than seek to 
force a reconciliation, he focused on whether the "universal unbroth­
erliness" produced by the will to knowledge, which had previously 
seemed like a necessary component of modernity-the price to be paid 
for knowledge and ethics-might well be more contingent than Weber 
had thought. He began thinking his way around this culturally coher­
ent but humanly intolerable outcome by radically recasting what Weber 
would have called "a vocation"-something that Foucault called an 
"ethics" understood as an ethos. 
Care of the Self 
In an interview published as "The Ethic of the Concern for the Self as 
a Practice of Freedom" (p. 281), Foucault provides an unusually unqual­
ified formulation of his philosophical and ethical work. He reiterates 
that his project has always been to untangle the relations between the 
subject and truth. Although his argument is not presented as a set of 
working premises, it is convenient and plausible to view it this way. 
Premise one: "what is ethics, if not the practice of liberty, the consid­
ered [rijlechie] practice of liberty" (p. 281). "Freedom is the ontologi­
cal condition of ethics. But ethics is the considered fonn that freedom 
takes" (p. 281). Thus, a condition of liberty is the ontological starting 
point. Premise two: In the Western tradition, "taking care of oneself 
requires knowing [connaitre] oneself" (p. 281). "To take care of the self 
is to equip oneself with these truths" (p. 281). It is through these tools 
and this conceptual linkage that "ethics is linked to the game of the

XXVI Introduction: The History o/Systems if Thought 
truth" (p. 281). Premise three: Ethics is not just a theory-it is equally 
a practice, an embodiment, a style of life (p. 281). Hence, the problem 
is to give "liberty the form of an ethos" (p. 281). Premise four: the sub­
ject "is not a substance. It is a form, and this form is not primarily or 
always identical to itself" (p. 281). "Self" is a reflexive pronoun, and 
it has two meanings. Auto means "the same," but it also conveys the 
notion of identity. The latter meaning shifts the question from "What 
is this self?" to "What is the foundation on which I shall find my iden­
tity?" (p. 281). Premisefive: The central arena of inquiry is the histori­
cal constitution of these forms and their relation to "games of truth." 
"A game of truth is a set of procedures that lead to a certain result, 
which, on the basis of its principles and rules of procedures, may be 
considered valid or invalid" (p. 281). "[W]hy truth? ... And why must 
the care of the self occur only through the concern for truth? [This is] 
the question for the West. How did it come about that all of Western 
culture began to revolve around this obligation of truth ... ?" (p. 281). 
Given these premises, one must conclude equally that "one escaped 
from a domination of truth" only by playing that game differently 
(p. 281). Premise sir: "the relationship between philosophy and poli­
tics is permanent and fundamental" (p. 281). By "politics" Foucault 
means both power relations and the life of the city as understood in 
the ancient world, the modern equivalent being "governmentality." 
Premise seven: Philosophy, understood as a practice and a problem, 
is a vocation. The manner in which liberty is taken up by the philos­
opher is distinctive, differing in intensity and zeal from other free 
citizens (p. 281). 
Since the Enlightenment, while demand for an ethics has been in­
cessant, the philosophical fulfillment of that demand has been notably 
scarce. This impasse has led to many fundamentalist projects, none of 
which has achieved any general acceptance, even among the philoso­
phers and moralists. Such a meager harvest has also led to the cate­
gorical or partial rejection of such projects. Foucault himself argued in 
The Order of Things that there could be no moral system in moder­
nity, if by "moral system" one meant a philosophical anthropology that 
produced firm foundations concerning the nature of Man and, thereby, 
a basis for human action. Ultimately, though, Foucault may well be 
remembered as one of the major ethical thinkers of modernity. 
Foucault sets up two "ideal" types of moral systems: one that empha­
sizes the moral code, and another that emphasizes ethical practices.

Introduction: The History if Systems if Thought XXVII 
Within systems of the first type, "the authority that enforces the code, 
[takes] a quasi-juridical form, the subject refers his conduct to a law, or 
set of laws. "25 The great monotheistic religious systems exemplify this 
type of moral system. In the second ideal-typical form, which Foucault 
associated with the ancient world, it is the "mode of subjectivation"­
the way a subject freely relates to himself-that receives greater elab­
oration. In this type of system, the codes and explicit rules of behavior 
may be rudimentary, while greater attention is paid to the methods, 
techniques, and exercises directed at forming the self within a nexus 
of relationships. In such a system, authority would be self-referential 
and might take a therapeutic or philosophical form. He stressed that, in 
practice, these forms were not wholly distinct-subject-oriented prac­
tices have been widespread in Christianity, just as there were moral 
prohibitions in the ethical practices of the ancient world. Nonetheless, 
the contrast is an instructive one. 
In Volumes Two and Three of The History of Sexuality, Foucault 
undertook a restorative historical analysis of the place of the self­
formation as an "ethical subject" in the ancient world. He describes 
this process as one in which "the individual delimits that part of him­
self that will form the object of his moral practice, defines his position 
relative to the precept that he will follow, and decides on a certain 
mode of being that will serve his moral goal. "26 His goal in this analy­
sis was not to "return" to some archaic mode of social order but, rather, 
to make visible a bygone way of approaching the self and others which 
might suggest possibilities for the present. He was seeking not to denat­
uralize the "subject of desire," not to invent a philosophic system per 
se, but to contribute to a mode of living. He thought that elements of 
that possible mode of living were already in existence: he sought to 
learn from and strengthen these, not to discover or "invent" others. In 
that spirit, it seems worthwhile to tum his ethical categories onto his 
own thought-something he himself did not do-in order to identity 
and illuminate his singular enterprise. 
The Ethical Fouifold 
Foucault saw ethical analysis as the free relationship to the self (rap­
port a sOl)-a relationship that could be examined through four basic 
categories: ethical substance, mode of subjectivation, ethical work, and 
telos. Although he treats these categories as independent one from the

XXVIII Introduction: The History of Systems of Thought 
other, he recognizes that, in any historical instance, they are always 
found in a specific configuration. In his genealogy of the subject of 
desire, he gives us historical examples of how such an analytics of eth­
ics had been elaborated, of the internal systematicity, and of the differ­
ential mode of alteration over time. His goal in these historical analyses 
was to loosen the grip of our self-understanding as "subjects of desire," 
so as to make possible a different relationship to our thought, ourselves 
and others, as well as to our pleasures. 
However, as he was wont to say, there is more. What if one was 
undertaking not only a history of sexuality but also a genealogy of eth­
ics? How, then, would one cast the analytics of a free relationship to 
the self that a life of thinking entailed? In an interview in Berkeley 
("On the Genealogy of Ethics," p. 253), he was asked why he was not 
intending to talk more about friendship in his forthcoming books. He 
responded, "don't forget L'Usage des plaisirs is a book about sexual eth­
ics; it's not a book about love, or about friendship, or about reciproc­
ity .... Friendship is reciprocal and sexual relations are not reciprocal" 
(p. 253). "What I want to ask is: Are we able to have an ethics of acts 
and their pleasures which would be able to take into account the plea­
sure of the other?" (p. 253). 
There are two important points here. First, Foucault makes it clear 
that the content of the ethical discussion he provides in Volumes Two 
and Three of The History of Sexuality follow from the subject matter 
under discussion. As we shall see, the general categories of ethics he 
provides can be elaborated differently in the context of a different gene­
alogy. At the end of the Archaeology cif Knowledge, he stated that it 
would have been perfectly possible to construct other archaeologies of 
other objects, and that he was never talking about the spirit of an age 
or a unified understanding of being. Second, he is very clear that he is 
not advocating a "return" to the Greek model of sexual or human rela­
tions. Ancient Greek society was characterized by essential inequalities 
and nonreciprocities that modems can only find intolerable. Conse­
quently, what he identifies in the ancient world is a problematic, a 
way of thinking about ethical issues, and a form of practice-askesis­
integrally linked to that thought. 
It should be stressed again, though, that when in 1984 Foucault was 
asked if he found the ancient Greeks admirable, he answered: "Not 
very .... They were stymied right away by what seems to be the point 
of contradiction of ancient morality: between, on the one hand, this

Introduction: The History of Systems of Thought XXIX 
obstinate search for a certain style of existence and, on the other hand, 
the effort to make it common to everyone, a style that they approached 
more or less obscurely with Seneca and Epictetus but which would find 
the possibility of realization only within a religious style. All of antiq­
uity appears to me to have been a 'profound error' (laughs)."27 It is not 
entirely clear what exactly he was laughing at: certainly not the obsti­
nate search for a style of existence. Was it the religious stylization? 
Was it the effort to make a stylized life common? The offending term 
appears to be "common," understood as uniform. Foucault definitely 
rejected two possible interpretations of what "common" could mean: 
either that a class location or professional identity was the sine qua non 
of liberty and, hence, of ethics; or that everyone would have the same 
stylization. Foucault unequivocally equated the latter project with nor­
malization and the will to knowledge, and there is no reason to believe 
he ever entertained the former (although the issue of "leisure" to pur­
sue such questions remains unaddressed). This answer, perhaps appro­
priately, leaves entirely open how general and diverse Foucault thought 
such a project could be. 
ETHICAL SUBSTANCE: THE WILL TO TRUTH. The way that the 
individual has to constitute this or that part of himself as the prime 
material if his moral conduct- Foucault 28 
For Foucault as a thinker, the ethical substance, the prime material 
of moral conduct, is the "will to truth." As we have seen, in the course 
summary of his first year at the College, he summarized his comparison 
between Aristotle and Nietzsche, discussed archaic practices of estab­
lishing the truth in the context of justice, and elucidated the general 
goal of his work. The primary, perhaps ultimate, task he had set for 
himself was to establish "the distinction between the will to knowledge 
[savoir] and the will to truth [verite]; the position of the subject and sub­
jects in relation to this will" (p. n). The lion's share of Foucault's work 
centered on "[t]he historical analysis of this rancorous will to knowl­
edge. "29 He did not abandon his attention to the dangers of knowledge­
power complexes, even as he cautiously moved away from a central 
focus on the "will to knowledge." He categorically refused appeals to 
"science, religion, or law" as the basis upon which a free person could 
shape his life. For him, whatever we were to become, it could not be 
legitimated by the will to knowledge. Still, of the will to truth he said 
very, very little. In his 1971 essay, "Nietzsche, Genealogy, History," he 
offered an utterly bleak picture of modernity: "[T]he will to truth ...

xxx Introduction: The History o/'Systems of Thought 
loses all sense of limitations and all claim to truth in its unavoidable 
sacrifice of the subject of knowledge. "30 In "The Order of Discourse," 
he had told his audience it was "[a]s though the will to truth and its 
vicissitudes were masked by truth itself and its necessary unfolding. "31 
The "as though" presents the smallest sliver of maneuvering space. 
Thirteen years later, in the introduction to The Uses of Pleasure, 
Foucault formulated his problem thus: "How, why and in what forms 
is thinking constituted as a moral domain?"32 A few paragraphs later 
he could ingenuously write, "As for what motivated me, it is quite 
simple; I would hope that in the eyes of some people it might be suf­
ficient in itself. It was curiosity-the only kind of curiosity, in any case, 
that is worth acting upon with a degree of obstinacy; not the curiosity 
that seeks to assimilate what is proper for one to know, but that which 
enables one to get free of oneself. "33 Foucault presents curiosity as a 
modest impulse, but his qualification that curiosity is what enables one 
"to get free of oneself"-the telos of his ethics-signals that the stakes 
of this simple little thing could not be higher. "But, then, what is phi­
losophy today-philosophical activity, I mean-if it is not the critical 
work that thought brings to bear on itself?"34 
In another version of the preface to The Uses if Pleasure, Foucault 
wrote, "It is easy to see how the reading of Nietzsche in the early fifties 
has given access to these kinds of questions." Nietzsche does indeed 
provide access to these kinds of questions. In The Gay Science, he had 
already specified the problem: "This unconditional will to truth-what 
is it? Is it the will not to allow oneself to be deceived? Or is it the will 
not to deceive?" He concludes: "Consequently 'will to truth' does not 
mean 'I will not allow myself to be deceived' but-there is no altern­
ative-'I will not decide, even myself'; and with that we stand on moral 
ground. "35 Nietzsche and Weber are clearly Foucault's precursors in 
making these topics into problems. 
MODE OF SUBJECTIVATION: SELF-STYLIZATION OR FORM-GIV­
IN G. The way in which the individual establishes his relation to the rule 
and recognizes himself as obligated to put it into practice.-Foucaul('i6 
M.F. What strikes me is the fact that, in our society, art has become 
something that is related only to objects and not to individuals or to life. 
That art is something which is specialized or done by experts who are 
artists. But couldn't everyone's life become a work of art? Why should 
the lamp or the house be an art object, but not our life?

Introduction: The History-0/ Systems of Thought XXXI 
Q. Of course, that kind of project is very common in places like 
Berkeley .... 
M.F. But I am afraid in most of those cases, most of the people think if 
they do what they do, if they live as they live, the reason is that they know 
the truth about desire, life, nature, body and so on. (p. 253) 
For Foucault, the challenge of the mode of subjectivation is not to base 
one's subjectivity, that multidimensional relationship (to others, to 
things, and to ourselves) on any science, nor on any previously estab­
lished doctrine. In "What is Enlightenment?" he wrote: "I wonder 
whether we may not envisage modernity as an attitude rather than as 
a period of history. And by 'attitude,' I mean a mode of relating to con­
temporary reality; a voluntary choice made by certain people; in the 
end, a way of thinking and feeling; a way, too, of acting and behaving 
that at one and the same time marks a relation of belonging and pres­
ents itself as a task" (p. 303). This "belonging" is relation to thesoci­
ety in its historical and political determinations, with its embedded and 
embodied strictures, its sedimented orders of thought. The "task" is 
to determine what must be shown to be contingent, and what can be 
shown to be truly singular in the present. An essential aspect of doing 
this work is to take up a stylized relationship to things, to oneself, and 
to others. The question is, What form should such a relationship take? 
In "What is Enlightenment?" Foucault presents two exemplary 
modes of subjectivation, one personified by Kant, the other by Baude­
laire. Kant took up this question in an original way, by transforming it 
from an issue of epochs or of pure reason into a question of the thinker's 
relationship to the present-to temporality understood as memory.37 
Foucault restates Kant's question thus: "What difference does today 
introduce with respect to yesterday?" (p. 303). What difference does 
the present make to our thinking? For Kant, addressing this question 
put one on the road from an "immature" state marked by a lack of 
thought, or reflection upon dependency toward "maturity." Kant prob­
lematized the relationship between the will, authority, and reason. For 
him, thinking about the relationship of these terms was not only a pro­
cess but, equally, a task and an obligation. We are responsible for our 
own maturity. Consequently, it is through the obligation to work on 
ourselves that we may discover the way to a proper relationship to the 
Enlightenment-we will "dare to know." Kant proposed a political con­
tract with the "rational despot" Frederick II: an exchange of political

XXXII Introduction: The History of Systems of Thought 
subservience for the free use of the rational faculties. However, this con­
tract was not something Foucault was willing to endorse. 
Baudelaire also privileged a particular relationship to temporality­
characterized by keen attentiveness to the passing moment. However, 
he transformed the Enlightenment attitude into one of "modernity." 
In his now-classic manifesto, The Painter of Modern Life, Baudelaire 
identified the modern artist's challenge as one of seizing the eternal 
within the "contingent, fleeting, volatile" present. What he sought 
was not behind or beyond the present but within it. The artist had not 
merely to observe the carnival parading in front of him with the disin­
terested, ironic, blase attitude of the jllmeur but rather to heroize the 
present by "taking hold" (prendre) of it. For Baudelaire, the artist has 
"no right to despise the present"; hence, it is his business-through 
an act of will-to seize hold of it. 
This is only half the story, though. The point of seizing hold of the 
present is to transfigure it. As Foucault understands it, Baudelaire's 
"transfiguration entails not the annulling of reality but a difficult inter­
play between the truth of what is real and the exercise of freedom" 
(p. 303). Transfiguration is not transgression; transgression is a word 
Foucault does not employ in his later work. 38 Rather, Foucault sought 
in Baudelaire the means to invent a different attitude toward the world 
and the self, one more respectful and ultimately more difficult to 
achieve. Just as he drew from Kant an attention to the historical sin­
gularity of reason as a practice, so, in a parallel way-and one closer 
to the original text he was interpreting-he drew from Baudelaire a 
stylization of the self as an exercise "in which extreme attention to what 
is real is confronted with the practice of a liberty that simultaneously 
respects this reality and violates it" (p. 303). 
Baudelaire gives form to the self in art. He never imagined, Foucault 
insists, that such stylization could operate on "society itself or on the 
body politic" (p. 303). Foucault proposes a stylization of the practices and 
exercises of the self taken as an attitude-a relationship-that clearly 
draws from the models of Kant and Baudelaire. However,\ unlike Kant, 
Foucault does not accept social and political conformity as the trade­
off for freedom of thought; equally, he refuses Baudelaire's restriction 
of a modern ethos to the arena of art~ Rather, Foucault hopes to invent 
a mode of subjectivation in which this ethos would be a practice of 
thought formed in direct contact with social and political realities. "Yet 
if we are not to settle for the affirmation or the empty dream of free-

Introduction: The History of Systems cifThought XXXIII 
dom, it seems to me that this historico-critical attitude must also be 
an experimental one. I mean that this work done at the limits of our­
selves must, on the one hand, open up a realm of historical inquiry, 
and, on the other, put itself to a test of reality, of contemporary reality, 
both to grasp the points where change is possible and desirable, and 
to determine the precise form this change should take" (p. 303). The 
relation to the present is one that tests the limits of society, and of the 
self, a determination of what it is desirable and possible to change. 
"This philosophical attitude may be characterized as a limit-attitude. 
We are not talking about a gesture of rejection .... Criticism indeed con­
sists of analyzing and reflecting upon limits. But if the Kantian ques­
tion was that of knowing [savoir] what limits knowledge [connaissance] 
must renounce exceeding Lfranchir], it seems to me that the critical 
question today must be turned back into a positive one: In what is given 
to us as universal, necessary, obligatory, what place is occupied by what­
ever is singular, contingent, and the product of arbitrary constraints? 
The point, in brief, is to transform the critique conducted in the form 
of a necessary limitation into a practical critique that takes the form of 
a possible crossing-over of an obstacle" (p. 303). Such a crossing-over 
or "clearing-away" will always be historically specific and partial. "This 
means that the historical ontology of ourselves must turn away from 
all projects that claim to be global or radical. ... I prefer the very spe­
cific transformations that have proved to be possible in the last twenty 
years in a certain number of areas which concern our ways of being 
and thinking, relations to authority, relations between the sexes, the 
way in which we perceive insanity or illness; I prefer even these par­
tial transformations, which have been made in the correlation of his­
torical analysis and the practical attitude, to the programs for a new 
man that the worst political systems have repeated throughout the 
twentieth century. I shall thus characterize the philosophical ethos 
appropriate to the critical ontology of ourselves as a historico-practical 
test of the limits we may go beyond, and thus as work carried out by 
ourselves upon ourselves as free beings" (p. 303). What is that work? 
ETHICAL WORK: CRITICAL ACTIVITY, THOUGHT EXPERIENCE. 
The work one peiforms to attempt to traniform oneself into the ethical 
subject if one:S-behavior. (What are the means by which we can change 
ourselves in order to become ethical subjects?)-Foucault3 9 What we 
are to do, either to moderate our acts, or to decipher what we are .... 
The task of ethical work for Foucault is to establish the right relation-

XXXIV Introduction: The History if Systems of Thought 
ship between intellect and character in the context of practical affairs. 
His clearest discussion of this relationship between "thought" and 
"experience" is found in a version of the preface to The Uses of Plea­
sure, where he states that his attempt in this work had been to develop 
a satisfactory means to analyze sexuality as "a historically singular 
form of experience." However, as he indicates elsewhere, his general 
remarks about sexuality apply as well to other "fundamental" experi­
ences. Not surprisingly, he differentiated his approach from phe­
nomenological or existential approaches based on the subject and its 
"primary experience." Rather, Foucault located experience (and the 
subject) within a complex site comprising "a domain of knowledge 
[savoir], a type of normativity, and a mode of relation to the self." 
Thus, he addressed experience as a historical product that emerges 
within a "field of knowledge [connaissance] ... a collection of social 
rules ... and a mode of relation between the individual and himself." 
Foucault identified this overall project as a nominalist philosophic an­
thropology, explicitly rejecting any basis in pregiven essence or nature. 
Without rejecting the possibility that some such constants can be found, 
he interprets experiences, such as those of sexuality, within the par­
ticular historical fields that shaped them, to which they were in part a 
reaction, and which both created and limited the form those experi­
ences could take at a given historical moment. 
Many analytical, political, and ethical problems could be developed 
from this nominalist understanding of experience, thought, and the 
subject. Foucault made this constellation the privileged domain of the 
history of thought. To do so, he provides a rich, if idiosyncratic defini­
tion of "thought": "By 'thought,' I mean what establishes, in a variety 
of possible forms, the play of true and false, and consequently consti­
tutes the human being as a knowing subject [connaissance] ... as social 
and juridical subjects ... and as an ethical subject." This definition estab­
lishes a terrain for the history of thought which is far broader than the 
history of scientific disciplines or philosophic systems. It posits all forms 
of experience as potential objects of thought, and thus of the history 
of thought. The task of the history of thought is to identify and delimit 
the development and transformation of these domains of experience; 
as these domains and these experiences are diverse, it follows that so, 
too, are modes of thought. 
Foucault's definition of thought as a modem practice is so broad that 
it comes close to equating thought not only with experience but with

Introduction: The History 0/ Systems of Thought xxxv 
action. However, it is important to avoid a misunderstanding here (as 
in a parallel way with Foucault's definition of power). Since thought is 
a defining aspect of any historically singular complex-a vital aspect 
of its singularity-an analysis of such complexes is always possible for 
a history of thought. But that does not mean that thought (or power 
relations, which are also an unsurpassable part of such historical sin­
gularities) is totally coextensive with the object of analysis. As Foucault 
put it, "The study of forms of experience can thus proceed from an 
analysis of 'practices' ... as long as one qualifies that word to mean the 
different systems of action insofar as they are inhabited by thought." 
Insofar, to the extent that, "qua" -a classic and elementary philosophic 
proviso that is often misunderstood today as totalization. 
In this light, we can make sense of Foucault's claim that "thought 
is ... the very form of action." He is referring to a potential present 
both in the object of analysis and for the analyst. "Thought is not what 
inhabits a certain conduct and gives it its meaning; rather, it is what 
allows one to step back from this way of acting or reacting, to present 
it to oneself as an object of thought and to question it as to its mean­
ing, its conditions, and its goals. Thought is freedom in relation to what 
one does, the motion by which one detaches oneself from it, estab­
lishes it as an object, and reflects on it as a problem." Precisely because 
thought is not a given, thought is an action; and actions arising from 
experience and formed by thought are ethical ones. 
This brings us to the question of ethical work; it will have both an 
intellectual and a practical dimension, though, as we have just seen, 
experience and action arise within complex assemblages. As a thinker, 
the work Foucault performs "to transform himself into an ethical sub­
ject of one's behavior" is a distinctive form of intellectual practice, a 
singular form of critical thought. He writes: criticism is "a historical 
investigation into the events that have led us to constitute ourselves 
and to recognize ourselves as subjects of what we are doing, thinking, 
saying. In that sense, this criticism is not transcendental, and its goal 
is not to that of making a metaphysics possible; it is genealogical in its 
design and archaeological in its method .... [I]t will separate out, from 
the contingency that has made us what we are, the possibility of no 
longer being, doing, or thinking what we are, do, or think ... it is seek­
ing to give new impetus, as far and as wide as possible, to the unde­
fined work of freedom." Such work would have multiple dimensions 
but, qua ethical work, it would be a disentangling and re-forming of

XXXVI Introduction: The History if Systems if Thought 
the (power and thought) relationships within which and from which 
the self is shaped and takes shape. 
Thus, Foucault came to conceive of the most general name for the 
practice he was seeking to identify: "problematization." "The proper 
task of a history of thought is: to define the conditions in which human 
beings 'problematize' what they are, what they do, and the world in 
which they live."40 Or, again, in more philosophical language, he 
defines his object of analysis (and also his task) as: "the problematiza­
tions through which being [l'etre] offers itself to be necessarily [pouvant 
et devant] thought and the practices on the basis of which these prob­
lematizations are formed. "41 It is vital to understand that, for Foucault, 
"being" is given through problematizations and practices; it is not prior 
to them. That is why it is both potentially and obligatorily-pouvant 
et devant-available for thought. As Foucault insisted, thought does not 
reside in the practices giving them their meaning; it is always a prac­
tice of freedom that could have taken (or could take in the future) a dif­
ferent form. Problematizations and practices can and must be thought 
vis-a.-vis experience insofar as they concern our freedom. Ethical work 
makes them available in that form. 
In an interview entided "Friendship as a way of life," Foucault presents 
a quasi manifesto of what he sees as his own ethical task, cast as the 
work of thought, pleasure, and invention. Interviewed by several young 
French editors of a gay journal Gai pied, he is especially crisp in his 
formulations, speaking as a member of the community. The problem 
for gays now, he told his young interviewers, was not to uncover the 
truth of homosexual desire but to make homosexuality desirable; "Sex 
is not a fatality; it's a possibility for creative life" (p. 135). The search 
should be not for the secret of one's identity but for how to invent new 
modes of relationship and a new way of life. How, that is, to become 
homosexual rather than affirming that one already is so. "I am not sure 
we should create our own culture. We have to create a culture" (p. 135). 
Could such a quest lead to a way of life not based on social class and 
other existing divisions? One that could be shared among individuals 
of different ages, statuses, and so on? One that could "reopen affec­
tive and relational virtualities" and invent "the instruments for poly­
morphic, varied, and individually modulated relationships" (p. 135)? 
He thought this was possible; what needed to be problematized was the 
whole tissue of sociality. What was needed was not a means of mak-

Introduction: The History if Systems of Thought XXXVII 
ing everyone the same but of creating new modes of being together. 
Gays, Foucault told his interviewers, have come a long way in over­
coming sexual renunciation, so perhaps they have an obligation, to 
themselves and to others, to invent "a homosexual ascesis," a manner 
of being that today seems improbable. Ascesis is "the work that one 
performs on oneself in order to transform oneself or make the self 
appear which, happily, one never attains. Can that be our problem 
today?" (p. 135). To make the self a continuous creative task, a social 
experience? For gays, the problem might be how "to make ourselves 
infinitely more susceptible to pleasure [plaisirs]. We must escape and 
help others to escape the two readymade formulas of the pure sexual 
encounter and the lovers' fusion of identities" (p. 135). Or, he asked 
in the same interview, "What is friendship?" His answer: "the sum of 
all those things through which [people] can reciprocally give each other 
pleasure" (p. 135). A provocative answer, no doubt, but what he means 
by pleasure is not very well spelled out. A few things, however, can be 
said about his use of the term. First, he is opposing pleasure to desire, 
as surface to depth, as the body to the person. He is seeking to break 
open the equation of the forms of pleasure one enjoys and one's sup­
posed identity. Second, his attention to pleasure does not entail embrac­
ing the doctrine of hedonism: pleasure is neither the unique nor the 
highest good but, rather, an accompaniment to other activities. Fou­
cault's pleasure is embedded in a practice, an askesis. One might say, 
it supervenes on other practices. For him, pleasure seems to function 
as a kind of ethical heuristic, in the sense that he suggests that where 
one encounters pleasures, one will be in the vicinity of experiences wor­
thy of further reflection, experimentation, and reformulation. 42 
In another interview for a gay audience, Foucault insisted that gays 
should not privilege the model of individual rights or heterosexual mar­
riage (that is, rights to inheritance and so on). As important as the 
struggles to obtain basic rights and legal protections for homosexuality 
were, Foucault argued, the real target was the general impoverishment 
of social relationships in contemporary society. Instead of treating the 
task as one of normalizing homosexuality in the heterosexual model, 
he urged his readers to try to invent something else. Such work, while 
arising within gay relationships, might be partially transposable to oth­
ers, albeit with some imagination and tenacity. The problem, as he 
saw it, was to create new social forms: "We should fight against the 
impoverishment of the relational fabric" (p. 157). Why not imagine new

XXXVIII Introduction: The History of Systems if Thought 
practices (and eventually new forms oflaw) that were not restricted to 
individual rights but began from a premise of giving new forms to rela­
tional activities? This work is not only ethical, it is also political; but it 
is politics without a program. 
TELOS: DISASSEMBLING THE SELF. The place an action occupies 
in a pattern of conduct. It commits an individual ... to a certain mode if 
being, a mode cifbeing characteristic cifthe ethical subject.-Foucault 43 
The mode of being to which Foucault was committed is captured in 
his ambiguous formula "to release oneself from one self" (se de prendre 
de soi-meme). The difficulties of finding a correct translation for the 
phrase indicates some of the ambiguities that surround it. A falsely lit­
eral translation would be "to untake oneself, oneself"; but not only is 
this phrasing alien to English (and French), but if the goal were to 
"untake" oneself, how exactly had one previously "taken" (prendre) 
oneself? What self had one taken? And who had been doing the tak­
ing? The dictionary translation of se de prendre is to "free oneself,"44 
which captures the dimension of releasing oneself from a material 
entanglement. But "to free" obviously carries inappropriate philosophic 
baggage, for it implies a preexistent, essential, or true self already there 
to be freed. Another possibility might be "detaching oneself from one 
self." Although "detachment" can suggest (as it does for the Stoics) an 
emotional distancing from the things of the world, in English the phrase 
connotes an affectless noninvolvement. And, in fact, Foucault is pointing 
to a certain self-distancing, and he advocated an exercise of detaching 
and examining parts that need to be cared for and ultimately repaired 
or replaced. Thus, the most adequate (or least inadequate) rendering 
might well be "to disassemble the self, oneself" -a phrasing that high­
lights the material and relational aspects of this exercise, and intro­
duces a notion of the self as a form-giving practice that operates with 
and upon heterogeneous parts and forms available at a given point 
in history. 
Foucault reiterated that the goal~the mode of being-of ethics, as 
historically constrained, practical assembly and disassembly, when he 
asked: "But what then is philosophy-philosophical activity I mean-if 
it is not the critical work that thought brings to bear on itself? In what 
does it consist, if not in the endeavor to know how and to what extent 
it might be possible to think differently, instead of legitimating what 
is already known? [Thought] is entitled to explore what might be 
changed, through the practice of a knowledge that is foreign to it. "45

Introduction: The History of Systems of Thought XXXIX 
Consequently, se de prendre de soi-meme might be best understood as 
a form of continual self-bn·colage. 
Levi-Strauss's classic description of the bricoleur, or "handyman," 
constantly tinkering with heterogeneous objects-objects in which 
there was no clear distinction between concrete thought, aesthetic 
form-giving, and a subject's material practice-is helpful up to a point. 
So, too, the bricoleur's work on discarded and anonymous materials, 
reshaped and "customized" in a new way, seems apposite. 46 Foucault 
points at such a conception when he asserts that: "I insist that this 
change take the form neither of a sudden illumination that makes 'the 
scales fall from the eyes' nor an openness to every movement of the 
time. I would like it to be an elaboration of the self by the self, a stu­
dious transformation, a slow and arduous transformation through a 
constant care for the truth. "47 Of course, the constant focus on the self, 
the care for the truth, and its reflectiveness separates Foucault's ethics 
from the cultural constructions of the handyman. 
But if we can indicate the way in which this activity should be en­
gaged, the question of why we should do so remains. If Foucault was 
stingy in his explanations of the place and meaning of the "will to 
truth," he is only slightly more generous in providing material about 
the telos of his own thinking. There are, however, some scattered and 
suggestive indications. For example, he wonders, "What can the eth­
ics of an intellectual be ... if not ... to render oneself permanently cap­
able of self-detaching [se de prendre de soi-meme] (which is the opposite 
of the attitude of conversion)? .. To be at the same time an academic 
and an intellectual is to try to engage a type of knowledge and analysis 
that is taught and received in the university in a way so as to modify 
not only the thought of others but one's own as well. This work of mod­
ifying one's own thought and that of others seems to me to be the intel­
lectual's reason for being. "48 Elsewhere: "After all, what would the 
value of the passion for knowledge be if it resulted only in a certain 
amount of knowledgeableness and not, in one way or another, and to 
the extent possible, in the knower straying afield from himself?"49 
The word he uses that is translated as "straying afield of oneself" is 
egarement. 50 The Le Robert dictionary gives the primary meaning of 
egarement as "an action of getting a distance from what is defined as 
morality, reason, and the norm, and the state that ensues." This defi­
nition has a certain resonance with Georges Canguilhem's conception 
of errance, to err, to wander, to stray from the norm. For Canguilhem,

XL Introduction: The History if Systems of Thought 
as one commentator put it, "We must move, err, adapt to survive. This 
condition of 'erring or drifting' is not merely accidental or external to 
life but its fundamental form."51 Norms are active states; error is a con­
dition of truth. 
Disassembling the self suggests a modulated version of the second 
part of Levi-Strauss's definition of bricolage, in fact the original mean­
ing of the word, un mouvement incident, or a swerve. This "incidental 
movement" originally referred to the motion of a billiard ball caroming 
off a cushion, or a horse swerving to avoid an unexpected obstacle. 
Foucault's egarement is a slower and more meandering swerve, but 
nonetheless it is fair to take it as an unplanned, if reflective, avoidance 
or alteration of historical constituted obstacles, and as a patient disen­
tanglement from the encumbrances of contingency. Foucault stresses 
the obligation to analyze historical forms that, with all their constraints 
and their diversity, make us what we are, and the patient labor required 
to reformulate them, fragment by fragment. In that work lies both the 
necessity and the pleasure of thought. 
NOTES 
For details, see Didier Eribon, Michel Foucault (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 
1991); the biography originally appeared in French in 1989. 
2 Foucault has already defined these terms in great detail in two works: The Archaeology of 
Knowledge (trans. A. M. Sheridan Smith [New York: Pantheon, 1972]) and The Order if Things 
(trans. Alan Sheridan [New York: Pantheon, 1976]), both of which preceded his nomination and 
election to the College de France. At the time of his lectures at the College, he was finishing 
"Nietzsche, Genealogy, History" (in The Foucault Reader, Rabinow, ed. [New York: Pantheon, 
1984]), an important statement of his understanding of these topics. 
5 Foucault, "The Order of Discourse," trans. Ruper Swyer, appendix to The Archaeology if Knowl­
edge (New York: Pantheon, 1972), p. 229. 
4 Idem. 
5 Ibid., p. 217. 
6 His use of savoir and connaissance also seems to be inconsistent in this text. 
7 Again, Foucault at times distinguishes between savoir and connaissance, but he seems not to 
do so with any great consistency. 
8 Foucault, "Two Lectures," in Colin Gordon, ed., Power/Knowledge (New York: Pantheon, 1972), 
P·78. 
9 Ibid., p. 91. 
10 Idem. The English translation has "repression," but that is a confusion. 
11 Ibid., p. 92. 
12 The History of Sexuality, vol. 1: An Introduction (New York: Pantheon, 1978), p. 7.

Introduction: The History of Systems of Thought XLI 
13 Ibid., p. 159. 
14 In a 1978 lecture, Foucault emphatically stated that these technologies did not simply replace 
one another, as one epoch supersedes another: "We need to see things not in terms of the 
replacement of a society of sovereignty by a disciplinary society by a society of governmentality, 
in reality one has a triangle, sovereignty-discipline-governmentality." Foucault, "Governmental­
ity," in The Foucault Effect: Studies in Govemmentality, Burchall, Gordon, Miller, eds. (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1991), p. 10'2. 
15 Foucault, "Pour une morale de l'inconfort," in Dits et ecrits (Paris: Gallimard, 1994), vol. 3, 
P·784· 
16 Idem. 
17 Ibid., p. 787. 
18 Foucault, "Des Travaux," in Dits et ecrits, vol. 4, p. 367. 
19 "Pour une Morale," p. 786. 
'20 Idem. 
'21 Foucault, "Iran: The Spirit of a World without Spirit," in Michel Foucault: Politics, Philosophy, 
Culture, Lawrence Kritzman, ed. (New York and London: Routledge, 1988), p. '214. 
'2'2 Ibid., p. '218. 
'23 Foucault, "A quoi revent les Iraniens?" in Dits et ecn'ts, vol. 3, p. 694. 
'24 Cf. Didier Eribon, Michel Foucault et ses contemporains (Paris: 1995). 
25 The History of Sexuality, vol. 2: The Uses of Pleasure (New York: Pantheon, 1985), p. 2g. 
26 Ibid., p. 28. 
27 "Le retour de la morale," in Dits et ecrits, vol. 4, p. 6g8. 
28 The History of Sexuality, vol. 2, p. 26. 
29 "Nietzsche, Genealogy, History," p. 16'2. 
30 Ibid., p. 164. 
31 "The Order of Discourse," p. 218. 
32 History of Sexuality, vol. 2, p. X. 
33 Ibid., p. 8. 
54 Ibid., p. g. 
35 Friedrich Nietzsche, The Gay Science, trans. Walter Kaufmann (New York: Vintage, 1974), 
pp. 281~2. 
36 History of Sexuality, vol. 2, p. '27. 
37 Gilles Deleuze makes a point in many ways similar to this in Foucault (Minneapolis: Univer­
sity of Minnesota, 1988), pp. 94--123. 
38 The term transgression appears only twice in all of Dits et ecrits, vol. 4, and then only as his­
torical examples. 
39 HistoryofSexuality, vol. 2, p. 27· 
40 Ibid., p. 10.

XLII Introduction: The History of Systems of Thought 
41 Ibid., p. II. 
42 I would like to thank James Faubion for the notion of an "ethical heuristic." 
43 History-0fSexuality, vol. 2, p. 28. 
44 Harrap s New Collegiate French and English Dictionary- (London: Harraps, 1982). 
45 History-if Sexuality, vol. 2, p. 9· 
46 I would like to thank Robert Hurley for suggesting "customize" as a helpful gloss. 
47 Foucault, "The Concern for Truth" in Foucault Live (New York: Semiotext(e), 1996), p. 461. 
48 Idem. 
49 History-if Sexuality, vol. 2, p. 8. 
50 I would like to thank Arpad Szakoloczai for bringing this word to my attention. 
51 Franlrois Delaporte, ed., A Vital Rationalist: Selected Writingsjrom Georges Canguilhem (New 
York: Zone Books, 1994), pp. 20-'21.

NOTE ON TERMS AND TRANSLATIONS 
This volume comprises texts written and published over a range of 
nearly two decades. A few were originally published in English. ,Sev­
eral others have already been translated into English. The majority, 
however, appear in English here for the first time. The last category, 
which includes all the course summaries, and "Self Writing" are due 
to Robert Hurley, a distinguished translator of twentieth-century French 
social thought and the translator in particular of the second and third 
volumes of Foucault's History if Sexuality. 
As a matter of principle, the editorial hand has been exercised lightly. 
Texts originally in English are accordingly subject to mechanical, but 
only to the most compelling stylistic, emendations. Translations are 
another, and more complex, matter. With only a few exceptions, extant 
translations have proved to be of sufficient quality to merit reprinting. 
Even so, they vary in any number of ways with their translators. Even 
the most polished of translations is, moreover, far from timeless. Cer­
tain words and phrases become standard at the cost that others become 
misleading or seem strange. Certain early words or phrases, certain 
early lexical distinctions emerge as crucial only in the light of the later 
oeuvre. Initially unexceptionable glosses emerge as controversial only 
in the light of retrospective discussion and debate. 
James Faubion's review of the available translations was undertaken 
with such problems in mind. His emendations are of several different 
sorts. The first sort seeks to highlight or clarify Foucault's usage by 
inserting French terms in brackets after their English glosses (when the 
translator has not himself or herself inserted them). Such terms are rel­
atively rare, but worth noting in advance. One is epistime. It appears 
in English as "episteme"-an inevitable coinage, but a misleading one 
insofar as it conjures associations with such apparent cognates as "pho­
neme" or "lexeme." Epistime is rather a transliteration of the Greek 
em crn'lpn, "science" or "systematic understanding" of a conceptual 
domain, or of an art or craft. The least troublesome of them is savoir, 
which can usually be glossed straightforwardly as "knowledge" (or in 
its verbal form, "to know"). Much more troublesome is connaissance 
and its related verb connaltre. Connaissance can also frequently be

XLIV Note on Terms and Translations 
glossed as "knowledge"-indeed, sometimes must be, even when its 
usage is not synonymous with savoir. English has no consistent way of 
registering the difference between that sort of knowledge that derives 
from "acquaintance" or familiarity with someone or something (connais­
sance) and that which is, or may be, purely "theoretical" or abstract 
(savoir). The lack of a register is all the more troublesome because 
Foucault's usage sometimes suggests that the distinction between con­
naissance and savoir is analytically pivotal. A more extended discussion 
of the distinction must, however, be reserved for Faubion's introduc­
tion to the second volume of the series. 
Faubion has also undertaken a variety of more direct editorial inter­
ventions, more or fewer from one available translation to the next. In 
some cases, he corrects what seems to be an obvious error. In many 
others, however, he merely seeks to render more literally or more to 
the letter what the translator has rendered more freely or inventively. 
In general, his corrections have the purpose of clarifying the semantic 
content-in some cases, the semantic ambiguity-of assertions that 
allow of diverse English representations. In a few cases, he has ap­
pended footnotes (marked by lower-case Roman letters) that elaborate 
upon the context of some remark or allusion. Finally, he has standard­
ized the gloss and the spelling of a few words and phrases that take 
on special thematic significance as Foucault's thought unfolds. Foucault 
himself sometimes writes of problimisation, sometimes of problimati­
sation, but with no alteration of meaning from one instance to the next. 
Translations preserve the variation in English. In this volume, however, 
we render both terms throughout as problematization (after problem­
atic). Especially in early translations, asujettissement is often brought 
into English as "subjugation," and its related verb, asujettir, as "to sub­
jugate." Here, however, we opt for a neologism that signals Foucault's 
technical, and more positive, usage. Hence, asujettissement consistently 
appears as "subjectivation"; and asujettir, as "to subjectify." Le souci 
de soi might be-and has been-translated into English as "concern 
for" or "concern with the self," or as "self-concern." In this volume, 
however, it has consistently been rendered as "the care of the self." 
Faubion has made virtually no changes to Robert Hurley'S own trans­
lations. He was, however, able to review a draft of those translations, 
and to provide a list of questions and annotations that Hurley consid­
ered in the course of making revisions. Hurley reciprocally provided 
Faubion with linguistic analyses and editorial advice. It is hoped that

Note on Terms and Translations XLV 
the result is a volume that might, among other things, go far in clarify­
ing many of those aspects of Foucault's 'modes of expression and thought 
that have been lost or obscured, if not within single translations then 
often enough between them.



PART ONE



THE COURSES



CANDIDACY PRESENTATION: 
COLLEGE DE FRANCE, 1969 
PREVIOUS WORK 
In the Histoire de La folie a l'age classique, a I tried to determine what 
might be known about mental illness in a given epoch. A knowledge 
of this sort is manifested, of course, in the medical theories that name 
and classify the different pathological types and attempt to explain 
them; one also sees it appearing in phenomena of opinion-in that old 
fear which madmen give rise to, in the operation of the credulities that 
surround them, in the way they are depicted in the theater or in liter­
ature. Here and there, analyses done by historians could serve me as 
guides. Yet one dimension appeared to be unexplored: I needed to try 
to discover how the mad were recognized, set apart, excluded from 
society, interned, and treated; what institutions were assigned to re­
ceive and hold them-care for them at times; what authorities decided 
about their madness, and according to what criteria; what methods 
were employed to constrain them, punish them, or cure them; in short, 
in what network of institutions and practices the madman was both 
enmeshed and defined. Now, this network appears very coherent and 
well adapted to its purpose when one looks at its functioning and the 
justifications it was given at the time: a whole exact and articulated 
knowledge was involved in it. So an object took shape for me: the knowl­
edge invested in complex institutional systems. And a method asserted 
itself: instead of running through the library of scientific literature, as 
one was apt to do, and stopping at that, I would need to examine a col­
lection of archives comprising official orders, statutes, hospital or prison 
records, court proceedings, and so on. It was at the Arsenal and the

6 Ethics.' Subjectivity and Truth 
Archives Nationales that I undertook the analysis of a knowledge whose 
visible body is not theoretical or scientific discourse, nor literature 
either, but a regulated, everyday practice. The example of madness 
appeared to me, however, to be insufficiently topical; in the seventeenth 
and eighteenth centuries, psychopathology was still too rudimentary for 
one to be able to distinguish it from a mere elaboration of traditional 
opinions; it seemed to me that clinical medicine at the time of its birth 
posed the problem in more rigorous terms; indeed, at the beginning 
of the nineteenth century it was connected with constituted sciences 
or ones in the process of being constituted, such as biology, physiol­
ogy, and pathological anatomy; but it was also connected with a set of 
institutions such as hospitals, welfare services, and teaching clinics, as 
well as with practices such as administrative surveys. I wondered how, 
between these two reference points, a knowledge could have come into 
being, transformed itself and developed, offering to scientific theory 
new fields of observation, fresh problems, and objects unperceived until 
then; but how, on the other hand, scientific knowledge [des connais­
sances scientifiques] had been introduced into it, had taken on a pre­
scriptive value and become a source of ethical standards. The practice 
of medicine is not limited to combining a rigorous science and an uncer­
tain tradition to form an unstable blend; it is built as a knowledge sys­
tem that has its own balance and coherence. 
So one could grant the existence of domains of knowledge that were 
not exactly identifiable with sciences yet were not just mental habits 
either. Thus, in Les Mots et les chosesb I tried an opposite experiment: 
neutralize the whole practical and institutional side but without giving 
up the idea of going back to it one day; consider, for a given period, 
several of these domains of knowledge (natural classifications, general 
grammar, and the analysis of wealth in the seventeenth and eighteenth 
centuries) and examine them in tum to define the type of problems they 
raise, of concepts they bring into play, the theories they put to the test. 
Not only could one define the internal "archaeology" of each of these 
domains taken one by one, but from one to the other there were dis­
cernible identities, analogies, sets of differences that must be described. 
An overall configuration emerged. To be sure, it was far from charac­
terizing the classical mind in general, but it organized in a coherent way 
a whole area of empirical knowledge. 
I was thus presented with two very distinct groups of results: on the 
one hand, I had established the specific and relatively autonomous

Candidacy Presentation: College de France, 1969 7 
existence of "vested knowledges"; on the other, I had noted system­
atic relations in the architecture peculiar to each one of them. A clari­
fication became necessary. I outlined it in L'Archeologie du savoir C: 
between opinion and science [connaissance scientifique] one can rec­
ognize the existence of a particular level that we may call the level of 
knowledge [savoir]. This knowledge is embodied not only in theoret­
ical texts or empirical instruments but also in a whole set of practices 
and institutions; however, it is not the pure and simple result, the half­
conscious expression, of these. In point of fact, it comprises rules that 
properly belong to it, characterizing its existence, its operation, and its 
history. Some of these rules are peculiar to a single domain; others are 
common to several; and there are rules that may be general to a whole 
epoch. Finally, the development of this knowledge [savoir] and its 
transformations involve complex relations of causality. 
TEACHING PROJECT 
The work to come is subject to two imperatives: never lose sight of the 
reference of a concrete example that may serve as a testing ground for 
the analysis; frame the problems that I have come across or will no 
doubt encounter. 
1. The sector chosen as a privileged example, which I will adhere to 
for a certain time, is the knowledge of heredity. It developed through­
out the nineteenth century, starting from breeding techniques, on 
through attempts to improve species, experiments with intensive cul­
tivation, efforts to combat animal and plant epidemics, and culminat­
ing in the establishment of a genetics whose birth date can be placed 
at the beginning of the twentieth century. On the one hand, this knowl­
edge responded to quite particular economic needs and historical con­
ditions. Changes in the dimensions and forms of cultivation of rural 
properties, in the equilibrium of markets, in the required standards of 
profitability, and in the system of colonial agriculture deeply trans­
formed this knowledge; they altered not only the nature of its informa­
tion but also its quantity and scale. On the other hand, this knowledge 
was receptive to new developments in sciences such as chemistry or 
plant and animal physiology. (Witness the use of nitrate fertilizer or the 
technique of hybridization, which had been made possible by the the­
ory of plant fertilization, defined in the eighteenth century.) But this 
dual dependence does not deprive it of its characteristics and its inter-

8 Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
nal regulation. It gave rise both to adapted techniques (such as those of 
Vilmorin for species improvement) and epistemologically productive 
concepts (such as that of hereditary trait, explained in detail if not 
defined by Naudin). Darwiri was not mistaken when he found in this 
human practice the model enabling him to understand the natural evo­
lution of species. 
2. As for the theoretical problems that will have to be worked out, 
it seems to me that they can be assembled into three groups. 
It will be necessary first to try to assign a status to this knowledge: 
where to place it, between what boundaries, and what tools to select 
for describing it. (In the example I've put forward, one sees that the 
material is enormous, going from almost silent habits transmitted by 
tradition to duly transcribed experimentations and precepts.) It will 
also be necessary to try to identify its instruments and its channels of 
dissemination, and to see whether it spread evenly through all the 
social groups and all the areas. Lastly, it will be necessary to try to 
determine the different levels of such a knowledge, its degrees of con­
sciousness, its possibilities of adjustment and correction. Thus, the the­
oretical problem that appears is that of an anonymous social knowledge 
[savoir] which does not take individual conscious learning [connais­
sance] as a model or foundation. 
Another group of problems has to do with the elaboration of this 
knowledge into a scientific discourse. In a sense, these crossings, these 
transformations, and these thresholds constitute the genesis of a sci­
ence. But instead of seeking-as was done in certain projects of the 
phenomenological type-the primary origin of a science, its fundamen­
tal project, and its root conditions of possibility, I will try to witness 
the insidious and manifold beginnings of a science. It is sometimes pos­
sible to rediscover and date the decisive text that constitutes a science's 
birth certificate and its initial charter, so to speak (in the domain that 
I will use as my example, the texts of Naudin, Mendel, De Vries, or 
Morgan may claim this role by turns); but the important thing is to 
determine what transformation must have been carried out prior to 
them, around them, or in them for a knowledge to be able to take on 
the status and function of a science. In short, this is the theoretical 
problem of the constitution of a science when one aims to analyze it 
not in transcendental terms but in terms of history. 
The third group of problems concerns causality in the order of knowl­
edge. General correlations between events and discoveries, or between

Candidacy Presentation: College de France, 1969 9 
economic necessities and the development of a domain of knowledge, 
have been established for a long time, of course. (We know, for ex­
ample, how important the great plant epidemics of the nineteenth cen­
tury were in the study of varieties, of their adaptive capacity and their 
stability.) But we need to determine much more precisely how-by 
what channels and according to what codes-knowledge registers (not 
without choice or modification) phenomena that had remained exte­
rior to it up to that point; how it becomes receptive to processes that 
are foreign to it; how, finally, an alteration that occurred in one of 
its areas or at one of its levels can be transmitted elsewhere and take 
effect there. 
The analysis of these three groups of problems should bring knowl­
edge to light in its threefold appearance: it characterizes, groups to­
gether, and coordinates a set of practices and institutions; it is the 
constantly shifting locus of the constitution of sciences; it is the con­
stituent element of a complex causality in which the history of science 
is caught up. To the extent that, in a given period, it has clearly speci­
fied forms and domains, it can be broken down into several systems 
of thought. Obviously, it is by no means a matter of determining the 
system of thought of a particular epoch, or something like its "world­
view." Rather, it is a matter of identifying the different ensembles that 
are each bearers of a quite particular type of knowledge; that connect 
behaviors, rules of conduct, laws, habits, or prescriptions; that thus 
form configurations both stable and capable of transformation. It is also 
a matter of defining relations of conflict, proximity, or exchange. Sys­
tems of thought are forms in which, during a given period of time, the 
knowledges [savoirs] individualize, achieve an equilibrium, and enter 
into communication. 
In its most general formulation, the problem I have encountered 
bears some analogy, perhaps, with that which philosophy raised a few 
decades ago. Between a reflexive tradition of pure consciousness and 
an empiricism of sensation, philosophy gave itself the task of finding 
not the genesis, not the connection, not even the surface of contact, 
but a third dimension, that of perception and the body. Today, the his­
tory of thought requires, perhaps, a readjustment of the same order: 
between the constituted sciences (whose history has often been written) 
and the phenomena of opinion (which historians know how to deal 
with), it would be necessary to undertake the history of systems of 
thought. By bringing out the specificity of knowledge [savoir] in this

10 Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
way, one not only defines a level of analysis that has been overlooked 
up to now, but one might well be forced to reexamine knowledge [con­
naissance], its conditions, and the status ofthe knowing subject. 
NOTES 
a Madness and Civilization: A History of Insanity in the Age if Reason, trans. Richard Howard 
(New York: Vintage, 1973), is an abridged translation of the work thal Foucault cites. 
b The Order if Things: An Archaeology of the Human Sciences (New York: Vintage, 1973). 
c The Archaeology of Knowledge, trans. A. M. Sheridan Smith (New York: Harper Colophon, 
1972).

THE WILL TO KNOWLEDGE 
Lis yea,'s cou"e begins a secies of analyses that attempt to piece 
together, fragment by fragment, a "morphology of the will to knowl­
edge." Sometimes this theme of the will to knowledge will be invested 
in specific historical inquiries; sometimes it will be treated for itself and 
in its theoretical implications. 
The aim this year was to determine its place and define its role in a 
history of systems of thought; to decide, at least provisionally, upon an 
initial model of analysis, and to test its effectiveness on a first batch 
of examples. 
1. Previous research had made it possible to recognize a peculiar level 
among all those which enable one to analyze systems of thought-that 
of discursive practices. There one finds a type of systematicity which 
is neither logical nor linguistic. Discursive practices are characterized 
by the demarcation of a field of objects, by the definition of a legiti­
mate perspective for a subject of knowledge, by the setting of norms 
for elaborating concepts and theories. Hence, each of them presupposes 
a play of prescriptions that govern exclusions and selections. 
Now, these sets of regularities do not coincide with individual works. 
Even if they are manifested through the latter, even if they happen to 
stand out, for the first time, in one of them, they extend well beyond 
such works and often group together a considerable number of them. 
But neither do they coincide necessarily with what are usually called 
"sciences" or "disciplines," although their boundaries may sometimes 
be provisionally the same. More often, it happens that a discursive prac­
tice brings together various disciplines or sciences, or it passes through

12 Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
a number of them and gathers several of their areas into a sometimes­
inconspicuous cluster. 
Discursive practices are not purely and simply modes of manufacture 
of discourse. They take shape in technical ensembles, in institutions, 
in behavioral schemes, in types of transmission and dissemination, in 
pedagogical forms that both impose and maintain them. 
Finally, they have specific modes of transformation. One cannot 
reduce these transformations to a precise individual discovery; and 
yet one cannot merely characterize them as an overall change of out­
look [mentaliti], of collective attitude or state of mind. The transfor­
mation of a discursive practice is tied to a whole, often quite complex 
set of modifications which may occur either outside it (in the forms of 
production, in the social relations, in the political institutions), or 
within it (in the techniques for determining objects, in the refinement 
and adjustment of concepts, in the accumulation of data), or along­
side it (in other discursive practices). And it is linked to them in the 
form not simply of an outcome but of an effect that maintains its own 
autonomy and a set of precise functions relative to what determines 
the transformation. 
These principles of exclusion and selection-whose presence is mul­
tifarious, whose efficacy is concretely demonstrated in practices, and 
whose transformations are relatively autonomous-do not refer to a 
(historical or transcendental) subject of knowledge that would invent 
them one after another or would found them at an original level; they 
point, rather, to an anonymous and polymorphous will to knowledge, 
capable of regular transformations and caught up in an identifiable 
play of dependence. 
Empirical studies, dealing with psychopathology, with clinical medi­
cine, with natural history, and so on, had made it possible to isolate 
the level of discursive practices. The general features of these practices 
and the appropriate methods for analyzing them had been inventoried 
under the name of archaeology. Research concerning the will to knowl­
edge should now be able to give a theoretical justification to this en­
semble. For the moment, one can indicate in a very general way the 
directions in which it will need to advance, involving the distinction 
between knowledge [savoir] and learning [connazSsance]; the difference 
between the will to knowledge [savoir] and the will to truth [verite']; 
the position of the subject, or subjects, with respect to that will. 
2. Few conceptual tools for analyzing the will to knowledge have

The Will to Knowledge 
been developed up to now. Most of the time, rather crude notions are 
used. "Anthropological" or psychological notions: curiosity, the need 
to master or appropriate through learning [connaissance], anguish in 
the face of the unknown, reactions to the threats of the undifferenti­
ated. Historical generalities, like the spirit of an epoch, its sensibility, 
its types of interest, its conception of the world, its system of values, 
its basic needs. Philosophical themes such as that of a horizon of ration­
ality which becomes explicit through time. Nothing, finally, allows one 
to think that the still quite rudimentary formulations of psychoanaly­
sis on the position of the subject and the object in desire and knowl­
edge might be imported unaltered into the field of historical studies. 
No doubt, it must be admitted that the instruments enabling us to ana­
lyze the will to knowledge will have to be made up and defined as we go 
along, according to the requirements and possibilities that are revealed 
by concrete studies. 
The history of philosophy offers theoretical models of this will 
to knowledge, and analysis of them may enable us to get our bear­
ings. Among all those who will need to be studied and tested (Plato, 
Spinoza, Schopenhauer, Aristotle, Nietzsche, and so on), the last two 
were selected first and studied this year, seeing that they constitute two 
extreme and opposite forms. 
The Aristotelian model has been analyzed essentially on the basis of 
the texts of the Metaphysics, the Nichomachean Ethics, and De Anima. 1 
It is brought to bear starting at the level of sensation. It establishes: 
• a link between sensation and pleasure; 
• the independence of this link with regard to the vital usefulness 
sensation can entail; 
• a direct ratio between the intensity of pleasure and the quantity of 
knowledge delivered by the sensation; 
• the incompatibility between the truth of pleasure and the error of 
sensation. 
Visual perception, as a remote sensing of multiple objects which 
are given simultaneously and are not immediately related to the use­
fulness of the body, manifests the link between knowledge, pleasure, 
and truth in the satisfaction it carries. This same relationship is found

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
again, transposed to the other extreme, in the happiness of theoretical 
contemplation. The desire to know, which the first lines of the Meta­
physics posit as both universal and natural, is based on that primary 
belonging which sensation already manifests. 2 And it is this desire 
which ensures the continuous passage from that first type of knowl­
edge to the ultimate type expressed in philosophy. In Aristotle, the 
desire to know presupposes and transposes the prior relationship of 
knowledge, truth, and pleasure. 
In The Gay Science, Nietzsche defines an altogether different set of 
relations: 
• knowledge is an "invention"3 behind which there is something quite 
distinct from it: an interplay of instincts, impulses, desires, fear, 
will to appropriation. It is on the stage where they clash that knowl­
edge comes into being; 
• it arises not as an effect of their harmony, of their successful equi­
librium, but of their hatred, of their dubious and provisional com­
promise, of a fragile pact they are always prepared to betray. It is 
not a permanent faculty; it is an event or at least a series of events; 
• it is always servile, dependent, alert to advantages (not to its own, 
but to what might interest the instinct or instincts that dominate it); 
• and if it professes to be a knowledge of the truth, this is because it 
produces the truth through the action of a primordial and renewed 
falsification that establishes the distinction between the true and 
the untrue. 
Interest is thus posited radically prior to the knowledge that it sub­
ordinates as a mere instrument; the dissociated knowledge of pleasure 
and happiness is linked to strife, aversion, and malevolence exerted 
against themselves to the point of renouncing themselves through a 
supplement of strife, aversion, and malevolence; its original link to 
truth is undone, since in it truth is only an effect-an effect, moreover, 
of a falsification that calls itself opposition of the true and the untrue. 
This model of a fundamentally interested knowledge, produced as an 
event of the will and determining the effect of truth through falsifica­
tion, is doubtless as far as it could be from the postulates of classical 
metaphysics. It is the one that has been freely adapted and used, in this 
year's course, with regard to a series of examples.

The Will to Knowledge 
3. This series of examples was borrowed from archaic Greek history 
and institutions. They all belong to the domain of justice. It was a mat­
ter of following a development that occurred from the seventh to the 
fifth centuries. This transformation concerns the administration of jus­
tice, the concept of the just, and social reactions to crime. 
Studied in turn were: 
• the practice of the oath in judicial disputes and the evolution that 
goes from the defiance oath of litigants exposing themselves to the 
vengeance of the gods to the assertoric oath of the witness who is 
supposed to affirm what is true from having seen it and been pres­
ent to it; 
• the search for a just measure not only in commercial exchanges 
but in social relations inside the city-state, through the institution 
of money; 
• the search for a nomos, a just law of distribution ensuring the order 
of the city-state by making an order reign therein which is the order 
of the world. 
• the rituals of purification after killings. 
During the whole period under consideration, the distribution of jus­
tice was the focus of significant political struggles. They ultimately gave 
rise to a form of justice linked to a knowledge [savoir] in which truth 
was posited as visible, easily established, obedient to laws like those 
governing the order of the world, and whose discovery holds a purifi­
catory value for oneself. This type of affirmation of truth was to be deci­
sive in the history of Western knowledge. 
This year's seminar was generally confined to the study of penality in 
France in the nineteenth century. It dealt this year with the first devel­
opments of a penal psychiatry in the period of the Restoration. The 
material used was largely the text of the medico-legal experts' opin­
ions submitted by the contemporaries and disciples of Esquirol. 
NOTES 
1 Aristotle, Metaphysique, trans. J. Tricot (Paris: Vrin, 1956); Ethique a Nicomaque, trans. J. Tricot 
(Paris: Vrin, 1959); De l'Arne, trans. E. Barbotin (Paris: Belles Lettres, 1966).

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
2 Aristotle, Metaphysique, trans. J. Tricot (Paris: Vrin, 1956). [Aristotle, Metaphysics, A.I.98oa21: 
"All men by nature desire to know. An indication of this is the delight we take in our senses; 
for even apart from their usefulness they are loved for themselves; and above all others the sense 
of sight," in The Basic Works of Aristotle, Richard McKeon, ed. (New York: Random House, 
1941), p. 689.] 
3 F. Nietzsche, Die frOliche Wissenschaft (Chemnitz, 1882); the subtitle La Caya scienza does not 
appear until the edition of 1887 (Le Cai Savoir, trans. P. Klossowski, in Oeuvres philosophiques 
completes [Paris: Gallimard, 1967], vol. 5) [The Cay Science, trans. Walter Kaufmann (New York: 
Vintage, 1974)].

PENAL THEORIES AND INSTITUTIONS 
Lis year's comse was meant to serve as a historical preliminary 
to the study of penal institutions (more generally, of social controls and 
punitive systems) in French society of the nineteenth century. That 
study itself fits within a broader project, outlined the previous year: to 
trace the formation of certain types of knowledge [savoir] out of the 
juridico-political matrices that gave birth to them and act as their sup­
port. The working hypothesis is this: power relations (together with the 
struggles that traverse them or the institutions that maintain them) do 
not simply playa facilitating or obstructing role with respect to knowl­
edge; they do not merely encourage or stimulate it, distort or restrict 
it; power and knowledge are not bound to each other solely through 
the action of interests and ideologies; so the problem is not just to 
determine how power subordinates knowledge and makes it serve its 
ends or how it superimposes itself on it, imposing ideological contents 
and limitations. No knowledge is formed without a system of commu­
nication, registration, accumulation, and displacement that is in itself 
a form of power, linked in its existence and its functioning to other 
forms of power. No power, on the other hand, is exercised without the 
extraction, appropriation, distribution, or restraint of a knowledge. At 
this level there is not knowledge [connaissance] on one side and soci­
ety on the other, or science and the state, but the basic forms of "power­
knowledge" ["pouvoir-savoir"]. 
Measure [mesure] had been studied, the previous year, as a form of 
"power-knowledge" tied to the construction of the Greek city-state. 
This year the inquiry was studied in the same manner as it related to

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
the formation of the medieval state; next year the examination will be 
considered, as a form of power-knowledge linked to systems of con­
trol, exclusion, and punishment characteristic of industrial societies. In 
their historical formation, measure, inquiry, and examination were all 
means of exercising power and, at the same time, rules for establishing 
knowledge. Measure: a means of establishing or restoring order, the 
right order, in the combat of men or the elements; but also a matrix 
of mathematical and physical knowledge. The inquiry: a means of 
establishing or restoring facts, events, actions, properties, rights; but 
also a matrix of empirical knowledge and natural sciences. The exam­
ination: a means of setting or reinstating the standard, the rule, the 
distribution, the qualification, the exclusion; but also a matrix of all the 
psychologies, sociologies, psychiatries-in short, of what is called the 
"human sciences." To be sure, measure, inquiry, and examination are 
brought into play simultaneously in many scientific practices, as so 
many pure and simple methods or strictly controlled instruments. It 
is also true that at this level and in this role they are detached from 
their relationship with the forms of power. Before appearing together, 
in this clarified form, inside definite epistemological domains, they 
were connected to a setting in place of a political power; they were both 
its effect and its instrument, serving a function of order in the case of 
measure, of centralization in the case of the inquiry, of selection and 
exclusion in the case of the examination. 
So the course for the year 1971-1972 was divided into two parts. 
The first was devoted to studying the inquiry and its development 
during the Middle Ages. Special attention was given to the conditions 
of its emergence in the domain of penal practice. A transition from the 
system of revenge to that of punishment; from accusatory practice to 
inquisitory practice; from the injury that provokes the litigation to the 
infraction that determines the prosecution; from the decision upon 
testing to the judgment upon proof; from the combat that designates 
the victor and shows the just cause to the official report that establishes 
the fact by relying on the evidence. This whole set of transformations 
is tied to the birth of a State that tends to take stricter and stricter con­
trol of the administration of penal justice; and this insofar as the func­
tions of maintaining order become concentrated in its hands and as the 
fiscalization of justice by the feudal system has inserted judicial prac­
tice in the great circuits of transfer of wealth. The judicial form of the 
inquiry was perhaps borrowed from what remained of the forms of

Penal Theories and Institutions 
Carolingian administration; but much more surely from models of eccle­
siastical administration and control. To this set of practices belong: the 
questions characteristic of the inquiry (Who did what? Is the act pub­
licly known? Who saw it and can testify about it? What is the evidence, 
what are the proofs? Is there a confession?); the phases of the inquiry 
(the one that establishes the facts, the one that determines the guilty 
party, the one that establishes the circumstances of the act); the char­
acters of the inquiry (the one who prosecutes, the one who accuses, the 
one who denies or admits; the one who must judge and make the deci­
sion). This judicial model of the inquiry rests on a whole system of 
power; it is this system that defines what must be constituted as knowl­
edge; how, from whom, and by whom it is extracted; in what manner 
it moves about and is transmitted; at what point it accumulates and 
gives rise to a judgment or a decision. 
This "inquisitorial" model, displaced and gradually transformed, will 
constitute, starting in the fourteenth century, one of the factors that 
shapes the empirical sciences. The inquiry, connected with experi­
mentation and voyage or not, but strongly opposed to the authority of 
tradition and to the decision of the symbolic text, will be utilized in sci­
entific practices (magnetism, for example, or natural history), theorized 
in methodological reflection (Bacon, that administrator), transposed 
into discursive types (the inquiry as opposed to the essay, the medita­
tion, the treatise). We belong to an inquisitorial civilization that, for cen­
turies now, practices, according to forms of varying complexity but all 
derived from the same model, the extraction, displacement, and accu­
mulation of knowledge. The inquisition: a form of power-knowledge 
essential to our society. The truth of experience is a daughter of the 
inquisition-of the political, administrative, judicial power to ask ques­
tions, extract answers, collect testimonies, verify assertions, establish 
facts-just as the truth of measures and proportions was a daughter 
of Dike. A day came, quite early, when empiricism forgot and covered 
over its beginning. Pudenda origo. It set the serenity of the inquiry 
against the tyranny of the inquisition, disinterested learning [connais­
sance] against the passion of the inquisitorial system; and, in the name 
of the truths of experience, that system was blamed for giving birth, 
in its tortures, to the demons it claimed to be driving out; but the inqui­
sition was only one-and for a long time the most perfected one-of 
the forms of the inquisitorial system that is one of the most important 
political matrices of our knowledge.

20 Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
The other part of the course was devoted to the emergence, in 
sixteenth-century France, of new forms of social controls. The massive 
practice of confinement, the development of the police apparatus, the 
supervision of populations prepared for the construction of a new 
type of power-knowledge which would take the form of the examina­
tion. A study of this new type, of the functions and forms that it took 
in the nineteenth century, will be undertaken in the course for the 
year 1972-1975. 
In the Monday seminar we continued the study of medico-legal prac­
tices and concepts of the nineteenth century. One case was singled out 
for a detailed analysis and a subsequent publication. 
Pierre Riviere, a little-known murderer of the nineteenth century: 
at the age of twenty he had slaughtered his mother, his brother, and 
his sister; after his arrest, he had written a memoir that was handed 
over to his judges and to the doctors charged with preparing a psychi­
atric report. Riviere's statement, partially published in 1856 in a medi­
cal journal, was rediscovered in its entirety by Jean-Pierre Peter, along 
with most of the documents from the dossier. It is this set that was pre­
pared for publication, with the participation of Robert Castel, Gilles 
Deleuze, Alexandre Fontana, Jean-Pierre Peter, Phillippe Riot, and 
Maryvonne Saison. 
Among all the dossiers of penal psychiatry that we have at our dis­
posal, this one captured our attention for various reasons: the existence, 
certainly, of the statement written by the murderer, a young Norman 
peasant who seemed to be regarded by his entourage as bordering on 
imbecility; the content of that statement (the first part is taken up with 
an extremely meticulous account of all the contracts, conflicts, arrange­
ments, promises, breaks that managed to bind together the families of 
his father and mother or set them at odds, beginning with their mar­
riage plan-a remarkable document of peasant ethnology; in the sec­
ond part of his text, Pierre Riviere explains the "reasons" for his act); 
the relatively detailed deposition of the witnesses, all of them inhabi­
tants of the hamlet, giving their impressions concerning the "oddities" 
of Pierre Riviere; a series of psychiatric reports representing each of 
the well-defined strata of medical knowledge: one was drafted by a 
country doctor, another by a physician from Caen, others by the great 
Parisian psychiatrists of the day (Esquirol, Orfila, and so on); the date, 
finally, of the event (the beginning of criminological psychiatry, great

Penal Theories and Institutions 21 
public debates between psychiatrists and jurists about the concept of 
monomania, the extension of mitigating circumstances in judicial prac­
tice, the publication of Lacenaire's Memoires and the appearance of the 
great criminal in literature).



THE PUNITIVE SOCIETY 
In the penal system of the Classical period, one reencounters, mixed 
together, four great forms of punitive tactics-four forms having dif­
ferent historical origins, each having played if not an exclusive role then 
a privileged one: 
1. exile, cast out, banish, expel beyond the borders, forbid certain 
places, destroy the home, obliterate the birthplace, confiscate the pos­
sessions and properties; 
2. arrange a compensation, impose a redemption, convert the damage 
caused into a debt to repay, tum the offense into a financial obligation; 
3. expose, mark, wound, amputate, make a scar, stamp a sign on the 
face or the shoulder, impose an artificial and visible handicap, tor­
ture-in short, seize hold of the body and inscribe upon it the marks 
of power; 
4-confine. 
As a hypothesis we may distinguish, in terms of the types of pun­
ishment they privileged, banishment societies (Greek SOciety), redemp­
tion societies (Germanic societies), marking societies (Western societies 
at the end of the Middle Ages), and confinement societies-our own? 
Ours, but only since the end of the eighteenth century. For one thing 
is certain: detention and imprisonment do not form part of the Euro­
pean penal system before the great reforms of the years 1780-1820. The 
jurists of the eighteenth century are unanimous on this point: "Prison 
is not regarded as a penalty according to our civil law ... although the 
princes, for reasons of State, sometimes go so far as to inflict this pen­
alty, these are decisive blows, and civil courts do not make use of these

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
kinds of sentences" (Serpillon, Code criminel, 1767).1 But it can already 
be said that such an insistence on denying that imprisonment has any 
penal character indicates a growing uncertainty. In any case, the con­
finements that are practiced in the seventeenth and eighteenth century 
remain on the fringe of the penal system, even if they are close by and 
drawing ever closer . 
• surety confinement, employed by the courts during the investigation 
of a criminal matter, by the creditor until repayment of the debt, 
or by the royal power when it fears an enemy. This is not so much 
a matter of punishing an offense as of making sure of a person. 
• substitute confinement, imposed on someone who doesn't come 
under criminal justice (either because of the nature of his offenses, 
which are only moral or behavioral in nature; or due to a privileged 
status: the ecclesiastical courts, which since 16'29 no longer have the 
right to pass prison sentences in the strict sense, may order the 
guilty to withdraw to a monastery; the lettre de cachet is often a 
means for the privileged to escape criminal justice; women are sent 
to houses (If detention for mistakes that men will pay for on the 
convict ships). 
It should be noted, except in this last case, that this substitute con­
finement is characterized in general by the fact that it is not decided 
by judicial authority, that its duration is not set once and for all, and 
that it depends on a hypothetical purpose-correction. Punishment 
rather than penalty. 
Now, fifty years or so after the great monuments of Classical crimi­
nallaw (Serpillon, Jousse,2 Muyart de Vouglans 5), prison became the 
general form of penality. 
In 1831, Remusat, in a speech to the Chamber, said: "What is the 
penal system authorized by the new law? It is incarceration in all its 
forms. Compare in fact the four main penalties that remain in the Penal 
Code. Forced labor is a form of incarceration. Penal servitude is an 
open-air prison. Detention, hard labor, and correctional imprisonment 
are in a way just different names for the same act of punishment."4 And 
Van Meenen, opening the Third Penitentiary Conference at Brussels, 
recalled the time of his youth when the land was still covered with 
"wheels, gibbets, gallows, and pillories," with "skeletons hideously

The Punitive Society 
spread."5 It looks as if prison, parapenal punishment, had, at the end 
of the eighteenth century, made its entry into penal practice and had 
very quickly occupied the entire space. The Austrian Criminal Code, 
drafted under Joseph II, offers the most obvious evidence of this imme­
diately triumphant invasion. 
The organization of a penal system of confinement is not simply 
recent, it is enigmatic. 
At the very time of its planning, it was the object of vehement criti­
cism-criticism formulated in terms of basic principles; but also for­
mulated with a view to the dysfunctions that prison might induce in 
the penal system and in society as a whole. 
1. Prison prevents judicial authority from supervising and verifying 
the application of penalties. The law does not penetrate into the pris­
ons, said Decazes in 1818. 
2. Prison, by intermingling convicts who are both different and iso­
lated, forms a homogeneous community of criminals who become com­
rades in confinement and who will remain such on the outside. Prison 
manufactures a veritable army of domestic enemies. 
3. By giving convicts shelter, food, clothing, and often work, prison 
provides them with a condition preferable at times to that of workers. 
Not only may it fail to have a disuasive effect, but it fosters delinquency. 
4. Leaving prison are people who are doomed by their habits and 
by the infamy with which they are stamped to a life of crime. 
Right away, then, prison is denounced as an instrument that, in the 
margins of justice, manufactures those whom that justice will send or 
send back to prison. The carceral circle is clearly denounced as early as 
the years 1815-1830. To this criticism there were three successive replies: 
• imagine an alternative to prison which retains its positive effects 
(the segregation of criminals, their removal from circulation in soci­
ety) and eliminates its dangerous consequences (their return to cir­
culation). One will take up the old system of transport, which the 
British had suspended at the time of the War of Independence and 
reinstated after 1790, in the direction of Australia. The great debates 
about Botany Bay took place in France around the years 1824-1830. 
In actual fact, deportation-colonization will never take the place of 
imprisonment; during the period of the great colonial conquests, 
it will playa complex role in the controlled circuits of delinquency. 
A whole ensemble constituted by the groups of more or less vol-

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
untary colonists, the colonial regiments, the batallions of Africa, the 
Foreign Legion, and Cayenne will come to function, during the 
nineteenth century, in correlation with a penal practice that will 
remain essentially carceral. 
• reform the internal system of the prison so that it stops manufactur­
ing that army of domestic perils. This is the goal that was pointed to 
throughout Europe as "penitentiary reform." We can give as chron­
ological markers for it the Lessons on Prisons by Julius (18'28),6 on 
the one hand, and on the other the Brussels Conference in 1847. 
This reform includes three main aspects: complete or partial iso­
lation of prisoners inside the prisons (debates about the systems of 
Auburn and Pennsylvania); moral reform of convicts through work, 
instruction, religion, rewards, sentence reductions; development of 
parapenal institutions of prevention, or cooptation, or supervision. 
Now, these reforms, which the revolutions of 1848 put an end to, 
did not have the slightest effect on the prison dysfunctions that 
were denounced in the preceding period; 
• finally, give an anthropological status to the carceral circle; replace 
the old project of Julius and of Charles Lucas 7 (to establish a "sci­
ence of prisons" capable of giving the architectural, administrative, 
and pedagogical principles of a "correctional" institution) with a 
"science of criminals" that would be able to characterize them in 
their specificity and define the modes of social reaction suited to 
their case. The class of delinquents, to which the carceral circuit 
gave at least part of its autonomy and whose isolation and closure 
it ensured, appears then as a psychosociological deviation. A devi­
ation that comes under a "scientific" discourse (into which will rush 
psychopathological, psychiatric, psychoanalytic, and sociological 
analyses); a deviation about which people will wonder if prison 
constitutes a response or an appropriate treatment. 
What prison was reproached for in other terms at the beginning of 
the nineteenth century (its forming a "marginal" population of "delin­
quents") is now considered as an inevitability. Not only is it accepted 
as a fact, but it is constituted as a primary assumption. The "delin­
quency" effect produced by prison becomes a delinquency problem to 
which prison must give a suitable response. A criminological turning 
of the carceral circle.

The Punitive Society '27 
It must be asked how such a turning was possible; how effects that 
were denounced and criticized managed, after all, to be assumed as 
fundamental data for a scientific analysis of criminality; how it came 
about that prison, a recent, unstable, criticizable and criticized institu­
tion, was planted so deep in the institutional field that the mechanism 
of its effects could be posited as an anthropological constant; what 
prison's ultimate reason for being was; what functional requirement it 
happened to meet. 
It is all the more necessary to pose the question and, beyond that, 
all the more difficult to answer it, as one has trouble seeing the "ideo­
logical" genesis of the institution. One might think, in fact, that prison 
was indeed denounced, and very early on, in its practical consequences, 
but that it was so firmly tied to the new penal theory (the one presid­
ing over the drafting of the nineteenth-century code) that it had to be 
accepted along with the theory; or, further, that this theory would have 
to be reworked, from top to bottom, if one aimed to formulate a radi­
cal prison policy. 
Now, from this viewpoint, an examination ofthe penal theories ofthe 
second half of the eighteenth century yields rather surprising results. 
None of the great reformers, whether they were theoreticians like 
Beccaria, jurists like Servan, legislators like Le Peletier de Saint­
Fargeau, or both at the same time like Brissot, recommend prison as 
a universal or even a major penalty. In a general way, in all these for­
mulations, the criminal is defined as society's enemy. In this respect, 
the reformers take up and transform what had been the result of a 
whole political and institutional evolution since the Middle Ages: the 
replacement of litigation settlement by public prosecution. By interven­
ing, the king's prosecutor designates the infraction not just as an attack 
on a person or a private interest but as an attempt upon the king's sov­
ereignty. Commenting on the English laws, Blackstone said that the 
public prosecutor defends both the sovereignty of the king and the 
interests of society. 8 In short, a large majority of the reformers, starting 
with Beccaria, sought to define the notion of crime, the role of the pub­
lic party, and the necessity of punishment solely on the basis of the 
interest of society or the need to protect it. The criminal injures soci­
ety first of all; breaking the social compact, he sets himself up in soci­
ety as a domestic enemy. A certain number of consequences derive 
from this general principle. 
1. Each society will have to adjust the scale of penalties according to

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
its particular needs. Since the punishment does not derive from the 
transgression itself but from the harm caused to society or from the 
danger to which it exposes society, the weaker the society is, the more 
mindful of its security it will have to be, and the more severe it will 
need to show itself. Hence, no universal model of penal practice, and 
an essential relativity of penalties. 
2. If the penalty were expiation, there would be no harm in its being 
too harsh; in any case, it would be difficult to establish a just propor­
tion between it and the crime. Yet if it is a matter of protecting society, 
one can calculate it in such a way that it ensures exactly that function: 
any additional severity becomes an abuse of power. The justice of the 
penalty is in its economy. 
5. The role of the penalty is entirely oriented toward the exterior and 
toward the future: to prevent crime from recommencing. Logically, a 
crime that one knew for certain to be the last would not need to be pun­
ished. Hence, make the guilty incapable of further harm and dissuade 
the innocent from any similar infraction. Here, the certainty of the pen­
alty, its inevitability, more than any severity, constitutes its effectiveness. 
Now, from such principles it is not possible to deduce what will 
actually come to pass in penal practice, namely, the universalization of 
prison as the general form of punishment. On the contrary, one sees 
the emergence of very different punitive models: 
• one of these is geared to dishonor, that is, to the effects of public 
opinion. Dishonor is a perfect penalty, since it is the immediate and 
spontaneous reaction of society itself; it varies with each society; it 
is graduated according to the harmfulness of each crime; it can be 
revoked by a public rehabilitation; lastly, it affects only the guilty 
person. It is therefore a penalty that is adjusted to the crime with­
out having to go by way of a code, without having to be applied by 
a court, and without risk of being misused by a political power. It 
is exactly attuned to the principles of penal practice. "The triumph 
of a good legislation is when public opinion is strong enough to 
punish offenses by itself .... Fortunate is the people in whom the 
sense of honor can be the only law. It has little need of legislation. 
Dishonor, there is its penal code";9 
• another model employed in the plans for reform is that of retalia­
tion. By sentencing the guilty individual to a punishment of the

The Punitive Society 
same type and of the same gravity as the crime, one is sure of ob­
taining a penality that is both graduated and exactly proportional. 
The penalty takes the form of a counterattack. And, provided the 
latter is quick and inevitable, it almost automatically nullifies the 
advantages expected by the lawbreaker, rendering the crime use­
less. The benefit of the offense is abruptly brought back to zero. 
Doubtless, the retaliation model was never proposed in a detailed 
form; but it often enabled one to define some types of punishment. 
Beccaria, for example: "Attacks against persons ought to be pun­
ished by corporal penalties"; "personal injuries against honor ought 
to be pecuniary." One also finds it in the form of a "moral retalia­
tion": punish the crime not by turning its effects around but by turn­
ing back toward the beginnings and the vices that are its cause. 10 Le 
Peletier de Saint-Fargeau recommends to the National Assembly 
(21 May 1791): physical pain to punish heinous crimes; hard labor 
to punish crimes originating in idleness; and dishonor to punish 
crimes inspired by an "abject and degraded" soul; 11 
-lastly, a third model, enslavement for the benefit of society. Such 
a penalty can be graduated, in its intensity and duration, accord­
ing to the harm done to the community. It is connected with the 
transgression through that damaged interest. Beccaria, apropos of 
thieves: "Temporary slavery places the labor and the person of the 
guilty individual in the service of society so that this state of total 
dependence compensates it for the unjust despotism that he prac­
ticed by violating the social compact. "12 Brissot: "By what should the 
death penalty be replaced? By slavery which makes the guilty inca­
pable of harming society; by labor which makes him useful; by 
long and continuous suffering which frightens those who might be 
tempted to imitate him."!3 
Of course, in all these plans, prison often figures as one of the pos­
sible penalties: either as a condition of forced labor, or as a retaliation 
penalty for those who have interfered with the liberty of others. But it 
does not appear as the general form of penality, nor as the condition 
for a psychological and moral transformation of the delinquent. 
It is in the first years of the nineteenth century that one will see 
the theoreticians grant this role to prison. "Imprisonment is the pre­
eminent penalty in civilized societies. Its tendency is moral when it is

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
accompanied by the obligation of labor" (P. Rossi, 1829).14 But dur­
ing this period the prison will already exist as a major instrument of 
penality. Prison as a place of improvement is a reinterpretation of a 
practice of imprisonment that had spread in the preceding years. 
Thus, prison practice was not implied in penal theory. It was born else­
where and was formed for other reasons. And it was imposed from the 
outside, as it were, on penal theory, which would be obliged to justify 
it after the fact. For example, this is what Livingston would do, in 1820, 
when he said that the prison penalty had the fourfold advantage of 
being divisible into as many degrees as there were degrees of serious­
ness in the offenses; of preventing recurrence; of enabling correction; 
of being mild enough so that juries would not hesitate to punish and 
the people would not rebel against the law.15 
To understand how prison really functioned, beneath its apparent 
dysfunction, and how deeply successful it was beneath its surface fail­
ures, we must go back, no doubt, to those parapenal agencies of control 
in which it figured, as we have seen, in the seventeenth and especially 
the eighteenth centuries. 
In those instances, confinement plays a role that includes three dis­
tinct features. 
• It intervenes, in the spatial distribution of individuals, through 
the temporary imprisonment of beggars and vagabonds. No doubt, 
ordinances (end of seventeenth and eighteenth century) sentence 
them to the convict ships, at least in the case of repeat offenses; but 
confinement remains in fact the most frequent punishment. Now, 
if they are confined, it is not so much to keep them where they are 
held as to move them: make the cities off-limits to them, send them 
into the countryside, or also prevent them from roaming in an area, 
force them to go where they can be given work. This is at least a 
negative way of controlling their location relative to the apparatus 
of farm and factory production; a way of acting upon the popula­
tion flow, taking into account the needs of production and of the 
job market. 
• Confinement also intervenes at the level of individual conduct. It 
penalizes at an infrapenal level ways of living, types of discourse, 
political projects or intentions, sexual behaviors, rejections of author-

The Punitive Society 
ity, defiances of opinion, acts of violence, and so on. In short, it 
intervenes not so much on behalf of law as on behalf of order and 
regularity. The irregular, the unsettled, the dangerous, and the dis­
honorable are the object of confinement; whereas penality punishes 
the infraction, it penalizes disorder . 
• Lastly, while it is true that it is in the hands of political power, that 
it totally or partly escapes the control of regular justice (in France 
it is almost always decided by the king, the ministers, the admin­
istrators, the subdelegates), it is not by any means the instrument 
of arbitrariness and absolutism. An analysis of the lettres de cachet 
(of both their functioning and their motivation) shows that the great 
majority of them were solicited by family men, by minor notables, 
by local, religious, and professional communities against individu­
als who in their estimation cause disturbance and disorder. The 
lettre de cachet rises from the bottom to the top (in the form of a 
request) before going back down the power apparatus in the form 
of an order bearing the royal seal. It is the instrument of a local and, 
so to speak, capillary control. 
A similar analysis could be done concerning associations in England 
from the end of the seventeenth century onward. Often led by "dissi­
dents," they aim to denounce, exclude, and bring action against indi­
viduals for delinquencies, refusals of work, and everyday disorders. 
Between this form of control and that ensured by the lettres de cachet 
the differences, obviously, are enormous. This one alone would suffice: 
the English associations (at least in the first part of the eighteenth cen­
tury) are independent of any state apparatus; moreover, rather popular 
in their recruitment, they direct their attack, in general terms, against 
the immorality of the rich and the powerful; finally, the strictness they 
show toward their own members is doubtless also a way of helping 
them to escape an extremely strict penal justice (English penal laws, a 
"bloody chaos," included more capital cases than any other European 
code). In France, by contrast, the forms of control were closely con­
nected with a state apparatus that had organized Europe's first great 
police force, which the Austria of Joseph II, then England, undertook 
to imitate. As to England, it should be noted in fact that in the last years 
of the eighteenth century (essentially after the Gordon Riots, and at the 
time of the great popular movements more or less contemporaneous

3'2 Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
with the French Revolution), new moral reform associations sprang up, 
much more aristocratic in their recruitment (some of them militarily 
equipped): they requested royal intervention, the promulgation of a 
new set of laws, and the organization of a police force. The work and 
the person of Colquhoun are at the center of this process. 
What transformed penality at the tum of the century was the adjust­
ment of the judicial system to a mechanism of oversight and control. 
It is their joint integration into a centralized state apparatus-but also 
the establishment and development of a whole series of (parapenal and 
at times nonpenal) institutions-that serves the main apparatus as a 
point of support, as forward positions, or reduced forms. A general sys­
tem of oversight and confinement penetrates all layers of society, tak­
ing forms that go from the great prisons built on the panopticon model 
to the charitable societies, and that find their points of application not 
only among the delinquents, but among abandoned children, orphans, 
apprentices, high school students, workers, and so on. In a passage of 
his Lessons On Prisons, Julius contrasted civilizations of the spectacle 
(civilizations of sacrifice and ritual, where it is a matter of giving every­
one the spectacle of a unique event and the major architectural form 
is the theater) with civilizations of supervision (where it is a matter of 
ensuring an uninterrupted control by a few over the greatest number; 
its privileged architectural form-the prison). And he added that Euro­
pean society, which had replaced religion with the state, offered the 
first example of a civilization of supervision. 16 
The nineteenth century founded the age of panopticism. 
What needs did this transformation meet? 
It seems to have provided new forms and new rules in the practice 
of illegality. New threats, above all. 
The example of the French Revolution (but also of many other move­
ments in the last twenty years of the eighteenth century) shows that the 
political apparatus of a nation is vulnerable to popular rebellions. A 
food riot, a revolt against taxes or rents, resistance to conscription are 
no longer those localized and limited movements which may well reach 
(and physically so) the representative of political power while leaving 
its structures and its distribution out of range. They may challenge the 
possession and exercise of political power. But further, and perhaps 
above all, the development of industry places the production apparatus 
in the grasp of those who must operate it. The small-scale craft units,

The Punitive Society 33 
the factories with limited and relatively simple equipment, the low­
capacity warehouses supplying local markets did not offer much of an 
opportunity for gross depredations or large-scale acts of destruction; 
but mechanization, the organization of great factories, with large stocks 
of. raw materials, the globalization of the market, and the appearance of 
great centers for the redistribution of commodities place wealth within 
reach of endless attacks. And these attacks come not from the outside­
from those deprived or poorly assimilated individuals who, in the cast­
off garb of the beggar or the vagabond, caused such fear in the eighteenth 
century-but from within, as it were, from the very people who must 
handle the machines to make them productive. From the daily pillag­
ing of stored products to the great collective smashings by machine 
operators, a constant danger threatens the wealth that is invested in the 
productive apparatus. The whole series of measures taken at the end 
of the eighteenth century and the beginning of the nineteenth to pro­
tect the ports, docks, and arsenals of London and to dismantle the net­
works of black market dealers can serve as an example. 
In the countryside, an apparently inverse situation produces analo­
gous effects. The parceling out of rural property, the more or less com­
plete disappearance of the commons, and the bringing of fallow land 
into cultivation solidify appropriation and make rural society intolerant 
of a whole set of minor illegalities that people had to accept-like it or 
not-in the system of great undercultivated estates. The margins disap­
peared where the poorest and the most mobile had managed to subsist, 
taking advantage of tolerance and neglect, of forgotten regulations and 
established facts. The tightening of property ties or, rather, the new sta­
tus of landed property and its new cultivation transforms many estab­
lished illegalities into offenses. The importance, more political than 
economic, of rural offenses in the France of the Directoire and the Con­
sulat (offenses that are connected either to struggles in the form of civil 
wars or to draft resistance); the importance, too, of resistances in Europe 
against the forest codes of the beginning of the nineteenth century. 
But perhaps the most important form of the new illegality is else­
where. It concerns not so much the body of the production apparatus 
or that of landed property as the very body of the worker and the way 
in which it is applied to apparatuses of production. Inadequate wages, 
disqualification of labor by the machine, excessive labor hours, mul­
tiple regional or local crises, prohibition of associations, mechanism of 
indebtment-all this leads workers into behaviors such as absenteeism,

34 Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
breaking of the "hiring contract," migration, and "irregular" living. The 
problem is then to attach workers firmly to the production apparatus, 
to settle them or move them where it needs them to be, to subject them 
to its rhythm, to impose the constancy or regularity on them that it 
requires-in short, to constitute them as a labor force. Hence a set of 
laws creating new offenses (the passbook order, the law concerning 
drinking establishments, the lottery prohibition); hence a whole series 
of measures that, without being absolutely binding, bring about a divi­
sion between the good and the bad worker, and seek to ensure a behav­
ioral rectification (the savings bank, the encouragement of marriage, 
and later, the workers' housing projects [cites ouvrieres]); hence the 
appearance of organizations exercising control or pressure (philan­
thropic societies, rehabilitation associations); hence, finally, a whole 
immense worker moralization campaign. This campaign defines what 
it wants to exorcize as "dissipation" and what it wants to e,stablish as 
"regularity": a working body that is concentrated, diligent, adjusted to 
the time of production, supplying exactly the force required. It gives 
the marginalization effect that is due to the control mechanisms a psy­
chological and moral status of importance. 
A certain number of conclusions can be drawn from all this. 
1. The forms of penality that one sees appearing between the years 
1760 and 1840 are not linked to a renewal of moral perception. The 
essential nature of the infractions defined by the code scarcely changed 
(we may note, however, the gradual or sudden disappearance of reli­
gious offenses); the appearance of certain economic or professional 
offenses; and while the regimen of penalties grew considerably milder, 
the infractions themselves remained nearly identical. What brought the 
great renewal of the epoch into play was a problem of bodies and mate­
riality, a question of physics: a new form of materiality taken by the 
production apparatus, a new type of contact between that apparatus and 
the individual who makes it function; new requirements imposed on 
individuals as productive forces. The history of penality at the begin­
ning of the nineteenth century does not belong essentially to a history 
of moral ideas; it is a chapter in the history of the body. Or let us put 
it another way: By questioning moral ideas in light of penal institutions 
and practice, one discovers that the evolution of morals is, above all, 
the history of the body, of bodies, rather. This being the case, it is 
understandable that:

The Punitive Society 35 
• prison became the general form of punishment, replacing torture. 
The body no longer has to be marked; it must be trained and re­
trained; its time must be measured out and fully used; its forces 
must be continuously applied to labor. The prison form of penality 
corresponds to the wage form of labor; 
• medicine, as a science of the normality of bodies, found a place at 
the center of penal practice (the penalty must have healing as its 
purpose). 
2. The transformation of penality does not belong simply to a his­
tory of bodies; it belongs more specifically to a history of relations 
between political power and bodies. The coercion of bodies, their con­
trol, their subjectivation, the way in which that power is exerted on 
them directly or indirectly, the way in which they are adapted, set in 
place, and used are at the root of the change we have examined. A 
Physics of power would need to be written, showing how that physics 
was modified relative to its earlier forms, at the beginning of the nine­
teenth century, at the time of the development of state structures. 
A new optics, first of all: an organ of generalized and constant over­
sight; everything must be observed, seen, transmitted: organization of 
a police force; instituting of a system ofrecords (with individual files), 
establishment of a panopticism. 
A new mechanics: isolation and regrouping of individuals, localiza­
tion of bodies; optimal utilization of forces; monitoring and improve­
ment of the output; in short, the putting into place of a whole discipline 
of life, time, and energies. 
A new physiology: definition of standards, exclusion and rejection 
of everything that does not meet them, mechanism of their reestab­
lishment through corrective interventions that are ambiguously thera­
peutic and punitive. 
3. Delinquency plays an important role in this "physics." But there 
should be no misunderstanding about the term delinquency It is not a 
matter of delinquents, a kind of psychological and social mutant, who 
would be the object of penal repression. Delinquency should be under­
stood, rather, as the coupled penality-delinquent system. The penal 
institution, with prison at its center, manufactures a category of indi­
viduals who form a circuit with it: prison does not correct-it endlessly 
calls the same ones back; little by little, it constitutes a marginalized

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
population that is used to exert pressure on the "irregularities" or 
"illegalities" that cannot be tolerated. And it exerts this pressure on 
illegalities via delinquency in three ways: by gradually leading the irreg­
ularity or illegality toward the infraction, with the help of a whole pro­
cess of exclusions and parapenal sanctions (a mechanism that we may 
call "indiscipline leads to the gallows"); by incorporating delinquents 
into its own instruments for supervising illegality (recruitment of pro­
vocateurs, informers, detectives; a mechanism that we may call "every 
thief can become Vidocq"); by channeling the infractions of delinquents 
toward populations that need watching the most (the principle here: 
"a poor person is always easier to rob than a rich one"). 
So, to return to the question posed right at the start-"Why this 
strange institution of the prison, why this choice of a penality whose 
dysfunction was denounced so early?"-perhaps the answer should be 
sought along these lines: prison has the advantage of producing delin­
quency, an instrument of control over and pressure on illegality, a sub­
stantial component in the exercise of power over bodies, an element 
of that physics of power which gave rise to the psychology of the subject. 
This year's seminar was devoted to preparing the Pierre Riviere dos­
sier for publication. 
NOTES 
I F. Serpillon, Code criminel, ou commentaire sur l'ordonnance de 1670 (Lyon: Perisse, 1767), 
vol. 2, title 35: Des sentences, jugements et arrets, art. 13, §33, p. 1095. 
2 D. Jousse, Traite de la justice criminelle de France (Paris: Debure, 1771), 4 vols. 
3 P. Muyart de Vouglans, Institutes au droit criminel, ou Principes generaur en ces matieres (Paris: 
Breton, 1757). 
4 C. Remusat, "Discussion du projet de loi relatif II des rHormes dans la legislation penale" 
(Chambre des deputes, December I, 1831), Archives pariementaires, 2d ser. (Paris: Dupont, 
1889), p. 185. 
5 Van Meenen (Presiding Judge of the Supreme Court of Appeals of Brussels), "Discours d'ouver­
ture du.IIc congres international penitentiaire" (September 20-23,1847, Brussels), Debats du 
Congres penitentiare de Brurelles (Deltombe, 1847), p. 20. 
6 N. H. Julius, Vorselungen iiber die Gefiingnisskunde (Berlin: Stuhr, 1828): Lefons sur les pri­
sons, presentees enforme de cours au public de Berlin en l'annee 1827, trans. Lagarmitte (Paris: 
Levrault, 1831), 2 vols. 
7 C. Lucas, De la Riforme des prisons, ou de la theorie de l'emprisonnement, de ses principes, de 
ses moyens et de ses conditions pratiques (Paris: Legrand and Bergouinioux, 1836-1838), 3 vols. 
8 Sir W. Blackstone, Commentaries on the Law 0/ England (Oxford: Clarendon, 1758): Commen­
taire sur Ie code criminel d'Angleterre, trans. abbe Goyer (Paris: Knapen, 1776).

The Punitive Society 37 
9 J. Brissot de Warville, Theorie des lois criminelles (Berlin), ch. 2, sec. 2, p. 187. 
10 C. de Beccaria, Dei Deli/ti e delle Pene (Milan, 1764): Traite des delits e/ des peines, trans. Collin 
de Plancy (Paris: Flammarion, 1979), ch. 27, p. 118; ch. 28, p. 121; ch. 30, p. 125. 
II Le Peletier de Saint-Fargeau, "Rapport sur Ie projet de Code penal" (Assemblee nationale, 2') 
mai 1791), Archives parlementaires de 1787 a 1860: recueil complet des debats !egislatifs et 
politiques des Chambres franr;aises (Paris: Dupont, 1887), 1st ser., vol. 26, p. 322. 
12 Beccaria, Traite des de/its, p. 125. 
13 Brissot de Warville, Theories des lois, p. 147. 
14 P. L. Rossi, Traite de droit penal, bk. 3, ch. 8, "De I'emprisonnemcnt" (Paris: Sautelet, 1829), 
P·169· 
Pj F. Livingston, Introductory Report to the System of Penal Law Prepared for the State if Louisi­
ana (New Orleans, 1820): Rapportfait a I'Assemb!ee generale de l'Etat de Louisiane sur Ie 
projet d'un code penal (New Orleans: Levy, 1822). 
16 Julius, Le((ons sur les prisons, vol. I, pp. 384-86.



PSYCHIATRIC POWER 
E a long time, medicine, psychiatry, penal justice, and criminol­
ogy remained-and in large part still remain-within the limits of a 
manifestation of truth inside the norms of knowledge and a produc­
tion of truth in the form of the test, the second of these always tending 
to hide beneath and getting its justification from the first. The current 
crisis in these "disciplines" does not simply call into question their lim­
its or uncertainties in the sphere of knowledge; it calls knowledge into 
question, the form of knowledge, the "subject-object" norm; it ques­
tions the relations between our society's economic and political struc­
tures and knowledge (not in its true and untrue contents but in its 
"power-knowledge" functions). A historico-political crisis, then. 
Consider, first, the example of medicine, with the space connected 
to it, namely, the hospital. The hospital was still an ambiguous place 
quite late, a place of investigation for a hidden truth and of testing for 
a truth to be produced. 
A direct action upon illness: not just enable it to reveal its truth to 
the physician's gaze but to produce that truth. The hospital, a place 
where the true illness blossoms forth. It was assumed, in fact, that the 
sick person left at liberty-in his "milieu," in his family, in his circle 
of friends, with his regimen, his habits, his prejudices, his illusions­
could not help but be affected by a complex, mixed, and tangled dis­
ease, a kind of unnatural illness that was both the blend of several 
diseases and the impediment preventing the true disease from being 
produced in the authenticity of its nature. So the hospital's role was, 
by clearing away that parasitic vegetation, those aberrant forms, not

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
only to bring to light the disease as it was but to produce it finally 
in its heretofore-enclosed and blocked truth. Its peculiar nature, its 
es!)ential characteristics, its specific development would be able at last, 
through the effect of hospitalization, to become a reality. 
The eighteenth-century hospital was supposed to create the condi­
tions that would allow the truth of the sickness to break out. Thus, it 
was a place of observation and demonstration, but also of purification 
and testing. It constituted a sort of complex setup designed both to 
bring out and actually to produce the illness: a botanical place for the 
contemplation of species, a still-alchemical place for the elaboration of 
pathological substances. 
It is this dual function that was taken charge of for a long time yet 
by the great hospital structures established in the nineteenth century. 
And, for a century (1760-1860), the theory and practice of hospitaliza­
tion, and generally speaking, the conception of illness, were dominated 
by this ambiguity: should the hospital, a reception structure for illness, 
be a space of knowledge or a place of testing? 
Hence a whole series of problems that traversed the thought and 
practice of physicians. Here are a few of them: 
1. Therapy consists in suppressing sickness, in reducing it to nonex­
istence; but if this therapy is to be rational, if it is to be based on truth, 
must it not allow the disease to develop? When must one intervene, 
and in what way? Must one intervene at all? Must one act so that the 
disease develops or so that it stops? To diminish it or to guide it to 
its term? 
2. There are diseases and alterations of diseases. Pure and impure, 
simple and complex diseases. Is there not ultimately just one disease, 
of which all the others would be the more or less distantly derived 
forms, or must irreducible categories be granted? (The debate between 
Broussais and his adversaries concerning the notion of irritation. The 
problem of essential fevers.) 
3. What is a normal disease? What is a disease that follows its course? 
A disease that leads to death, or one that heals spontaneously once its 
development is completed? These are the terms in which Bichat re­
flected on the position of disease between life and death. 
We are aware of the prodigious simplification that Pasteurian biol­
ogy brought to all these problems. By determining the agent of the sick­
ness and by pinpointing it as a single organism, it enabled the hospital 
to become a place of observation, of diagnosis, of clinical and experi-

Psychiatric Power 
mental identification, but also of immediate intervention, of counter­
attack against the microbial invasion. 
As to the testing function, one sees that it may disappear. The place 
where the disease is produced will be the laboratory, the test tube; but 
there, the disease does not develop in a crisis; its process is reduced 
to an amplified mechanism; it is brought down to a verifiable and con­
trollable phenomenon. For the patient, the hospital milieu no longer 
must be the place that favors a decisive event; it simply enables a reduc­
tion, a transfer, an amplification, a verification; the test is transformed 
into a proof in the technical structure of the laboratory and in the phy­
sician's report. 
If one were to write an "ethno-epistemology" of the medical person­
age, it would be necessary to say that the Paste urian revolution deprived 
him of his role-an ancient one no doubt-in the ritual production and 
testing of the disease. And the disappearance of that role was drama­
tized, of course, by the fact that Pasteur did not merely show that the 
physician did not have to be the producer of the disease "in its truth," 
but even that, through ignorance of the truth, he had made himself, 
thousands of times, its propagator and reproducer: the hospital physi­
cian going from bed to bed was one of the main agents of contagion. 
Pasteur delivered a formidable narcissistic wound to physicians, some­
thing for which they took a long time to forgive him: those hands that 
must glide over the patient's body, palpate it, examine it, those hands 
that must uncover the disease, bring it forth, Pasteur pOinted to as car­
riers of disease. Up to that moment, the hospital space and the physi­
cian's body had had the role of producing the "critical" truth of disease; 
now the physician's body and the overcrowded hospital appeared as 
producers of disease's reality. 
By asepticizing the physician and the hospital, one gave them a new 
innocence, from which they drew new powers, and a new status in 
men's imagination. But that is another story. 
These few notations may help us to understand the position of the 
madman and the psychiatrist in the space of the asylum. 
There is doubtless a historical correlation between two facts: before 
the eighteenth century, madness was not systematically interned; and 
it was considered essentially as a form of error or illusion. At the begin­
ning of the Classical age, madness was still seen as belonging to the 
world's chimeras; it could live in the midst of them, and it didn't have

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
to be separated from them until it took extreme or dangerous forms. 
Under these conditions, it is understandable that the privileged place 
where madness could and must shine forth in its truth could not be 
the artificial space of the hospital. The therapeutic places that were rec­
ognized were in nature, first of all, since nature was the visible form 
of truth; it held the power to dissipate error, to make the chimera melt 
away. So the prescriptions given by doctors were apt to be travel, rest, 
walking, retirement, breaking with the artificial and vain world of the 
city. Esquirol will remember this when, in planning a psychiatric hos­
pital, he will recommend that each courtyard open expansively onto a 
garden view. The other therapeutic place put to use was the theater, 
nature's opposite: the patient's own madness was acted out for him on 
the stage; it was lent a momentary fictive reality; one pretended, with 
the help of props and disguises, as if it were true, but in such a way 
that, caught in this trap, the delusion would finally reveal itself to the 
very eyes of its victim. This technique had not completely disappeared, 
either, in the nineteenth century; Esquirol, for example, would recom­
mend that proceedings be instituted against melancholics to stimulate 
their taste for fighting back. 
The practice of internment at the beginning of the nineteenth cen­
tury coincides with the moment when madness is perceived less in 
relation to delusion than in relation to regular, normal behavior; when 
it appears no longer as disturbed judgment but as a disorder in one's 
way of acting, of willing, of experiencing passions, of making decisions, 
and of being free; in short, when it is no longer inscribed on the axis 
truth-error-consciousness but on the axis passion-will-freedom-the 
moment of Hoffbauer and Esquirol. "There are madmen whose delir­
ium is scarcely visible; there are none whose passions, whose moral 
affections are not confused, perverted, or reduced to nothing .... The les­
sening of the delirium is a sure sign of recovery only when the madmen 
return to their first affections."! What is the process of recovery in fact? 
The movement by which the delusion is dissipated and the truth is 
newly brought to light? Not at all; rather, "the return of the moral affec­
tions within their proper bounds, the desire to see one's friends, one's 
children, again, the tears of sensibility, the need to pour out one's heart, 
to be in the midst of one's family again, to resume one's habits."2 
What might be the role of the asylum, then, in this new orientation 
toward regular behaviors? Of course, first it will have the function 
that was attributed to hospitals at the end of the eighteenth century:

Psychiatric Power 43 
make it possible to uncover the truth of the mental illness, brush aside 
everything in the patient's milieu that may mask it, muddle it, give it 
aberrant forms, or sustain it and give it a new impetus. But even more 
than a place of unveiling, the hospital for which Esquirol supplied the 
model is a scene of confrontation: madness, a disturbed will, a per­
verted passion, must encounter there a sound will and orthodox pas­
sions. Their confrontation, their unavoidable (and in fact desirable) 
collision will produce two effects: the diseased will, which could very 
well remain beyond grasp so long as it did not express itself in any 
delirium, will produce illness in broad daylight through the resistance 
it offers against the healthy will of the physician; moreover, the struggle 
that is engaged as a result should lead, if it is properly conducted, to 
the victory of the sound will, to the submission, the renunciation of 
the troubled will. A process of opposition, then, of struggle and domi­
nation. "We must apply a perturbing method, to break the spasm by 
means of the spasm .... We must subjugate the whole character of 
some patients, subdue their transports, break their pride, while we 
must stimulate and encourage the others."3 
In this way, the quite curious function of the nineteenth-century psy­
chiatric hospital was set into place; a place of diagnosis and classifica­
tion, a botanical rectangle where the species of diseases are distributed 
over courtyards whose layout brings to mind a vast kitchen garden; but 
also an enclosed space for a confrontation, the scene of a contest, an 
institutional field where it is a question of victory and submission. The 
great asylum physician-whether it is Leuret, Charcot, or Kraepelin-is 
both the one who can tell the truth of the disease through the knowl­
edge [savoir] he has of it and the one who can produce the disease in 
its truth and subdue it in its reality, through the power that his will 
exerts on the patient himself. All the techniques or procedures em­
ployed in asylums of the nineteenth century-isolation, private or pub­
lic interrogations, punishment techniques such as cold showers, moral 
talks (encouragements or reprimands), strict discipline, compulsory 
work, rewards, preferential relations between the physician and his 
patients, relations of vassalage, of possession, of domesticity, even of 
servitude between patient and physician, at times-all this was designed 
to make the medical personage the "master of madness": the one who 
makes it appear in its truth (when it conceals itself, when it remains 
hidden and silent) and the one who dominates it, pacifies it, absorbs 
it after astutely unleashing it.

44 Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
Let us say, then, in a schematic way, that in the Pasteurian hospital 
the "truth-producing" function of the disease continues to fade; the 
physician as truth-producer disappears into a knowledge structure. 
On the other hand, in the hospital of Esquirol or Charcot the "truth­
production" function hypertrophies, intensifies around the figure of the 
physician. And this occurs in a process revolving around the inflated 
power of the physician. Charcot, the miracle worker of hysteria, is un­
doubtedly the figure most highly symbolic of this type of functioning. 
Now, this heightening occurs at a time when medical power finds 
its guarantees and its justifications in the privilege of expertise [con­
naissance]; the doctor is qualified, the doctor knows the diseases and 
the patients, he possesses a scientific knowledge that is of the same 
type as that of the chemist or the biologist, and that is what authorizes 
him to intervene and decide. So the power that the asylum gives to the 
psychiatrist will have to justify itself (and mask itself at the same time 
as a primordial superpower) by producing phenomena that can be inte­
grated into medical science. One understands why the technique of 
hypnosis and suggestion, the problem of simulation, and diagnosis dif­
ferentiating between organic disease and psychological disease were, 
for so many years (from 1860 to 1890 at least), at the center of psychi­
atric theory and practice. The point of perfection, of a too-miraculous 
perfection, was reached when patients in the service of Charcot began 
to reproduce, at the behest of medical power-knowledge, a symp­
tomatology normed on epilepsy-that is, capable of being deciphered, 
known, and recognized in terms of an organic disease. 
A crucial episode where the two functions of the hospital (testing 
and truth production, on the one hand; recording and understanding 
of phenomena, on the other) are redistributed and superimposed. 
Henceforth, the physician's power enables him to produce the reality 
of mental illness characterized by the ability to reproduce phenomena 
completely accessible to knowledge. The hysteric was the perfect patient 
since she provided material for knowledge [donnait a connaitre]: she 
herself would retranscribe the effects of medical power into the forms 
that the physician could describe according to a scientifically acceptable 
discourse. As for the power relation that made this whole operation 
possible, how could it have been detected in its decisive role, since­
supreme virtue of hysteria, unparalleled dOcility, veritable epistemologi­
cal sanctity-the patients themselves took charge of it and accepted 
responsibility for it: it appeared in the symptomatology as a morbid

Psychiatric Power 45 
suggestibility. Everything would spread out henceforth in the limpid­
ness of knowledge cleansed of all power, between the knowing subject 
and the known object. 
A hypothesis: the crisis was opened, and the still imperceptible age of 
anti psychiatry began, when people developed the suspicion, then the 
certainty, that Charcot actually produced the hysterical fit he described. 
There one has the rough equivalent of the discovery made by Pasteur 
that the physician transmitted the diseases he was supposed to combat. 
It seems to me, in any case, that all the big jolts that have shaken 
psychiatry since the end of the nineteenth century have essentially ques­
tioned the power of the physician-his power and the effect that he pro­
duced on the patient, more than his knowledge and the truth he told 
concerning the illness. Let us say more exactly that, from Bernheim 
to Laing or Basaglia, in question was the way in which the physician's 
power was involved in the truth of what he said and, conversely, the 
way in which the truth could be manufactured and compromised by 
his power. Cooper has said: "At the heart of our problem is violence."4 
And Basaglia: "The characteristic of these institutions (schools, facto­
ries, hospitals) is a clear-cut separation between those who hold the 
power and those who don't."5 All the great reforms, not only of psy­
chiatric power but of psychiatric thought, are focused on this power 
relation: they constitute so many attempts to displace it, mask it, elim­
inate it, nullify it. The whole of modern psychiatry is fundamentally 
pervaded by anti psychiatry, if one understands by this everything that 
calls back into question the role of the psychiatrist formerly charged 
with producing the truth of illness in the hospital space. 
One might speak, then, of the anti psychiatries that have traversed 
the history of modern psychiatry. Yet perhaps it would be better to dis­
tinguish carefully between two processes that are completely distinct 
from the historical, epistemological, and political point of view. 
First, there was the "depsychiatrization" movement. It is what ap­
pears immediately after Charcot. And it is then not so much a ques­
tion of neutralizing the physician's power as of displacing it on behalf 
of a more exact knowledge, of giving it a different point of application 
and new measures. Depsychiatrize mental medicine in order to restore 
to its true effectiveness a medical power that Charcot's shameless­
ness (or ignorance) had wrongly caused to produce illnesses, hence 
false illnesses.

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
1. A first form of depsychiatrization begins with Basinski, in whom 
it finds its critical hero. Instead of trying to produce the truth of ill­
ness theatrically, it would be better to try to reduce it to its strict real­
ity, which is often nothing more than the capacity for letting itself be 
dramatized-pithiatism. Henceforth, not only will the relation of dom­
ination by the doctor over the patient lose none of its rigor, but its rigor 
will be directed toward reducing the illness to its strict minimum: the 
signs necessary and sufficient for it to be diagnosable as a mental ill­
ness, and the techniques absolutely necessary in order for these mani­
festations to disappear. 
The object is to Pasteurize the psychiatric hospital, as it were, to 
obtain the same simplification effect for the asylum that Pasteur had 
forced upon the hospitals: link diagnosis and therapy, knowledge of the 
nature of the illness and the suppression of its manifestations, directly 
to one another. The moment of testing, when the illness appears in 
its truth and is fully expressed, no longer must figure in the medical 
process; the hospital can become a silent place where the form of 
medical power is maintained in its strictest aspect, but without its hav­
ing to encounter or confront madness itself. Let us call this "aseptic" 
and "asymptomatic" form of depsychiatrization "zero-production psy­
chiatry." Psychosurgery and pharmacological psychiatry are its most 
notable forms. 
2. Another form of depsychiatrization, the exact opposite of the pre­
ceding one. Here it is a matter of making the production of madness 
in its truth as intense as possible, but in such a way that the power rela­
tions between doctor and patient are invested exactly in that produc­
tion; they remain adequate to it and do not allow themselves to be 
overrun by it, and they keep control of it. 
The first condition for this maintenance of "depsychiatrized" medi­
cal power is the discrediting of all the effects peculiar to the space of 
the asylum. Above all, one must avoid the trap into which Charcot's 
thaumaturgy fell: one must make sure that hospital allegiance does not 
mock medical authority and that, in this place of collusions and obscure 
collective knowledge [savoirs], the physician's sovereign science does 
not get caught up in mechanisms that it may have unintentionally pro­
duced. Hence a rule of private consultation; hence a rule of free con­
tract between physician and patient; hence a rule of limitation of all 
the effects the relationship at the discourse level alone ("I only ask one 
thing of you, which is to speak, but to tell me effectively everything that

Psychiatric Power 47 
crosses your mind"); hence a rule of discursive freedom ("You won't 
be able to boast about fooling your doctor any more, since you will no 
longer be answering questions put to you; you will say what occurs to 
you, without even needing to ask me what I think about it, and should 
you try to fool me by breaking this rule, I will not really be fooled; you 
will be caught in your own trap, because you will have interfered with 
the production of truth, and added several sessions to the total you 
owe me"); hence a rule of the couch that grants reality only to the 
results produced in that privileged place and during that single hour 
when the doctor's power is exercised-a power that cannot be drawn 
into any countereffect, since it is completely withdrawn into silence 
and invisibility. 
Psychoanalysis can be deciphered historically as the other great 
form of depsychiatrization that was provoked by Charcot's trauma­
tism: a withdrawal outside the asylum space in order to obliterate the 
effects of psychiatric superpower; but a reconstitution of medical power 
as truth-producer, in a space arranged so that that production would 
always remain perfectly adapted to that power. The notion of trans­
ference, as a process essential to the treatment, is a way of conceptu­
alizing this adequation in the form of knowledge [connaissance]; the 
payment of money, the monetary counterpart of transference, is a way 
of preventing the production of truth from becoming a counterpower 
that traps, annuls, overturns the power of the physician. 
These two great forms of depsychiatrization-both of which are 
power-conserving, the first because it annuls the production of truth, 
the second because it tries to ensure an exact fit between truth produc­
tion and medical power-become the target of anti psychiatry. Rather 
than a withdrawal outside the asylum space, it is a question of its sys­
tematic destruction through an internal effort; and it is a matter of 
transferring to the patient himself the power to produce his madness 
and the truth of his madness, instead of trying to reduce it to zero. This 
being the case, one can understand, I believe, what is at issue in anti­
psychiatry, which is not at all the truth value of psychiatry in terms of 
knowledge (of diagnostic correctness or therapeutic effectiveness). 
At the heart of antipsychiatry, the struggle with, in, and against the 
institution. When the great asylum structures were put into place at 
the beginning of the nineteenth century, they were justified by a mar­
velous harmony between the requirements of the social order (which 
demanded to be protected against the disorder of madmen) and the

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
needs of therapeutics (which called for the isolation of patients).6 In 
justifying the isolation of madmen, Esquirol gave five main reasons for 
the practice: (1) to ensure their safety and that of their families; (2) to 
free them from outside influences; (3) to overcome their personal resis­
tances; (4) to subject them to a medical regimen; (5) to impose new 
intellectual and moral habits on them. Obviously, everything is a mat­
ter of power; subdue the power of the madman, neutralize the external 
powers that may be brought to bear on him; establish a power of ther­
apy and rectification-of "orthopedics"-over him. Now, it is clearly 
the institution-as a place, a form of distribution, and a mechanism of 
these power relations-that antipsychiatry attacks. Beneath the ration­
ale of an internment that would make it possible, in a purified place, 
to determine what's what and to intervene when, where, and however 
necessary, it gives rise to the relations of domination that characterize 
the institutional setup: "The sheer power of the doctor increases," says 
Basaglia, observing the effects of Esquirol's prescriptions in the twen­
tieth century, "and the power of the patient diminishes at the same 
vertiginous rate; the patient, from the mere fact that he is interned, 
becomes a citizen without rights, delivered over to the arbitrariness of 
the doctor and the orderlies, who can do what they please with him 
without any possibility of appeal."7 It seems to me that one could situ­
ate the different forms of anti psychiatry according to their strategies 
with respect to these institutional power games: escape from them in 
the form of a two-party contract freely agreed to by both sides (Szasz 8); 
arrange a privileged place where they must be suspended or rooted 
out if they manage to reconstitute themselves (Kingsley Hallg); iden­
tify them one by one and gradually destroy them inside an institution 
of the classic type (Cooper, at Villa 2110); connect them to other power 
relations outside the asylum which may have already brought about 
the segregation of an individual as a mental patient (Gorizia ll). Power 
relations constituted the a priori of psychiatric practice. They condi­
tioned the operation of the mental institution; they distributed relation­
ships between individuals within it; they governed the forms of medical 
intervention. The characteristic reversal of antipsychiatry consists in 
placing them, on the contrary, at the center of the problematic field and 
in questioning them in a primary way. 
Now, what was essentially involved in these power relations was the 
absolute right of nonmadness over madness. A right transcribed into 
terms of competence brought to bear on an ignorance, of good sense

Psychiatn·c Power 49 
(access to reality) correcting errors (delusions, hallucinations, fanta­
sies), of normality imposing itself on disorder and deviance. It is this 
threefold power that constituted madness as an object of possible knowl­
edge for a medical science, that constituted it as an illness, at the very 
moment when the "subject" stricken with this illness found himself 
disqualified as insane-which is to say, stripped of any power and any 
knowledge concerning his illness: "We know enough about your suf­
fering and your special condition (things that you have no inkling of) 
to recognize that it is a disease; but we are familiar enough with this 
disease to know that you can't exercise any right over it or with respect 
to it. Our science enables us to call your madness a disease, and con­
sequently we doctors are qualified to intervene and diagnose a mad­
ness in you that prevents you from being a patient like others: so you 
will be a mental patient." This game involving a power relation that 
gives rise to a knowledge, which in return founds the rights of the 
power in question, characterizes "classical" psychiatry. It is this circle 
that antipsychiatry undertakes to undo: giving the individual the right 
to take his madness to the limit, to see it through, in an experience to 
which others may contribute, but never in the name of a power that 
would be conferred on them by their reason or their normality; detach­
ing the behaviors, the suffering, the desires from the medical status 
that had been conferred on them, freeing them from a diagnosis and 
a symptomatology that had not simply a value of classification but also 
one of decision and decree; invalidating, finally, the great retranscrip­
tion of madness into mental illness which had been initiated in the 
seventeenth century and completed in the nineteenth. 
The demedicalization of madness is correlative with that fundamen­
tal questioning of power in antipsychiatric practice. A fact that allows us 
to gauge the latter's opposition to "depsychiatrization," which appears 
to characterize psychoanalysis as well as psychopharmacology: both 
seem to derive from an overmedicalization of madness. And now, at 
last, the problem is posed of the eventual freeing of madness from that 
singular form of power-knowledge which is expertise [connaissance]. 
Is it possible that the truth production of madness might be carried 
out in forms that are not those of the knowledge relation? A fictitious 
problem, it will be said, a question that has its place only in utopia. In 
actual fact, it is posed concretely every day in connection with the role 
of the doctor-of the official subject of knowledge-in the depsychia­
trization movement.

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
The seminar was devoted alternately to two topics: the history of the 
hospital institution and hospital architecture in the eighteenth century; 
and the study of medico-legal appraisal in psychiatric cases since 1820. 
NOTES 
J. E. D. Esquirol, De la Folie (1816), §I: "Symptomes de la folie," in Des Maladies mentales 
considerees sous les rapports medical, hygienique, et medico-legal (Paris: Bailliere, 1838), vol. I, 
p. 16 (repub. Paris: Frenesie, i989). 
2 Ibid. 
3 Esquirol, De la Folie, §5: "Traitement de la folie," pp. 132-33. 
4 D. Cooper, Psychiatry and Antipsychiatry (London: Tavistock, 1967), p. 17: Psychiatrie et anti­
psychiatrie, trans. M. Braudeau (Paris: Seuil, 1970), ch. I: "Violence et psychiatrie," p. 33. 
5 F. Basaglia, ed., L'Instituzione negata: rapporto da un ospedale psichiatrico (Turin: Nuovo poli­
tecnico, 1968): Les Institutions de la violence, in F. Basaglia, ed., L'Institution en negation: 
rapport sur I'h6pital psychiatrique de Gorizia, trans. L. Bonalumi (Paris: Seuil, 1970), p. 105. 
6 See the pages of Robert Castel on this subject, in Le Psychanalysme (Paris: Maspero, 1973), 
PP·150-53· 
7 Basaglia, L'Institution en negation, p. Ill. 
8 Thomas Stephen Szasz, American psychiatrist and psychoanalyst born in Budapest in 1920. Pro­
fessor of psychiatry at Syracuse University, he was the only American psychiatrist to join the 
"antipsychiatric" movement that developed in the sixties. His work carries out a critique of psy­
chiatric institutions based on a liberal humanistic conception of the subject and human rights. 
See his collection of articles titled 'Ideology and Insanity (London: Calder and Boyars, 1970): 
Ideologie etfolie: Essais sur la negation des valeurs humaines dans la psychiatn'e d'aujourd'hui, 
trans. P. Sullivan (Paris: P.u.F., 1976); The Myth of Mental Illness (New York: Harper and Row, 
1961): Le My the de la maladie mentale, trans. D. Berger (Paris: Payot, 1975). 
9 Kingsley Hall is one of the three reception centers created in the sixties. Located in a working­
class neighborhood of London's East End, it is known through the account given by Mary 
Barnes, who spent five years there, and her therapist, Joe Berke, in the book Mary Barnes, un 
voyage autour de lafolie, trans. M. Davidovici (Paris: Seuil, 1973) [Mary Barnes and Joseph 
Berke, Two Accounts of a Journey Through Madness (London: MacGibbon and Kee, 1971)]. 
10 The experience of Villa 21, begun in January 1962 in a psychiatric hospital in northwest Lon­
don, inaugurated the series of communal psychiatric projects, Kingsley Hall being one of 
the best known. David Cooper, the director until 1966, writes about it in his Psychiatry and 
Antipsychiatry. 
II Italian public psychiatric hospital located in northern Trieste. Its institutional transformation 
was undertaken by Franco Basaglia and his team starting in 1963. L'Institution en negation 
describes this anti-institutional struggle that set an example. Basaglia resigned as director of 
Gorizia in 1968 in order to develop his experience in Trieste.

THE ABNORMALS 
Te great indefinite and confused lamily 01 "abnonnals," the lea< 
of which will haunt the end of the nineteenth century, does not simply 
mark a phase of indecision or a somewhat unfortunate episode in the 
history of psychopathology; it was formed in correlation with a whole 
set of institutions of control, a whole series of mechanisms of supervi­
sion and distribution; and when it will have been almost completely 
covered over by the category of "degeneration," it will give rise to ridic­
ulous theoretical constructions but with harshly real effects. 
The group of abnormals was formed out of three elements whose 
own formation was not exactly synchronic. 
1. The human monster. An ancient notion whose frame of reference 
is law. A juridical notion, then, but in the broad sense, as it referred 
not only to social laws but to natural laws as well; the monster's field 
of appearance is a juridico-biological domain. The figures of the half­
human, half-animal being (valorized especially in the Middle Ages), 
of double individualities (valorized in the Renaissance), of hermaph­
rodites (who occasioned so many problems in the seventeenth and 
eighteenth centuries) in turn represented that double violation; what 
makes a human monster a monster is not just its exceptionality rela­
tive to the species form; it is the disturbance it brings to juridical reg­
ularities (whether it is a question of marriage laws, canons of baptism, 
or rules of inheritance). The human monster combines the impossible 
and the forbidden. One needs to study from this viewpoint the great 
trials of hermaphrodites in which jurists and physicians clashed from 
the Rouen affair! (beginning of the seventeenth century) to the trial of

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
Anne Grandjean 2 (in the middle of the following century); and also 
works like Cangiamila's Sacred Embryology, 3 published and translated 
in the eighteenth century. 
From this history one can understand a number of ambiguities that 
will continue to haunt the analysis and the status of the abnormal man, 
even when he will have reduced and appropriated the peculiar traits 
of the monster. In the first rank of these ambiguities one would have to 
place the unnatural act and the illegal offense. They cease to be super­
imposed without ceasing to be reciprocally related. The "natural" devi­
ation from "nature" alters the juridical effects of the transgression yet 
does not obliterate them entirely; it does not refer purely and simply 
to the law but does not suspend it either; it snares the law, provoking 
effects, triggering mechanisms, calling in parajudicial and marginally 
medical institutions. We have been able to study in this regard the evo­
lution of medico-legal appraisals in penal cases, from the "monstrous" 
act problematized at the beginning of the nineteenth century (with the 
Cornier, Leger, and Papavoine affairs4) to the emergence of that notion 
of the "dangerous" individual-to which it is not possible to give a 
medical sense or a juridical status-and which is nonetheless the fun­
damental notion of contemporary experts' assessments. By asking the 
doctor the properly senseless question "Is this individual dangerous?" 
(a question that contradicts a penal law based solely on the condem­
nation of acts, and postulates a natural connection between illness and 
infraction), the courts revive, through transformations that need ana­
lyzing, the uncertainties of the age-old monsters. 
2. The individual to be corrected. This is a more recent figure than 
the monster. It is the correlative not so much of the imperatives of the 
law as of training techniques with their own requirements. The emer­
gence of the "incorrigible" is contemporaneous with the putting into 
place of disciplinary techniques during the seventeenth and eighteenth 
centuries, in the army, the schools, the workshops, then, a little later, 
in families themselves. The new procedures for training the bodYl 
behavior, and aptitudes open up the problem of those who escape that 
normativity which is no longer the sovereignty of the law. 
"Interdiction" constituted the judicial measure by which an individ­
ual was at least partially disqualified as a legal subject. This juridical 
and negative frame will be partly filled, partly replaced by a set of tech­
niques and methods by which the authorities will undertake to train 
those who resist training and correct the incorrigibles. The "confine-

The Abnormals 53 
ment" that was practiced on a wide scale starting in the seventeenth 
century may appear as a kind of intermediate formula between the 
negative judicial int~rdiction and the positive methods of rectification. 
Confinement does in fact exclude, and it functions outside the laws, 
but as justification it asserts the need to correct, to improve, to lead to 
repentance, to restore to "better feelings." Starting from this mixed but 
historically decisive form, it is necessary to study the appearance, at 
precise historical dates, of the different institutions of rectification 
and the categories of individuals to which they are directed. Technico­
institutional births of blindness and deaf-muteness, of imbeciles, of 
the retarded, the nerve-disordered, the unbalanced. 
A vulgarized and faded monster, the nineteenth-century abnormal 
is also a descendant of those incorrigibles who appeared on the fringes 
of modern "training" techniques. 
3. The onanist. A completely new figure in the eighteenth century. 
It appears in connection with the new relations between sexuality and 
family organization, with the new position of the child at the center of 
the parental group, with the new importance given to the body and to 
health. The appearance of the sexual body of the child. 
In actual fact, this emergence has a long prehistory: the joint devel­
opment of the techniques of direction of conscience (in the new pasto­
ral springing from the Reformation and the Council of Trent) and the 
institutions of education. From Gerson to Alfonso da Ligouri, a whole 
discursive partitioning of sexual desire, the sensual body, and the sin 
of mollities is ensured by the obligation of penitential confession and 
a highly coded practice of subtle interrogations. We can say, schemati­
cally, that the traditional control offorbidden relations (adultery, incest, 
sodomy, bestiality) was duplicated by the control of the "flesh" in the 
basic impulses of concupiscence. 
But the crusade against masturbation breaks out of this background. 
It begins nOisily in England first, in the years around 1710, with the 
publication of Onania, 5 then in Germany, before getting underway in 
France, in about 1760, with the book by Tissot. 6 Its raison d'etre is enig­
matic, but its effects are innumerable. None of these can be determined 
without taking into consideration some of the essential features of the 
campaign. It would not be enough, in fact, to see it-in a perspective 
close to Reich, who recently inspired the work of Van UsseF-only as 
a process of repression linked to the new requirements of industriali­
zation: the productive body as against the pleasure body. In reality, this

54 Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
crusade does not take, at least in the eighteenth century, the form of 
a general sexual discipline: it is directed primarily if not exclusively 
toward adolescents and children, and even more specifically toward 
those of wealthy or comfortably off families. It places sexuality, or at 
least the sexual use of one's own body, at the origin of an indefinite 
series of physical disorders that may make their effects felt in all forms 
and at all ages of life. Sexuality's limitless etiological power, at the level 
of bodies and diseases, is one of the most constant themes not only in 
the texts of that new medical ethics but also in the most serious works 
of pathology. If the child thus becomes responsible for his own body 
and his own life, in the "abuse" he makes of sexuality, the parents are 
denounced as the real culprits: lack of supervision, neglect, and, above 
all, lack of interest in their children, their children's bodies, and their 
conduct, which leads them to entrust their children to wet nurses, 
domestic servants, tutors, all those intermediaries regularly denounced 
as initiators into vice (Freud will take up this theme in his first theory 
of "seduction"). What emerges through this campaign is the impera­
tive of a new parents-children relationship, and more broadly as a new 
economy of intrafamilial relations: a solidification and intensification 
of father-mother-children relations (at the expense of the multiple 
relations that characterized the large "household"); a reversal of the 
system of family obligations (which formerly went from children to par­
ents but now tend to make the child the primary and ceaseless object 
of the duties of the parents, who are assigned complete moral and 
medical responsibility for their progeny); the emergence of the health 
principle as a basic law governing family ties; the distribution of the 
family cell around the body-and the sexual body-of the child; the 
organization of an immediate physical bond, a body-to-body relation­
ship of parents and children, knitting together desire and power in a 
complex way; the necessity, finally, for a control and an external med­
ical knowledge to arbitrate and regulate these new relations between 
the parents' obligatory vigilance and the children's ever so fragile, irri­
table, and excitable body. The crusade against masturbation reflects 
the setting-up of the restricted family (parents, children) as a new 
knowledge-power apparatus. The questioning of the child's sexuality, 
and of all the anomalies it was thought to be responsible for, was one of 
the means by which this new contrivance [dis-posit!!] was put together. 
The little incestuous family, the tiny, sexually saturated familial space 
in which we were raised and in which we live, was formed there.

The Abnormals 55 
The "abnormal" individual that so many institutions, discourses, and 
knowledges have concerned themselves with since the end of the nine­
teenth century is derived from the juridico-natural exceptionality of the 
monster, from the multitude of incorrigibles caught up in the mecha­
nisms of rectification, and from the universal secrecy of children's sex­
ualities. In actual fact, the three figures of the monster, the incorrigible, 
and the onanist will not exactly merge together. Each one will be taken 
into autonomous systems of scientific reference: the monster, into a ter­
atology and an embryology that found its first great scientific coherence 
with Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire;8 the incorrigible, into a psychophysiology of 
sensations, motricity, and capacities; the onanist, into a theory of sexual­
ity that is slowly elaborated starting with Kaan's Psychopathia Sexualis. 9 
Yet the specificity of these references must not lead us to overlook 
three essential phenomena, which cancel it in part, or at least modify 
it: the construction of a general theory of "degeneration," which, start­
ing with the book by Morel (1857),10 will serve for more than a half 
century as a theoretical framework, as well as a social and moral jus­
tification, for all the techniques of identification, classification, and 
intervention applied to abnormals; the setting-up of a complex insti­
tutional network that, within the limits of medicine and justice, serves 
as a "reception" structure for abnormals and an instrument for soci­
ety's defense; lastly, the movement by which the histOrically most recent 
problem to appear, that of children's sexuality, will overlay the two oth­
ers, to become, in the twentieth century, the most productive principle 
for explaining all abnormalities. 
The Antiphysis, which terror of the monster brought to the light of 
an exceptional day, is the universal sexuality of children, which now 
slips it under the little everyday anomalies. 
Since 1970, the series of courses has dealt with the slow formation of a 
knowledge and power of normalization based on the traditional jurid­
ical procedures of punishment. The course for the year 1975-1976 will 
end this cycle with a study of the mechanisms by which, since the end 
of the nineteenth century, people claim to "defend society." 
This year's seminar was devoted to an analysis of the transformations 
of psychiatric expert opinion in penal cases from the great affairs of 
criminal monstrosity (prime case: Henriette Cornier) to the diagnosis 
of "abnormal" delinquents.

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
NOTES 
This concerns the case of Marie Le Marcis. Born in 1581 and baptized as a girl, she eventually 
adopted men's dress, took the first name of Marin, and undertook to marry a widow, Jeanne 
Le Febvre. Arrested, she was given a death sentence on May 4, 1601, for "the crime of sodomy." 
The report by the doctor Jacques Duval saved her from being burned at the stake. She was sen­
tenced to remain a girl. See J. Duval, Des hermaphrodites (Rouen: Geuffroy, 1612); Reponse 
au discours fait par Ie sieur Riolan, docteur en medecine, contre l'histoire de l'hermaphrodite de 
Rouen (Rouen: Courant, n.d.). 
2 Anne Grandjean, born in 1732 at Grenoble, dressed as a man and married Fran~oise Lambert 
at Chambery, on June 24, 1761. Informed against and accused, she was summoned before the 
court of Lyon, where she was first sentenced to the iron collar and banishment for desecrating 
the marriage tie. A judgment from the Tournelle, on January 10, 1765, cleared her of the accu­
sation but ordered her to change back to women's dress. See the memoir by her lawyer, Mme. 
Vermeil, Memoire pour Anne Grandjean, connu sous Ie nom de Jean-Baptiste Grandjean, accuse 
et appelant contre L. Ie Procureur general, accusateur (Lyon, 1765), in C. Champeaux, Rijlexions 
sur les hermaphrodites relativement a Anne Grandjean, qualifiee telle dans un memoire de Mme. 
~rmeil, avocat au parlement (Lyon: Jacquenod, 1765). 
3 F. E. Cangiamila, Sacra Embryologia, sive De c1ficio sacerdotum, medicorum, et aliorum circa 
aeternam paroulorum in utero existentium salutem (Panormi: Valenza, 1758): Embryologie sacree, 
ou Traite du devoir des pretres, des medecins et autres sur Ie salut etemel des enfants qui sont 
dans Ie ventre de leur mere, trans. J. A. Dinouart and A. Roux (Paris, 1766). 
4 On November 4, 1825, Henriette Cornier cut off the head of Fanny Belon, nineteen months old, 
who was in her care. Her lawyers asked Charles Marc for a medico-legal consultation. See 
C. Marc, Consultation medicale pour Henriette Cornier, accusee d'homicide commis volontaire­
ment et avec premeditation (1826), in De la Folie consideree dans ses rapports avec les questions 
midico-judiciaires (Paris: Bailliere, 1840), vol. 2, pp. 71-130. 
Antoine Leger, twenty-nine-year-old vine grower, was summoned before the assize court 
of Versailles on November 23, 1824, for indecent assault with violence and homicide upon Jeanne 
Debully, twelve and a half years old. Reported first in the Journal de debats of November 24, 
1824, the affair was reviewed by Etienne Georget in his book &amen des proces criminels des 
nommes Leger, Feldtmann, Lecou.ffe, Jean-Pierre et Papavoine, dans lesquels l'alienation mentale 
a eli alleguee comme moyen de difense (Paris: Migneret, 1825), pp. 2-16. 
Louis Auguste Papavoine, ex-navy clerk, forty-one years old, was summoned on February 
23, 1825, before the assize court of Paris for the murder of two young children, committed in 
the Bois de Vincennes: ibid., pp. 39-65. 
5 Bekker (attrib.), Onania, or the Heinous Sin cif Self Pollution, and All Its FnghifUl Consequences 
in Both Sexes, Considered with Spiritual and Physical Advice to Those Who Have Already 
Injured Themselves by This Abominable Practice (London: Crouch, 1710). 
6 First published in 1758 subsequent to Dissertatio de febribus biliosis, seu Historia epidemiae 
biliosae Lausannensis, the Tentamen de morbis ex manustupratione by Simon Tissot appeared 
in a revised and enlarged version under the title L'Onanisme, ou Dissertation physique sur les 
maladies produites par la masturbation (Lausanne: Chapuis, 1760). 
7 J. Van Ussel, Sexualunterdriickung (Hamburg: Rowohlt, 1970): Histoire de la repression sexuelle, 
trans. C. Chevalot (Paris: Laffont, 1972). 
8 E. Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire, La Philosophie anatomique (Paris: Rignoux, 1822), vols. 2 and 3: Des 
Monstruosites humaines: Considerations generales sur les monstres, comprenant une theorie des 
phenomenes de la monstruosili (Paris: Tastu, 1826). See also idem, Histoire generale et par-

The Abnormals 57 
ticuliere des anomalies de ['organisation chez l'homme et les animaux, ou Traile de teratologie 
(Paris: Bailliere, 1832-1837), 4 vols. 
9 H. Kaan, Psychopathia sexualis (Leipzig: Voss, 1844). 
10 B. A. Morel, Traile des degenerescences physiques, intellectuelles et morales de l'espece humaine 
et des causes qui produisent ces varietes maladives (Paris: Bailliere, 1857).



SOCIETY MUST BE DEFENDED 
In order to conduct a concrete analysis of power relations, one would 
have to abandon the juridical notion of sovereignty. That model pre­
supposes the individual as a subject of natural rights or original pow­
ers; it aims to account for the ideal genesis of the state; and it makes 
law the fundamental manifestation of power. One would have to study 
power not on the basis of the primitive terms of the relation but starting 
from the relation itself, inasmuch as the relation is what determines 
the elements on which it bears: instead of asking ideal subjects what 
part of themselves or what powers of theirs they have surrendered, 
allowing themselves to be subjectified [se laisser assujettir], one would 
need to inquire how relations of subjectivation can manufacture sub­
jects. Similarly, rather than looking for the single form, the central 
point from which all the forms of power would be derived by way of 
consequence or development, one must first let them stand forth in 
their multiplicity, their differences, their specificity, their reversibility: 
study them therefore as relations of force that intersect, interrelate, 
converge, or, on the contrary, oppose one another or tend to cancel 
each other out. Finally, instead of privileging law as a manifestation of 
power, it would be better to try and identify the different techniques 
of constraint that it brings into play. 
If it is necessary to avoid reducing the analysis of power to the scheme 
suggested by the juridical constitution of sovereignty, if it is necessary 
to think about power in terms of force relations, must it be deciphered, 
then, according to the general form of war? Can war serve as an effec­
tive analyzer of power relations?

60 Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
This question overlays several others: 
• Should war be considered as a primary and fundamental state of 
things in relation to which all the phenomena of social domination, 
differentiation, and hierarchization are considered as secondary? 
• Do the processes of antagonism, confrontation, and struggle be­
tween individuals, groups, or classes belong, in the last instance, 
to the general processes of warfare? 
• Can the set of notions derived from strategy or tactics constitute a 
valid and adequate instrument for analyzing power relations? 
• Are military and war-related institutions and, in a general way, the 
methods utilized for waging war, immediately or remotely, directly 
or indirectly, the nucleus of political institutions? 
• But perhaps the question that needs to be asked first of all is this 
one: How, since when and how, did people begin to imagine that 
it is war that functions in power relations, that an uninterrupted 
combat undermines peace, and that the civil order is basically an 
order of battle? 
That is the question that was posed in this year's course. How was 
war perceived in the background of peace? Who looked in the din and 
confusion of war, in the mud of battles, for the principle of intelligibil­
ity of order, institutions, and history? Who first thought that politics 
was war pursued by other means? 
A paradox appears at a glance. With the evolution of states since the 
beginning of the Middle Ages, it seems that the practices and institu­
tions of war pursued a visible development. Moreover, they tended to 
be concentrated in the hands of a central power that alone had the right 
and the means of war; owing to that very fact, they withdrew, albeit 
slowly, from the person-to-person, group-to-group relationship, and a 
line of development led them increasingly to be a state privilege. Fur­
thermore and as a result, war tends to become the professional and 
technical prerogative of a carefully defined and controlled military 
apparatus. In short, a society pervaded by warlike relations was slowly 
replaced by a state equipped with military institutions. 
Now, this transformation had scarcely been completed when there

Society Must Be Difended 61 
appeared a certain type of discourse on the relations of society and war. 
A historico-political discourse-very different from the philosophico­
juridical discourse organized around the problem of sovereignty­
makes war the permanent basis of all the institutions of power. This 
discourse appeared shortly after the end of the wars of religion and at 
the beginning of the great English political struggles of the seventeenth 
century. According to this discourse, which was illustrated in England 
by Coke or Lilburne, in France by Boulainvilliers and later by Du Buat­
Nanr,;ay,l it was war that presided over the birth of states: not the ideal 
war imagined by the philosophers of the state of nature but real wars 
and actual battles; laws are born in the middle of expeditions, con­
quests, and burning cities; but war also continues to rage within the 
mechanisms of power-or, at least, to constitute the secret driving force 
of institutions, laws, and order. Beneath the omissions, illusions, and 
lies that make us believe in the necessities of nature or the functional 
requirements of order, we are bound to reecounter war: it is the cipher 
of peace. It continuously divides the entire social body; it places each 
of us in one camp or the other. And it is not enough to find this war 
again as an explanatory principle; we must reactivate it, make it leave 
the mute, larval forms in which it goes about its business almost with­
out our being aware of it, and lead it to a decisive battle that we must 
prepare for if we intend to be victorious. 
Through this thematic, which I have characterized loosely thus far, 
one can understand the importance of this form of analysis. 
1. The subject who speaks in this discourse cannot occupy the posi­
tion of the universal subject. In that general struggle of which he 
speaks, he is necessarily on one side or the other; he is in the battle, 
he has adversaries, he fights for a victory. No doubt, he tries to make 
right prevail, but the right in question is his particular right, marked 
by a relation of conquest, domination, or antiquity: rights of trium­
phant invasions or millennial occupations. And if he also speaks of 
truth, it is that perspectival and strategic truth that enables him to 
win the victory. So, in this case, we have a political and historical dis­
course that lays claim to truth and right, while explicitly excluding 
itself from juridico-philosophical universality. Its role is not the one 
that lawmakers and philosophers dreamed of, from Solon to Kant: to 
take a position between the adversaries, at the center of and above the 
conflict, and impose an armistice, establish an order that brings rec­
onciliation. It is a matter of positing a right stamped with dissym-

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
metry and functioning as a privilege to be maintained or reestablished, 
of asserting a truth that functions as a weapon. For the subject who 
speaks this sort of discourse, universal truth and general right are illu­
sions and traps. 
2. We are dealing, moreover, with a discourse that turns the tradi­
tional values of intelligibility upside down. An explanation from below, 
which is not the simplest, the most elementary, the clearest explana­
tion but, rather, the most confused, the murkiest, the most disorderly, 
the most haphazard. What is meant to serve as a principle of decipher­
ment is the confusion of violence, passions, enmities, revenges; it is 
also the web of petty circumstances that decide defeats and victories. 
The dark, elliptical god of battles must illuminate the long days of 
order, labor, and peace. Fury must account for harmonies. Thus, at 
the beginning of history and law one will posit a series of brute facts 
(physical vigor, force, character traits), a series of chance happenings 
(defeats, victories, successes or failures of conspiracy, rebellions or 
alliances). And only above this tangle will a growing rationality take 
shape, that of calculations and strategies-a rationality that, as one 
rises and it develops, becomes increasingly fragile, more and more 
spiteful, more closely tied to illusion, to fancy, to mystification. So 
we have the complete opposite of those traditional analyses which 
attempt to rediscover, beneath the visible brutality of bodies and pas­
sions, a fundamental, abiding rationality, linked by nature to the just 
and the good. 
This type of discourse develops entirely within the historical dimen­
sion. It undertakes not to measure history, unjust governments, abuses, 
and acts of violence with the ideal principle of a reason or a law but, 
rather, to awaken, beneath the form of institutions or laws, the forgot­
ten past of real struggles, of masked victories or defeats, the dried blood 
in the codes. It takes as its field of reference the undefined movement 
of history. But at the same time it is possible for it to draw support from 
the traditional mythical forms (the lost age of great ancestors, the immi­
nence of new times and millennial revenge, the coming of a new king­
dom that will wipe out the ancient defeats): it is a discourse that will 
be able to carry both the nostalgia of decaying aristocracies and the 
ardor of popular revenges. 
In summary, as against the philosophico-juridical discourse organ­
ized in terms of the problem of sovereignty and law, this discourse 
which deciphers the continued existence of war in society is essentially

Society Must Be Difended 
a his tori co-political discourse, a discourse in which truth functions as 
a weapon for a partisan victory, a discourse at once darkly critical and 
intensely mythical. 
This year's course was devoted to the emergence of that form of anal­
ysis: how was war (and its different aspects-invasion, battle, conquest, 
victory, relations of victors and vanquished, pillage and appropriation, 
uprisings) used as an analyzer of history and, in a general way, of social 
relations? 
1. One must first set aside some false paternities-that of Hobbes, 
in particular. What Hobbes calls the "war of all against all" is not in 
any way a real historical war but a game of representations by which 
each measures the danger that each represents for him, estimates the 
. others' will to fight, anti. calculates the risk he himself would be tak­
ing if he resorted to force. Sovereignty-whether it involves a "com­
monwealth by institution" or a "commonwealth by acquisition"-is 
established not by an act of bellicose domination but, rather, by a cal­
culation that allows war to be avoided. For Hobbes it is nonwar that 
founds the State and gives it its form.2 
2. The history of wars as wombs of states was doubtless outlined in 
the sixteenth century at the end of the wars of religion (in France, for 
example, in the work of Hotman 5). But it was mostly in the seventeenth 
century that this type of analysis was developed. In England, first, in 
the parliamentary opposition and among the Puritans, with the idea 
that English society, since the eleventh century, was a society of con­
quest: monarchy and aristocracy, with their characteristic institutions, 
were seen as Norman imports, while the Saxon people preserved, not 
without difficulty, a few traces of their original freedoms. Against this 
background of martial domination, English historians such as Coke or 
Selden 4 restored the chief episodes of England's history; each of these 
is analyzed either as a consequence or as a resumption of that histori­
cally primary state of war between two hostile races with different insti­
tutions and interests. The revolution of which these historians are the 
contemporaries and sometimes the protagonists would thus be the last 
battle and the revenge of that ancient. war. 
An analysis of the same type is also found in France, but at a later 
date and, above all, in the aristocratic circles of the end of the reign of 
Louis XlV. Boulainvilliers will give it the most rigorous formulation; 
but this time the story is told, and the rights are asserted, in the name

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
of the victor. By giving itself a Germanic origin, the French aristocracy 
lays claim to the right of conquest, hence of eminent possession, upon 
all the lands of the realm and of absolute dominion over all the Gallic 
or Roman inhabitants; but it also claims prerogatives with respect to 
royal power, which would have been established originally only by its 
consent, and which should always be kept within the limits established 
back then. The history written in this way is no longer, as in England, 
that of the perpetual confrontation of the vanquished and the victors, 
with uprising and extracted concessions as a basic category; it will be 
the history of the king's usurpations or betrayals with regard to the 
nobility from which he descended, and of his unnatural collusions with 
a bourgeoisie of Gallo-Roman origin. This scheme of analysis, taken 
up again by Freret 5 and especially Du Buat-Nan~ay, was the object of 
a whole series of polemical exchanges and the occasion of substantial 
historical research up to the Revolution. 
The important point is that the principle of historial analysis was 
sought in the duality and the war of races. Starting from there and 
going via the works of Augustin 6 and Amedee Thierry7, two types of 
decipherment of history will develop in the nineteenth century: one will 
be linked to class struggle, the other to biological confrontation. 
This year's seminar was devoted to a study of the category of "the dan­
gerous individual" in criminal psychiatry. The notions connected with 
the theme of "social defense" were compared with the notions con­
nected with the new theories of civil responsibility, as they appeared 
at the end of the nineteenth century. 
NOTES 
Sir E. Coke, Argumentum Anti-Normannicum, or an Argument Proving,from Ancient Stories 
arid Records, that William, Duke of Normandy, Made No AbsoLute Conquest if EngLand by the 
Word (London: Derby, 1682); J. Lilburne, EngLish Birth Right Justified Against All Arbitrary 
Usurpation (London, 1645); An Anatomy if the Lord's Tiranny and Injustice (London, 1646); 
Count H. de Boulainvilliers, Memoire pour La nobLesse de France contre Les dues et pairs (n.p., 
1717); Histoire de L'ancien gouvemement de La France, avec XIV Lettres historiques sur Les parle­
ments ou hats generaux (The Hague: Gesse et Neaulne, 1727), 3 vols.; Essai sur La nobLesse de 
France, contenant une dissertation sur son origine et son abaissement (Amsterdam, 1732). Count 
L.-G. Du Buat-Nan~ay, Les Origines ou L'Ancien Gouvemement de La France, de L'Italie, de 
L'Allemagne (Paris: Didot, 1757), 4 vols.; Histoire ancienne des peupLes de l'Europe (Paris: 
Desaint, 1772), 12 vols. 
2 T. Hobbes, Leviathan, or the Malter, Form and Power if a Commonwealth EcclesiasticaL and 
CiviL (London: Crooke, 1651): Leviathan: Trait! de La matiere, de Laforme et du pouvoir de La 
rtfpublique eccMsiastique et civiLe, trans. F. Tricaud (Paris: Sirey, 1971).

Society Must Be Difended 
3 F. Hotman, Discours simple et veritable des rages exerces par la France, des horribles et indignes 
meurtres commis es personnes de Gaspar de Coligny et de plusieurs grands seigneurs (Basel: 
Vaullemand, 1573); La Gaulejra"foise (Cologne: Bertulphe, 1574). 
4 J. Selden, England's epinomis (1610), in Opera omnia (London: Walthoe, 1726), vol. 3: De Jure 
naturali et gentium juxta disciplinam Ebraerorum libri septem (London: Bishopius, 1640); An 
Historical Discourse of the Uniformity of the Government of England (London: Walbancke, 
1647). 
5 N. Freret, Recherches historiques sur les moeurs et Ie gouvernement des Franr;:ais, dans les divers 
temps de la monarchie: De l'origine des Francs et de leur etablissement dans les Gaules, in Oeu­
vres completes, vols. 5-6 (Paris: Moutardier, 1796); Vues generales sur l'origine et Ie melange des 
anciennes nations et sur la maniere d'en etudier l'histoire, ibid., vol. 18. 
6 A. J. Thierry, Histoire de la conquete de l'Angleterre par les Normands, de ses causes et de ses 
suites jusqu'lI nos jours (Paris: Tessier, 1825), 2 vols.; Recits des temps merovingiens, precedes 
de considerations sur l'histoire de France (paris: Tessier, 1840), 2 vols. 
7 A. J. Thierry, Histoire des Gaulois, depuis les temps les plus recuMs jusqu 'II l'entiere soumission 
de la Gaulle II la domination romaine (Paris: Sautelet, 1828), 3 vols.



SECURITY, TERRITORY, AND POPULATION 
Le cou.-se dealt with the genesis of a political knowledge that was 
to place at the center of its concerns the notion of population and the 
mechanisms capable of ensuring its regulation. A transition from a 
"territorial state" to a "population state"? No, one would have to say, 
because what occurred was not a replacement but, rather, a shift of 
accent and the appearance of new objectives, and hence of new prob­
lems and new techniques. 
To follow that genesis, we took up the notion of government as our 
leading thread. 
1. One would need to do an in-depth inquiry concerning the history 
not merely of the notion but even of the procedures and means em­
ployed to ensure, in a given society, the "government of men." In a very 
first approach, it seems that for the Greek and Roman societies the 
exercise of political power did not involve the right or the possibilities 
of a "government" understood as an activity that undertakes to conduct 
individuals throughout their lives by placing them under the authority 
of a guide responsible for what they do and for what happens to them. 
Following the indications furnished by Paul Veyne, it seems that the 
idea of a pastor-sovereign, a king or judge-shepherd of the human 
flock, is rarely found outside the archaic Greek texts or except in cer­
tain authors of the imperial epoch. On the other hand, the metaphor 
of the shepherd watching over the sheep is accepted when it comes to 
characterizing the activity of the educator, the doctor, the gymnastics 
teacher. An analysis of the Politics would confirm this hypothesis. 
It was in the East that the theme of pastoral power was fully devel-

68 Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
oped-above all, in Hebrew society. A certain number of traits mark 
this theme: the shepherd's power is exercised not so much over a fixed 
territory as over a multitude in movement toward a goal; it has the role 
of providing the flock with its sustenance, watching over it on a daily 
basis, and ensuring its salvation; lastly, it is a matter of a power that 
individualizes by granting, through an essential paradox, as much value 
to a single one of the sheep as to the entire flock. It is this type of power 
that was introduced into the West by Christianity and took an insti­
tutional form in the ecclesiastical pastorate: the government of souls 
was constituted in the Christian Church as a central, knowledge-based 
activity indispensable for the salvation of each and every one. 
Now, the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries saw a general crisis of the 
pastorate open up and develop, but in a much more complex fashion: 
a search for other modes (and not necessarily less strict ones) of spir­
itual direction and new types of relations between pastor and flock; but 
also inquiries concerning the right way to "govern" children, a family, 
a domain, a principality. The general questioning of government and 
self-government, of guidance and self-guidance, accompanies, at the 
end of feudalism, the birth of new forms of economic and social rela­
tions and new political structurations. 
2. We next analyzed some aspects of the formation of a political 
"governmentality": that is, the way in which the behavior of a set of 
individuals became involved, more and more markedly, in the exercise 
of sovereign power. This important transformation is expressed in the 
different "arts of governing" that were written at the end of the six­
teenth century and the first half of the seventeenth. No doubt, it is 
linked to the emergence of the "reason of state." One goes from an art 
of governing whose principles were borrowed from the traditional vir­
tues (wisdom, justice, liberality, respect for divine laws and human 
customs) or from the common abilities (prudence, thoughtful deci­
sions, taking care to surround oneself with the best adviser) to an art 
of governing whose rationality has its principles and its specific domain 
of application in the state. The "reason of state" is not the imperative 
in the name of which one can or must upset all the other rules; it is 
the new matrix of rationality according to which the prince must exer­
cise his sovereignty in governing men. One is far from the virtue of 
the sovereign of justice-far, too, from that virtue which is proper to 
Machiavelli's hero. 
The development of the reason of state is correlative with the fad-

Security, Territory, and Population 69 
ing away of the imperial theme. Rome finally disappears. A new his­
torical perception takes form; it is no longer polarized around the end 
of time and the consolidation of all the particular sovereignties into the 
empire of the last days; it is open to an indefinite time in which the 
states have to struggle against one another to ensure their own survival. 
And more than the problems of a sovereign's legitimate dominion over 
a territory, what will appear important is the knowledge and develop­
ment of a state's forces: in a space (European and global at once) of 
competition between states, very different from that in which dynastic 
rivals confront each other, the major problem is that of a dynamic of 
the forces and the rational techniques which enable one to intervene 
in those forces. 
Thus, the reason of state, apart from the theories that formulated 
and justified it, takes shape in two great ensembles of political knowl­
edge and technology: a diplomatico-military technology that consists 
in ensuring and developing the forces of a state through a system of 
alliances, and the organizing of an armed apparatus. The search for a 
European equilibrium, which was one of the guiding principles of the 
treaties of Westphalia, is a consequence of this political technology. 
The second is constituted by "policy" [police], in the sense given to the 
word then: that is, the set of means necessary to make the forces of 
the state increase from within. At the junction point of these two great 
technologies, and as a shared instrument, one must place commerce 
and monetary circulation between the states: enrichment through com­
merce offers the possibility of increasing the population, the manpower, 
production, and export, and of endowing oneself with large, power­
ful armies. During the period of mercantilism and cameralistics, the 
population-wealth pair was the privileged object of the new govern­
mental reason. 
3. The working-out of this population-wealth problem (in its dif­
ferent concrete aspects: taxation Lfiscalite], scarcity, depopulation, 
idleness-beggary-vagabondage) constitutes one of the conditions of 
formation of political economy. The latter develops when it is realized 
that the resources-population relationship can no longer be fully man­
aged through a coercive regulatory system that would tend to raise the 
population in order to augment the resources. The physiocrats are not 
antipopulationist in opposition to the mercantilists of the preceding 
epoch; they frame the population problem in a different way. For them, 
the population is not simply the sum of subjects who inhabit a terri-

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
tory, a sum that would be the result of each person's desire to have chil­
dren or of laws that would promote or discourage births-it is a variable 
dependent on a number of factors. These are not all natural by any 
means (the tax system, the activity of circulation, and the distribution 
of profit are essential determinants of the population rate). But this 
dependence can be rationally analyzed, in such a way that the popula­
tion appears as "naturally" dependent on multiple factors that may be 
artificially alterable. So there begins to appear, branching off from the 
technology of "policy" and in correlation with the birth of economic 
thought, the political problem of population. The latter is not conceived 
as a collection of legal subjects, nor as a mass of human arms intended 
for labor; it is analyzed as a set of elements that, first, is connected with 
the general system of living beings (population in this sense falls in the 
category of "the human race" [l'espece humaine]; the notion, new at 
the time, is to be distinguished from "mankind" [Ie genre humain]) 
and, second, may offer a purchase for concerted interventions (through 
laws, but also through changes of attitude, of ways of acting and living 
that can be obtained through "campaigns"). 
SEMINAR 
The seminar was devoted to a few aspects of what the Germans, in the 
eighteenth century, called Polizeiwissenschafl-that is, the theory and 
analysis of everything '~that tends to affirm and increase the power of 
the state to make good use of its forces, to obtain the welfare of its sub­
jects," and, above all, "the maintenance of order and discipline, the reg­
ulations that tend to make their lives comfortable and to provide them 
with the things they need for their livelihood." 
We tried to show what problems this "policy" was meant to address; 
how the role it was assigned was different from the one that would later 
devolve upon the police institution; what results were expected of it 
in order to bring about the growth of the state, and this in terms of two 
objectives-enable it to mark out and improve its position in the game 
of rivalry and competition between European states, and to guarantee 
internal order by ensuring the "welfare" of individuals. Development 
of the competitive state (economically and militarily), development of 
the Wohifahrt state (wealth-tranquility-happiness): it is these two prin­
ciples that "policy," understood as a rational art of governing, must be 
able to coordinate. It was conceived during this period as a sort of "tech-

Security, Territory, and Population 71 
nology of state forces." Among the main objects with which this technol­
ogy needed to be concerned was population, in which the mercantilists 
saw a principle of enrichment and in which everyone recognized an 
essential component of the strength of states. And the management of 
this population required, among other things, a health policy capable 
of diminishing infant mortality, preventing epidemics, and bringing 
down the rates of endemic diseases, of intervening in living conditions 
in order to alter them and impose standards on them (whether this 
involved nutrition, housing, or urban planning), and of ensuring ade­
quate medical facilities and services. The development, starting in the 
second half of the eighteenth century, of what was called medizinische 
Polizei, public health, or social medicine, must be written back into 
the general framework of a "biopolitics"; the latter tends to treat the 
"population" as a mass of living and coexisting beings who present par­
ticular biological and pathological traits and who thus come under spe­
cific knowledge and technologies. And this "biopolitics" itself must be 
understood in terms of a theme developed as early as the seventeenth 
century: the management of state forces. 
Papers were read on the notion of Polizeiwissenschaft (Pasquale 
Pasquino), on the antismallpox campaigns in the eighteenth century 
(Anne-Marie Moulin), on the Paris cholera epidemic in 1832 (Fran­
~ois Delaporte), on the legislation dealing with work-related accidents, 
and the development of insurance in the nineteenth century (Fran~ois 
Ewald).



THE BIRTH OF BIOPOLITICS 
As it turned out, this ye.,'s course was devoted in its entirety to 
what was to have formed only its introduction. The theme addressed 
was "biopolitics." By that I meant the endeavor, begun in the eighteenth 
century, to rationalize the problems presented to governmental prac­
tice by the phenomena characteristic of a group of living human beings 
constituted as a population: health, sanitation, birthrate, longevity, 
race ... We are aware of the expanding place these problems have occu­
pied since the nineteenth century, and of the political and economic 
issues they have constituted up to the present day. 
It seemed to me that these problems could not be dissociated from 
the framework of political rationality within which they appeared and 
developed their urgency. "Liberalism" enters the picture here, because 
it was in connection with liberalism that they began to have the look 
of a challenge. In a system anxious to have the respect of legal subjects 
and to ensure the free enterprise of individuals, how can the "popula­
tion" phenomenon, with its specific effects and problems, be taken 
into account? On behalf of what, and according to what rules, can it 
be managed? The debate that took place in England in the middle of 
the nineteenth century concerning public health legislation can serve 
as an example. 
What should we understand by "liberalism"? I relied on Paul Veyne's 
reflections concerning historical universals and the need to test a nom­
inalist method in history. And taking up a number of choices of method 
already made, I tried to analyze "liberalism" not as a theory or an

74 Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
ideology-and even less, certainly, as a way for "society" to "represent 
itself. .. " -but, rather, as a practice, which is to say, as a "way of doing 
things" oriented toward objectives and regulating itself by means of a 
sustained reflection. Liberalism is to be analyzed, then, as a principle 
and a method of rationalizing the exercise of government, a rationali­
zation that obeys-and this is its specificity-the internal rule of maxi­
mum economy. While any rationalization of the exercise of government 
aims at maximizing its effects while diminishing, as far as possible, its 
cost (understood in the political as well as the economic sense), lib­
eral rationalization starts from the assumption that government (mean­
ing not the institution "government," of course, but the activity that 
consists in governing human behavior in the framework of, and by 
means of, state institutions) cannot be its own end. It does not have 
its reason for being in itself, and its maximization, even under the best 
possible conditions, should not be its regulative principle. On this point, 
liberalism breaks with that "reason of state" which, since the end of 
the nineteenth century, had sought, in the existence and strengthening 
of the state, the end capable both of justifying a growing governmen­
tality and of regulating its development. The Polizeiwissenschaft devel­
oped by the Germans in the eighteenth century-either because they 
lacked a large state form, OJ;" also because the narrowness of their ter­
ritorial partitions gave them access to much more easily observable 
units, given the technical and conceptual tools of the time-always 
subscribed to the principle: One is not paying enough attention, too 
many things escape one's control, too many areas lack regulation and 
supervision, there's not enough order and administration. In short, one 
is governing too little. Polizeiwissenschaft is the form taken by a gov­
ernmental technology dominated by the principle of the reason of state, 
and'it is in a "completely natural way," as it were, that it attends to 
the problems of population, which ought to be the largest and most 
active possible-for the strength of the state. Health, birthrate, sanita­
tion find an important place in it, therefore, without any problem. 
For its part, liberalism resonates with the principle: "One always 
governs too much"-or, at any rate, one always must suspect that one 
governs too much. Governmentality should not be exercised without a 
"critique" far more radical than a test of optimization. It should inquire 
not just as to the best (or least costly) means of achieving its effects but 
also concerning the possibility and even the lawfulness of its scheme 
for achieving effects. The suspicion that one always risks governing too

The Birth if Biopolitics 75 
much is inhabited by the question: Why, in fact, must one govern? This 
explains why the liberal critique barely detaches itself from a problem­
atic, new at the time, of "society": it is on the latter's behalf that one 
will try to determine why there has to be a government, to what extent 
it can be done without, and in which cases it is needless or harmful 
for it to intervene. The rationalization of governmental practice, in 
terms of a reason of state, implied its maximization in optimal circum­
stances insofar as the existence of the state immediately assumes the 
exercise of government. Liberal thought starts not from the existence 
of the state, seeing in the government the means for attaining that end 
it would be for itself, but rather from society, which is in a complex 
relation of exteriority and interiority with respect to the state. Society, 
as both a precondition and a final end, is what enables one to no longer 
ask the question: How can one govern as much as possible and at the 
least possible cost? Instead, the question becomes: Why must one gov­
ern? In other words, what makes it necessary for there to be a govern­
ment, and what ends should it pursue with regard to society in order 
to justify its existence? The idea of society enables a technology of gov­
ernment to be developed based on the principle that it itself is already 
"too much," "in excess"-or at least that it is added on as a supple­
ment which can and must always be questioned as to its necessity and 
its usefulness. 
Instead of making the distinction between state and civil society into 
a historical universal that allows us to examine all the concrete systems, 
we can try to see it as a form of schematization characteristic of a par­
ticular technology of government. 
It cannot be said, then, that liberalism is a utopia never realized-unless 
the core of liberalism is taken to be the projections it has been led to 
formulate out of its analyses and criticisms. It is not a dream that comes 
up against a reality and fails to find a place within it. It constitutes­
and this is the reason for both its polymorphism and its recurrences-a 
tool for criticizing the reality: (1) of a previous governmentality that 
one tries to shed; (2) of a current governmentality that one attempts 
to reform and rationalize by stripping it down; (3) of a governmen­
tality that one opposes and whose abuses one tries to limit. So that 
we will be able to find liberalism, in different but simultaneous forms, 
as a regulative scheme of governmental practice and as the theme of 
a sometimes-radical opposition. English political thought, at the end

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
of the eighteenth century and in the first half of the nineteenth, is 
highly characteristic of these multiple uses of liberalism. And even 
more specifically, the developments and ambiguities of Bentham and 
the Benthamites. 
There is no doubt that the market as a reality and political economy 
as a theory played an important role in the liberal critique. But, as 
P. Rosanvallon's important book has confirmed, liberalism is neither 
the consequence nor the development of these;! rather, the market 
played, in the liberal critique, the role of a "test," a locus of privileged 
experience where one can identify the effects of excessive governmen­
tality and even weigh their significance: the analysis of the mechanisms 
of "dearth" or more generally, of the grain trade in the middle of the 
eighteenth century, was meant to show the point at which governing 
was always governing too much. And whether it is a question of the 
physiocrats' Table or Smith's "invisible hand"; whether it is a question, 
therefore, of an analysis aiming to make visible (in the form of "evi­
dence") the formation of the value and circulation of wealth-or, on 
the contrary, an analysis presupposing the intrinsic invisibility of the 
connection between individual profit-seeking and the growth of collec­
tive wealth-economics, in any case, shows a basic incompatibility 
between the optimal development of the economic process and a max­
imization of governmental procedures. It is by this, more than by the 
play of ideas, that the French or English economists broke away from 
mercantilism and cameralism; they freed reflection on economic prac­
tice from the hegemony of the "reason of state" and from the saturation 
of governmental intervention. By using it as a measure of "governing 
too much," they placed it "at the limit" of governmental action. 
Liberalism does not derive from juridical thought any more than it 
does from an economic analysis. It is not the idea of a political society 
founded on a contractual tie that gave birth to it; but in the search for 
a liberal technology of government, it appeared that regulation through 
the juridical form constituted a far more effective tool than the wisdom 
or moderation of the governors. (Rather, the physiocrats tended, out 
of a distrust of law and the juridical institution, to look for that regu­
lation in the recognition, by a despot with institutionally limited power, 
of the economy's "natural" laws, impressing themselves upon him as 
an evident truth.) Liberalism sought that regulation in "the law," not 
through a legalism that would be natural to it but because the law 
defines forms of general intervention excluding particular, individual,

The Birth of Biopolitics 77 
or exceptional measures; and because the participation of the governed 
in the formulation of the law, in a parliamentary system, constitutes the 
most effective system of governmental economy. The "state of right," 
the Rechtsstaat, the rule of law, the organization of a "truly represent­
ative" parliamentary system was, therefore, during the whole beginning 
of the nineteenth century, closely connected with liberalism, but just 
as political economy-used at first as a test of excessive governmental­
ity-was not liberal either by nature or by virtue, and soon even led to 
antiliberal attitudes (whether in the Nationaloekonomie of the nine­
teenth century or in the planning economies of the twentieth), so the 
democracies of the state of right were not necessarily liberal, nor was 
liberalism necessarily democratic or devoted to the forms of law. 
Rather than a relatively coherent doctrine, rather than a politics pur­
suing a certain number of more or less clearly defined goals, I would 
be tempted to see in liberalism a form of critical reflection on govern­
mental practice. That criticism can come from within or without, it can 
rely on this or that economic theory, or refer to this or that juridical 
system without any necessary and one-to-one connection. The ques­
tion of liberalism, understood as a question of "too much government," 
was one of the constant dimensions of that recent European phenom­
enon, having appeared first in England, it seems-namely, "political 
life." Indeed, it is one of the constituent elements of it, if it is the case 
that political life exists when governmental practice is limited in its pos­
sible excess by the fact that it is the object of public debate as to its 
"good or bad," its "too much or too little." 
Of course, the above reflections constitute not an "interpretation" of 
liberalism which would claim to be exhaustive but, rather, a plan of 
possible analysis-of" governmental reason," that is, of those types of 
rationality which are brought into play in the methods by which human 
behavior is directed via a state administration. I have tried to carry out 
such an analysis concerning two contemporary examples: German lib­
eralism of the years 1948-62, and American liberalism of the Chicago 
school. In both cases, liberalism presented itself, in a definite context, 
as a critique of the irrationality peculiar to "excessive government" and 
as a return to a technology of "frugal government," as Franklin would 
have said. 
In Germany, that excess was the regime of war, Nazism, but, beyond 
that, a type of directed and planned economy developing out of the

Ethics.' Subjectivity and Truth 
1914-18 period and the general mobilization of resources and men; it 
was also "state socialism." In point of fact, German liberalism of the 
second postwar period was defined, programmed, and even to a cer­
tain extent put into practice by men who, starting in the years 1928-
1930, had belonged to the Freiburg school (or at least had been inspired 
by it) and who had later expressed themselves in the journal Ordo. At 
the intersection of neo-Kantian philosophy, Husserl's phenomenology, 
and Weber's sociology, on certain points close to the Viennese econo­
mists, concerned about the historical correlation between economic 
processes and juridical structures, men like Eucken, W. Roepke, Franz 
Bohm, and Von Rustow had conducted their critiques on three differ­
ent political fronts: Soviet socialism, National Socialism, and inter­
ventionist policies inspired by Keynes. But they addressed what they 
considered as a single adversary: a type of economic government sys­
tematically ignorant of the market mechanisms that were the only 
thing capable of price-forming regulation. Ordo-liberalism, working 
on the basic themes of the liberal technology of government, tried to 
define what a market economy could be, organized (but not planned 
or directed) within an institutional and juridical framework that, on the 
one hand, would offer the guarantees and limitations of law, and, on 
the other, would make sure that the freedom of economic processes did 
not cause any social distortion. The first part of this course was devoted 
to the study of this Ordo-liberalism, which had inspired the economic 
choice of the general policy of the German Federal Republic during the 
time of Adenauer and Ludwig Erhard. 
The second part was devoted to a few aspects of what is called "Amer­
ican neoliberalism": that liberalism which is generally associated with 
the Chicago school and which also developed in reaction against the 
"excessive government" exhibited in its eyes, starting with Simons, by 
the New Deal, war-planning, and the great economic and social pro­
grams generally supported by postwar Democratic administrations. As 
in the case of the German Ordo-liberals, the critique carried out in the 
name of economic liberalism cited the danger represented by the inev­
itable sequence: economic interventionism, inflation of governmental 
apparatuses, overadministration, bureaucracy, and rigidification of all 
the power mechanisms, accompanied by the production of new eco­
nomic distortions that would lead to new interventions. But what was 
striking in this American neoliberalism was a movement completely 
contrary to what is found in the social economy of the market in Ger-

The Birth of Biopolitics 79 
many: where the latter considers regulation of prices by the market­
the only basis for a rational economy-to be in itself so fragile that 
it must be supported, managed, and "ordered" by a vigilant internal 
policy of social interventions (involving assistance to the unemployed, 
health care coverage, a housing policy, and so on), American neo­
liberalism seeks rather to extend the rationality of the market, the 
schemes of analysis it proposes, and the decisionmaking criteria it sug­
gests to areas that are not exclusively or not primarily economic. For 
example, the family and birth policy, or delinquency and penal policy. 
What would need to be studied now, therefore, is the way in which 
the specific problems of life and population were raised within a tech­
nology of government which, without always having been liberal-far 
from it-was always haunted since the end of the eighteenth century 
by liberalism's question. 
The seminar was devoted this year to the crisis of juridical thought in 
the last years of the nineteenth century. Papers were read by Franc;;ois 
Ewald (on civil law), Catherine Mevel (on public and administrative 
law), Eliane AHo (on the right to life in legislation concerning children), 
Nathalie Coppinger and Pasquale Pasquino (on penal law), Alexandre 
Fontana (on security measures), Franc;;ois Delaporte and Anne-Marie 
Moulin (on health policy and health politics). 
NOTE 
1 P. Rosanvallon, Le Capitalisme utopique: critique de !'ideologie economique (Paris: Seuil, 1979).



ON THE GOVERNMENT OF THE LIVING 
Lis year's course drew support from the analyses done the pre­
ceding years on the subject of "government," this notion being under­
stood in the broad sense of techniques and procedures for directing 
human behavior. Government of children, government of souls and 
consciences, government of a household, of a state, or of oneself. 
Inside this very general framework, we studied the problem of self­
examination and confession. 
Speaking of the sacrament of penance, Tomaso de Vio called the con­
fession of sins an "act of truth."1 Let us retain this phrase, with the 
meaning that Cajetan gave to it. The question raised is this one, then: 
How is it that in Western Christian culture the government of men 
demands, on the part of those who are led, not only acts of obedience 
and submission but also "acts of truth," which have the peculiar re­
quirement not just that the subject tell the truth but that he tell the 
truth about himself, his faults, his desires, the state of his soul, and so 
on? How was a type of government of men formed in which one is 
required not simply to obey but to reveal what one is by stating it? 
After a theoretical introduction concerning the notion of "truth 
regime," the longest part of the course was devoted to the procedures 
of examination of souls and of confession in early Christianity. Two con­
cepts have to be recognized, each of which corresponds to a particular 
practice: exomologesis and exagoreusis. A study of exomologesis shows 
that this term is often employed in a very broad sense: it designates 
an act meant to reveal both a truth and the subject's adherence to that 
truth; to do the exomologesis of one's belief is not merely to affirm

Ethics.' Subjectivity and Truth 
what one believes but to affirm the fact of that belief; it is to make the 
act of affirmation an object of affirmation, and hence to authenticate it 
either for oneself or with regard to others. Exomologesis is an emphatic 
affirmation whose emphasis relates above all to the fact that the sub­
ject binds himself to that affirmation and accepts the consequences. 
Exomologesis as an "act of faith" is indispensable to the Christian, 
for whom the revealed and taught truths are not simply a matter of 
beliefs that he accepts but of obligations by which he commits him­
self-to uphold his beliefs, to accept the authority that authenticates 
them, to profess them publicly if need be, to live in accordance with 
them, and so on. Yet a different type of exomologesis is found very early 
on: the exomologesis of sins. There, too, distinctions must be made. 
Recognizing that one has committed sins is an obligation laid either 
on catechumens who are candidates for baptism or on Christians who 
have been prone to a few lapses. To the latter, the Didascalia prescribes 
that they perform the exomologesis of their sins to the congregation. z 
Now, this "confession" seems not to have taken, at the time, the form of 
a detailed public statement of the transgressions committed but, rather, 
of a collective rite in the course of which each individual acknowledged 
in his heart that he was a sinner before God. It was concerning seri­
ous offenses-in particular, idolatry, adultery, and homicide, as well as 
on the occasion of persecutions and apostasy-that the specific charac­
ter of the exomologesis of wrongs was manifested: it became a condition 
for reinstatement, and it was connected with a complex public ritual. 
The history of penitential practices from the second to the fifth cen­
turies shows that exomologesis did not have the form of a verbal con­
fession examining the different offenses along with their circumstances, 
and that it did not obtain remission from the fact that it was enacted 
in the canonical form before the person who had received the author­
ity to remit them. Penance was a state into which one entered after a 
ritual, and it was ended (sometimes on the deathbed) after a second 
ceremonial. Between these two moments, the penitent did the exo­
mologesis of his faults through his mortifications, his austerities, his 
way of living, his garments, his manifest attitude of repentance-in 
short, through a whole dramaticity in which the verbal expression did 
not have the main role, and in which the analytical statement of spe­
cific wrongs seems to have been absent. It may be that before the rec­
onciliation a special rite took place, and that the term exomologesis was 
applied to it more particularly. Yet even in that case it was still a mat-

On the Government of the Living 
ter of a dramatic and synthetic expression by which the sinner acknowl­
edged in the presence of all the fact of having sinned; he attested this 
acknowledgment in a manifestation that at the same time visibly bound 
him to a sinner's state and prepared his deliverance. Verbalization of 
the confession of sins in canonical penance will be done systematically 
only later-first with the practice of penance at a price, then from the 
twelfth and thirteenth centuries onward, when the sacrament of pen­
ance would be organized. 
In the monastic institutions, the practice of confession took quite dif­
ferent forms (which did not exclude recourse to forms of exomologesis 
in front of the assembled community when the monk had committed 
transgressions of a certain importance). To study these confessional 
practices in monastic life, we resorted to a more detailed study of 
Cassian's Coriferences and Institutes of the Cenobites':' with a view to 
the techniques of spiritual direction. Three aspects in particular were 
analyzed: the mode of dependence with respect to the elder or teacher, 
the way of conducting the examination of one's own conscience, and the 
obligation to describe one's mental impulses in a formulation that aims 
to be exhaustive-the exagoreusis. Considerable differences appear on 
these three points, in comparison with ancient philosophy. Schemati­
cally, we can say that in the monastic institution the relation to the 
teacher takes the form of an unconditional and steadfast obedience that 
concerns every aspect of life and, in principle, does not leave the nov­
ice any margin of initiative; that while the value of this relationship 
depends on the teacher's qualification, it is nonetheless true that by 
itself the form of obedience, whatever its object, holds a positive value; 
and finally, that while obedience is absolutely necessary for the nov­
ices and, as a rule, the teachers are elders, the age differential is not 
sufficient in itself to justify such a relationship-both because the abil­
ity to direct is a charisma and the obedience must constitute, in the 
form of humility, a permanent relationship with oneself and others. 
The examination of conscience is also very different from the one 
recommended in the philosophical schools of antiquity. Like the lat­
ter, of course, it comprises two great forms: the evening recollection 
of the day gone by and continual vigilance concerning oneself. It is this 
second form that is most important in the monasticism described by 
Cassian. Its procedures show clearly that it is not a matter of deciding 
what must be done to keep from committing a transgression or even 
to recognize whether one may have committed a transgression in what

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
one has done. It is a matter of taking hold of the thought occurrence 
(cogitatio = /ogismos), of probing rather deeply in order to grasp its 
origin and determine where it comes from (from God, from oneself, 
from the Devil) and do a sorting-out (which Cassian describes by using 
several metaphors, the most important of which is that of the money­
changer who inspects the coins). Cassian devotes one of the most inter­
esting Conferences to "inconstancy of the mind"-relating the views 
of Abbot Serenus-which forms the domain of a self-examination 
that dearly has the role of making possible the unity and continuity 
of contemplation. 4 
As for the confession prescribed by Cassian, it is not simply a state­
ment of wrongs committed, nor a general exposition of the state of 
one's soul; it must tend toward the continuous verbalization of all the 
impulses of thought. This confession enables the director to give coun­
sel and render a diagnosis: Cassian thus relates examples of consulta­
tion; sometimes several elders take part and give their opinions. But 
verbalization also involves intrinsic effects which it owes simply to 
the fact that it transforms the impulses of the mind into statements 
addressed to another. In particular, the "sorting-out," which is one of 
the aims of the examination, is performed through verbalization with 
the help of a threefold mechanism of shame that makes one blush at 
expressing any bad thought, the material realization of what is hap­
pening in the mind through the words spoken, and the incompatibil­
ity between the Devil, who tempts and deceives while hiding in the 
recesses of consciousness, and the light that exposes them to view. 
Hence, understood in this way, confession involves a continuous exter­
nalization through words of the "arcana" of consciousness. 
Unconditional obedience, uninterrupted examination, and exhaus­
tive confession form an ensemble with each element implying the other 
two; the verbal manifestation of the truth that hides in the depths of 
oneself appears as an indispensable component of the government of 
men by each other, as it was carried out in monastic-and especially 
Cenobitic-institutions beginning in the fourth century. But it must be 
emphasized that this manifestation was not for the purpose of estab­
lishing one's sovereign mastery over oneself; what was expected, rather, 
was humility and mortification, detachment toward oneself and the 
constitution of a relation with oneself tending toward the destruction 
of the form of the self. 
This year's seminar was devoted to certain aspects of liberal thought

On the Government of the Living 
in the nineteenth century. Papers were read by N. Coppinger on eco­
nomic development at the end of the century, by D. Deleule on the 
Scottish historical school, P. Rosanvallon on Guizot, F. Ewald on Saint­
Simon and the Saint-Simonians, P. Pasquino on the place of Menger 
in the history of liberalism, A. Schutz on Menger's epistemology, and 
C. Mevel on the notions of the general will and the general interest. 
NOTES 
Father T. De Vio, De Co,!/essione questiones, in Opuscula (Paris: Regnault, 1530). 
2 Didascalia, the teaching of the twelve apostles and their disciples, an ecclesiastical document 
from the third century whose original, in Greek, is lost. There remains only an adaptation of it 
in the first six books of the Apostolic Constitutions: Constitutions apostoliques: Didascalie, c'est­
a-dire l'enseignemenl catholique des douze ap6tres et des saints disciples de Notre Saveur, trans. 
abbe F. Nau (Paris: Firmin Didot, 1902). 
') 1. Cassian, Institutions cenobitiques, trans. J.-C. Guy (Paris: Cerf, 1965). Coriferences, trans. 
Dom E. Pichery (Paris: Cerf): vol. I (1966), vol. 2 (1967), vol. ') (1971) [The Institutes of the 
Coenobia and Coriferences, trans. Edgar C. S. Gibson, in A Select Library of Nicene and Post­
Nicene Fathers (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Eerdman's, 1978), vol. llJ. 
4 Cassian, Premiere conference de l'abbe Serenus, de la mobilite de l'ame et des esprits du mal, in 
Conferences, vol. I, pp. 242-77.



SUBJECTIVITY AND TRUTH 
Lis year's course is to be the object of a forthcoming publication, 
so it will be enough for now to give a brief summary. 
Under the general title of "Subjectivity and Truth," it is a question of 
beginning an inquiry concerning the instituted models of self-knowledge 
and their history: How was the subject established, at different moments 
and in different institutional contexts, as a possible, desirable, or even 
indispensable object of knowledge? How were the experience that one 
may have of oneself and the knowledge that one forms of oneself organ­
ized according to certain schemes? How were these schemes defined, 
valorized, recommended, imposed? It is clear that neither the recourse 
to an original experience nor the study of the philosophical theories of 
the soul, the passions, or the body can serve as the main axis in such 
an investigation. The guiding thread that seems the most useful for this 
inquiry is constituted by what one might call the "techniques of the 
self," which is to say, the procedures, which no doubt exist in every civi­
lization, suggested or prescribed to individuals in order to determine 
their identity, maintain it, or transform it in terms of a certain number 
of ends, through relations of self-mastery or self-knowledge. In short, 
it is a matter of placing the imperative to "know oneself" -which to us 
appears so characteristic of our civilization-back in the much broader 
interrogation that serves as its explicit or implicit context: What should 
one do with oneself? What work should be carried out on the self? 
How should one "govern oneself" by performing actions in which one 
is oneself the objective of those actions, the domain in which they are 
brought to bear, the instrument they employ, and the subject that acts?

88 Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
Plato's Alcihiades can be taken as the starting point: 1 the question of 
the "care of oneself" -epimeleia heautou-appears in this text as the 
general framework within which the imperative of self-knowledge ac­
quires its significance. The series of studies that can be envisaged start­
ing from there could form a history of the "care of oneself," understood 
as an experience, and thus also as a technique elaborating and trans­
forming that experience. Such a project is at the intersection of two 
themes treated previously: a history of subjectivity and an analysis of 
the forms of "governmentality." The history of subjectivity was begun 
by studying the social divisions brought about in the name of madness, 
illness, and delinquency, along with their effects on the constitution of 
a rational and normal subject. It was also begun by attempting to iden­
tify the modes of objectification of the subject in knowledge disciplines 
[dans ses savoirsJ such as those dealing with language, labor, and life. As 
for the study of "governmentality," it answered a dual purpose: doing 
the necessary critique of the common conceptions of "power" (more 
or less confusedly conceived as a unitary system organized around a 
center that is at the same time its source, a system that is driven by its 
internal dynamic always to expand); analyze it rather as a domain of 
strategic relations focusing on the behavior of the other or others, and 
employing various procedures and techniques according to the case, the 
institutional frameworks, social groups, and historical periods in which 
they develop. The studies already published concerning confinement 
and the disciplines, the courses devoted to the reason of state and the 
"art of governing," and the volume in preparation, with the collabora­
tion of Arlette Farge, on the lettres de cachet in the eighteenth century, 2 
constitute elements in this analysis of "governmentality." 
The history of the "care" and the "techniques" of the self would 
thus be a way of doing the history of subjectivity; no longer, however, 
through the divisions between the mad and the nonmad, the sick and 
nonsick, delinquents and nondelinquents, nor through the constitu­
tion of fields of scientific objectivity giving a place to the living, speak­
ing, laboring subject; but, rather, through the putting in place, and the 
transformations in our culture, of "relations with oneself," with their 
technical armature and their knowledge effects. And in this way one 
could take up the question of governmentality from a different angle: 
the government of the self by oneself in its articulation with relations 
with others (such as one finds in pedagogy, behavior counseling, spir­
itual direction, the prescription of models for living, and so on).

Subjectivity and Truth 89 
The study done this year delimited this general framework in two ways. 
A historical limitation: we studied what had developed in Hellenic and 
Roman culture as a "technique of living," a "technique of existence" 
in the philosophers, moralists, and doctors in the period stretching 
from the first century B.C. to the second century A.D. And a limitation 
of domain: these techniques of living were considered only in their 
application to that type of act which the Greeks called aphrodisia, and 
for which our notion of "sexuality" obviously constitutes a completely 
inadequate translation. The problem raised was the following, then: 
How did the philosophical and medical techniques of living, on the eve 
of Christianity's development, define' and regulate the practice of sex­
ual acts-the khresis aphrodision? One sees how far one is from a his­
tory of sexuality organized around the good old repressive hypothesis 
and its customary questions (how and why is desire repressed?). It is 
a matter of acts and pleasures, not of desire. It is a matter of the forma­
tion of the self through techniques of living, not of repression through 
prohibition and law. We shall try to show not how sex was kept in 
check but how that long history began which, in our societies, binds 
together sex and the subject. 
It would be completely arbitrary to connect a particular moment in 
time to the emergence of the "care of oneself" in regard to sexual acts; 
bu t the proposed demarcation (around the techniques of the self in the 
centuries immediately preceding Christianity) has its justification. In 
fact, it is certain that the "technology of the self" -reflection on modes 
of living, on choices of existence, on the way to regulate one's behav­
ior, to attach oneself to ends and means-experienced an extensive 
development in the Hellenistic and Roman period, to the point of hav­
ing absorbed a large portion of philosophical activity. This develop­
ment cannot be dissociated from the growth of urban society, from the 
new distribution of political power, or from the importance assumed 
by the new service aristocracy in the Roman Empire. This government 
of the self, with the techniques that are peculiar to it, takes its place 
"between" pedagogical institutions and the religions of salvation. This 
should not be taken to mean a chronological succession, even if it is 
true that the question of the education of future citizens seems to have 
occasioned more interest and reflection in classical Greece, and the 
question of an afterlife and a hereafter caused more anxiety in later 
periods. Nor should it be thought that pedagogy, government of the 
self, and salvation constituted three utterly distinct domains, employing

go Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
different notions and methods; in reality there were numerous cross­
overs and a definite continuity between the three. The fact remains that 
the technology of the self intended for the adult can be analyzed in the 
specificity and breadth it took on during this period, provided it is 
pulled out of the retrospective shadow cast on it by pedagogical insti­
tutions and the salvation religions. 
Now, this art of self-government as it developed in the Hellenistic 
and Roman period is important for the ethic of sexual acts and its his­
tory. Indeed, it is there-and not in Christianity-that the principles 
of the famous conjugal arrangement, whose history has been so long, 
were formulated: the exclusion of any sexual activity outside the rela­
tion between spouses, the procreative purpose of these acts, at the 
expense of pleasure as an end, the emotional function of sexual rela­
tions in the marriage partnership. But that is not all; it is also in this 
technology of the self that one observes the development of a form of 
uneasiness about sexual acts and their effects, an uneasiness whose ori­
gin is too readily attributed to Christianity (when it is not attributed to 
capitalism or "bourgeois morality"!). Of course, the question of sexual 
acts was far from having the importance then that it would subsequently 
have in the Christian problematic of the flesh and its lusts; the ques­
tion, for example, of anger or reversal of fortune undoubtedly looms 
larger than sexual relations for the Hellenistic and Roman moralists; 
but even if the place of sexual relations in the order of concerns is 
rather far from being the first, it is important to note the way in which 
these techniques of the self connect the order of sexual acts to the 
whole of existence. 
In this year's course we focused on four examples of these techniques 
of the self in their relation with the regimen of the aphrodisia. 
1. The interpretation of dreams. Artemidorus's Oneirocritica/) in 
Book One, Chapters 78-80, constitutes the basic text in this area. The 
question raised there does not directly concern the practice of sexual 
acts but, rather, the use to be made of the dreams in which they are 
represented. In this text, it is a matter of determining the prognostic 
value they should be given in everyday life: what auspicious or inaus­
picious events may one expect according to whether the dream has 
presented this or that type of sexual relation? A text of this sort obvi­
ously does not prescribe any morals, but it does reveal, through the 
play of positive or negative significations that it ascribes to the dream

Subjectivity and Truth 91 
images, a whole set of correlations (between sexual acts and social life ) 
and a whole system of differential valuations (hierarchizing the sexual 
acts relative to one another). 
2. The medical regimens. These aim directly to assign a "measure" 
to sexual acts. It is noteworthy that this measure almost never concerns 
the form of the sexual act (natural or not, normal or not), but its fre­
quency and its moment. Quantitative and circumstantial values are all 
that is taken into consideration. A study of Galen's great theoretical edi­
fice shows clearly the connection established in medical and philosoph­
ical thought between sexual acts and the death of individuals. (Because 
each living being is destined to die, but the species must live eternally, 
nature invented the mechanism of sexual reproduction.) It also clearly 
shows the connection established between the sexual act and the sub­
stantial, violent, paroxysmal, and dangerous expenditure of the vital 
principle that it involves. A study of regimens properly speaking (in 
Rufus of Ephesus, Athenaeus, Galen, Soranus) shows, through the end­
less precautions they recommended, the complexity and tenuousness 
of the relations established between sexual acts and the life of the indi­
vidual: the sexual act's extreme sensitivity to all external and inter­
nal circumstances that might make it harmful; the immense range of 
effects of every sexual act on all parts and components of the body. 
3. Married life. The treatises on marriage were quite numerous in 
the period under study. What remains of the work of Musonius Rufus, 
Antipater of Tarsus, or Hierocles, as well as the works of Plutarch, 
shows not only the valorization of marriage (which seems to corres­
pond to a social phenomenon, according to the historians) but also a 
new conception of the marital relationship: added to the traditional 
principles of the complementarity of the two sexes necessary for the 
order of the "household" is the ideal of a dual relation, involving every 
aspect of the life of the two partners, and establishing personal emo­
tional ties in a definitive way. Sexual acts must find their exclusive 
place inside this relationship (a condemnation of adultery therefore, 
understood, by Musonius Rufus, no longer as an infringement on a hus­
band's privileges but as a breach of the marriage tie, which binds the 
husband as well as the wife4). So they must be directed toward pro­
creation, since that is the end given by the nature of marriage. And, 
finally, they must comply with an internal regulation required by mod­
esty, mutual affection, and respect for the other (Plutarch offers the 
most numerous and valuable indications on this last point).

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
4. The choice of loves. The standard comparison between the two 
loves-the love for women and the love for boys-left two important 
texts for the period studied: Plutarch's Dialogue on Love and Lucian's 
Amores. 5 An analysis of these two texts attests to the persistence of a 
problem with which the classical period was very familiar: the diffi­
culty of giving a status and a justification to sexual relations in the 
pederastic relationship. Lucian's dialogue concludes ironically with a 
precise reminder of those acts which the erotics of boys sought to elide 
in the name of friendship, virtue, and pedagogy. Plutarch's much more 
elaborate text brings out the mutual consent to pleasure as an essen­
tial element in the aphrodisia; it shows that this kind of reciprocity in 
pleasure can only exist between a man and a woman; better still, in 
the marriage relationship, where it regularly serves to renew the mar­
riage covenant. 
NOTES 
Plato, Alcibiade, trans. M. Croiset (Paris: Belles Lettres, Ig25). [Plato, Alcibiades, trans. W. R. M. 
Lamb, in Plato (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard, Ig67), vol. 12]. 
2 M. Foucault and A. Farge, Le Desordre desfamilles: Lettres de cachet des archives de la Bastille 
au VIlle siecle (Paris: Gallimard-lulliard, Ig82). 
:I Artemidorus, La Clif des songes: Onirocriticon, trans. A. J. Festugiere (Paris: Vrin, 1975), bk. 
I, chs. 78-80, pp. 84-95' [Artemidorus, The Interpretation if Dreams: Oneirocritica, trans. R. 
J. White (Park Ridge, N.J.: Noyes, 1975), bk. I, pp. 58-66]' 
4 C. Musonius Rufus, Reliquiae, XII: Sur les aphrodisia, ed. O. Hense (Leipzig: Teubner, Ig05), 
pp.65-67· 
5 Lucian (attrib.), Amores: Affairs of the Heart, trans. M. D. Macleod, in Works (London: Loeb 
Classical Library, Ig67), no. 55, pp. 250-55; Plutarch, Dialogue sur l'amour, trans. R. Flaceliere, 
in Oeuvres morales (Paris: Belles Lettres, Ig80), vol. 10, §76gb, p. 101 [Plutarch, The Dialogue 
on Love, trans. Edwin Minor, Jr., F. H. Sandbach, and W. C. Helmbold (Cambridge, Mass.: 
Harvard University Press, Ig61), vol. g, pp. 427-28].

THE HERMENEUTIC OF THE SUBJECT 
Lis year's comse was devoted 1D the fOnTIation of the theme of the 
hermeneutic of the self. The object was not just to study it in its theo­
retical formulations but to analyze it in relation to a set of practices that 
were very important in classical and late antiquity. These practices had 
to do with what was often called in Greek epimeleia heautou, and in 
Latin cura sui. This principle that one needs to "attend to oneself," 
to "take care of oneself," is doubtless obscured by the radiance of the 
gnothi seauton. Yet, one must bear in mind that the rule of having to 
know oneself was regularly associated with the theme of care of the 
self. Through all the culture of antiquity it is easy to find evidence of 
the importance given to "concern with oneself" and its connection with 
the theme of self-knowledge. 
To start with, in Socrates himself. In the Apology, one sees Socrates 
presenting himself to his judges as the teacher of self-concern.! He is 
the man who accosts passersby and says to them: You concern your­
self with your wealth, your reputation, and with honors, but you don't 
worry about your virtue and your soul. Socrates is the man who takes 
care that his fellow citizens "take care of themselves." Now, concern­
ing this role, Socrates says three important things, a little farther on in 
this same Apology: it is a mission that was conferred on him by the 
deity, and he will not give it up before his last breath; it is a disinter­
ested task for which he doesn't ask any payment, he performs it out 
of pure benevolence; and it is a useful service to the city-state, more 
useful even than an athlete's victory at Olympia, for by teaching citi­
zens to attend to themselves (rather than to their possessions), one also

94 Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
teaches them to attend to the city-state itself (rather than its material 
affairs). Instead of sentencing him, his judges would do better to reward 
Socrates for having taught others to care for themselves. 
Eight centuries later, the same notion of epimeleia heautou appears 
with an equally important role in Gregory of Nyssa. He applies this 
term to the impulse that moves one to renounce marriage, detach one­
self from the flesh, and, through the virginity of one's heart and body, 
regain the immortality from which one had fallen. In another passage 
of the Treatise on Virginity he makes the parable of the lost drachma 
the model of the care of the self:2 for a lost drachma one must light 
the lamp, ransack the house, explore every nook, until one sees the 
metal of the coin shining in the darkness; in the same way, in order to 
rediscover the effigy that God imprinted on our soul and that the body 
has covered with grime, one must "take care of oneself," lighting the 
lamp of reason and exploring all the recesses of the soul. So it is clear 
that Christian asceticism, like ancient philosophy, places itself under 
the sign of the care of the self and makes the obligation to know one­
self one of the elements of this essential care. 
Between these two extreme references-Socrates and Gregory of 
Nyssa-one can ascertain that the care of the self constituted not just a 
principle but a constant practice. We can consider two other examples, 
very far apart this time in their way of thinking and their type of ethic. 
An Epicurean text, the Letter to Menoeceus, begins in this way: "Let 
no one when young delay to study philosophy, nor when he is old grow 
weary of his study. For no one can come too early or too late to secure 
the health of his soul."3 Philosophy is assimilated to the care of the soul 
(the term is quite precisely medical: hugiainein), and this care is a task 
that must be carried on throughout one's life. In the treatise On the 
Contemplative Life, Philo thus designates a certain practice of the 
Theraputae as an epimeleia of the soul. 4 
We cannot stop there, however. It would be a mistake to think that 
the care of the self was an invention of philosophical thinking and that 
it constituted a precept peculiar to the philosophical life. It was actu­
ally a precept of living that, in a general way, was very highly valued 
in Greece. Plutarch cites a Lacedaemonian aphorism that is very sig­
nificant in this regard. 5 One day Anaxandrides was asked why his fel­
low countrymen, the Spartans, entrusted the cultivation of their lands 
to slaves instead of reserving this activity for themselves. This was the 
response: "It was by not taking care of the fields, but of ourselves, that

The Hermeneutic of the Subject 95 
we acquired those fields." Attending to oneself is a privilege; it is the 
mark of a social superiority, as against those who must attend to oth­
ers in order to serve them or attend to a trade in order to live. The 
advantage afforded by wealth, status, and birth is expressed by the fact 
that one has the possibility of attending to oneself. We may note that 
the Roman concept of the otium has some relation to this theme: the 
"leisure" designated by the word is, above all, the time that one spends 
attending to oneself. In this sense, philosophy, in Greece as in Rome, 
has only incorporated into its own requirements a much more wide­
spread social ideal. 
In any case, even after becoming a philosophical principle, the care 
of the self remained a form of activity. The very term epimeleia does 
not merely designate an attitude of awareness or a form of attention 
that one would focus on oneself; it designates a regulated occupation, a 
work with its methods and objectives. Xenophon, for example, employs 
the word epimeleia to designate the work of the master of the house­
hold who supervises its farming. It is a word also used to designate the 
ritual respects that are paid to the gods and to the dead. The activity 
of the sovereign who looks after his people and leads the city-state is 
called epimeleia by Dio of Prusa. It should be understood, then, that 
when the philosophers and moralists will recommend care of oneself 
(epimeleisthai heauttJ) they are not advising simply to pay attention to 
oneself, to avoid mistakes or dangers or to stay out of harm's way; they 
are referring to a whole domain of complex and regulated activities. 
We may say that in all of ancient philosophy the care of the self was 
considered as both a duty and a technique, a basic obligation and a set 
of carefully worked-out procedures. 
The quite natural starting point for a study focused on the care of the 
self is the Alcibiades. 6 Three questions appear in it, relating to the 
connection of the care of the self with politics, pedagogy, and self­
knowledge. A comparison of the Alcibiades with the texts of the first 
and second centuries reveals several important transformations. 
1. Socrates advised Alcibiades to take advantage of his youth to look 
after himself: "At fifty you would be too old." But Epicurus said: "When 
young one must not hesitate to study philosophy, and when old, one 
must not hesitate to study philosophy. It is never too early or too late 
to take care of one's soul." It is this principle of constant care through­
out life that clearly prevails. Musonius Rufus, for example: "One must

96 Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
always take care of oneself if one wishes to live in a wholesome way." 
Or Galen: "To become an accomplished man, each individual needs 
to exercise, as it were, his whole life through," even if it is true that it 
would be better "to have looked after his soul from his earliest years." 
It is a fact that the friends to whom Seneca or Plutarch offer their 
advice are no longer those ambitious adolescents to whom Socrates 
spoke: they are men, sometimes young (like Serenus), sometimes fully 
mature (like Lucilius, who served as the procurator of Sicily when 
Seneca and he exchanged a long spiritual correspondence). Epictetus, 
who ran a school, had students who were still quite young, but he, too, 
occasionally challenged adults-and even "statesmen"-to turn their 
attention back to themselves. 
Attending to oneself is therefore not just a momentary preparation 
for living; it is a form of living. Alcibiades realized that he must take 
care of himself if he meant to attend to others. Now it becomes a mat­
ter of attending to oneself, for oneself: one should be, for oneself and 
throughout one's existence, one's own object. 
Hence the idea of conversion to oneself (ad se convertere), the idea of 
an existential impulse by which one turns in upon oneself (eis heauton 
epistrephein). Of course, the theme of the epistrophe is a typically Pla­
tonic one. But, as one may have already seen in the Alcibiades, the 
impulse by which the soul turns to itself is an impulse by which one's 
gaze is drawn "aloft" -toward the divine element, toward the essences 
and the supracelestial world where they are visible. The turning that 
Seneca, Plutarch, and Epictetus urge people to accomplish is a kind of 
turning in place: it has no other end or outcome than to settle into one­
self, to "take up residence in oneself" and to remain there. The final 
objective of the conversion to oneself is to establish a certain number 
of relations with oneself. These relations are sometimes conceived on 
the jurido-political model: to be sovereign over oneself, to exert a per­
fect mastery over oneself, to be completely "self-possessed" (fled suum, 
Seneca often says). They are also often represented on the model of 
positive enjoyment: to enjoy oneself, to take one's pleasure with one­
self, to delight in the self alone. 
2. A second major difference concerns pedagogy. In the Alcibiades, 
care of the self was essential because of the deficiencies of education; 
it was a matter of perfecting the latter or of taking charge of it one­
self-in any case, of providing a "formation." 
From the moment that applying oneself to oneself became an adult

The Hermeneutic of the Subject 97 
practice that must be carried out one's entire life, its pedagogical role 
tended to fade and other functions came to the fore. 
a) A critical function, first of all. The practice of the self must 
enable one to get rid of all the bad habits, all the false opinions that 
one can get from the crowd or from bad teachers, but also from par­
ents and associates. To "unlearn" (de-discere) is one of the impor­
tant tasks of self-cultivation. 
b) But it also has a function of struggle. The practice of the self 
is conceived as a permanent battle. It is not simply a matter of shap­
ing a man of valor for the future. The individual must be given the 
weapons and the courage that will enable him to fight all his life. 
We know how frequently two metaphors appeared: that of the ath­
letic contest (in life one is like a wrestler who has to dispose of his 
successive opponents and who must be training when he is not fight­
ing) and that of warfare (the mind must be deployed like an army 
that an enemy is always liable to attack). 
c) But, above all, this self-cultivation has a curative and therapeu­
tic function. It is much closer to the medical model than to the 
pedagogical model. Of course, one must bear in mind certain facts 
that are very ancient in Greek culture: the existence of a notion such 
as pathos, which denotes both mental passion and physical illness; 
the breadth of a metaphorical field that allows one to apply to the 
body and the mind expressions such as "nurse," "heal," "amputate," 
"scarify," "purge." One should also recall the principle-familiar to 
the Epicureans, the Cynics, the Stoics-that philosophy's role is to 
heal the diseases of the soul. Plutarch was able one day to declare 
that philosophy and medicine constituted mia khora, a single area, 
a single domain. Epictetus did not want his school to be regarded 
merely as a place of education but also as a "medical clinic," an 
iatreion; he intended it to be a "dispensary for the soul"; he wanted 
his students to arrive thinking of themselves as patients: "One man 
has a dislocated shoulder, another an abcess, another a headache." 
3. In the first and second centuries, the relation to the self is always 
considered as needing to rely on the relation to a teacher, to a direc­
tor, or in any case to another person. Yet this presupposed a growing 
independence from the love relation. 
It was a generally accepted principle that one could not attend to 
oneself without the help of another. Seneca said that no one was ever 
strong enough on his own to get out of the state of stultitia he was in:

98 Ethics .. Subjectivity and Truth 
"He needs someone to extend him a hand and pull him free." In the 
same way, Galen said that man loves himself too much to be able to 
cure himself of his passions by himself; he had often seen men "stum­
ble" who had not been willing to rely on one another's authority. This 
principle is true for beginners but also for what follows, and even to 
the end of one's life. Seneca's attitude, in his correspondence with 
Lucilius, is characteristic: no matter that he is aged, having given up 
all his activities, he gives counsel to Lucilius but asks him for advice in 
return and is thankful for the help he finds in this exchange of letters. 
What is remarkable in this soul practice is the variety of social rela­
tions that can serve as its support. 
• There are the strictly educational organizations: Epictetus's school 
can serve as an example. Temporary auditors were given a place 
next to students who remained for a longer course of study; but 
instruction was also given to those who aspired to become philos­
ophers and soul directors themselves. Some of the Discourses col­
lected by Arrian are technical lessons for future practitioners of 
self-cultivation. 7 
• One also finds private counselors, especially in Rome: installed in 
the entourage of a great personage, being part of his group of clien­
tele, they would give political opinions, supervise the education of 
the young people, and provide assistance in the important circum­
stances of life. For example, Demetrius in the entourage of Thrasea 
Pactus; when the latter was led to take his own life, Demetrius 
served him as a kind of suicide counselor and braced his final 
moments with a discourse on immortality. 
• But there are many other forms in which this soul direction is car­
ried out. The latter joins and animates a whole set of other rela­
tions: family relations (Seneca writes a consolation to his mother 
on the occasion of his own exile); relations of protection (the same 
Seneca looks after both the career and the soul of the young Serenus, 
a provincial cousin newly arrived at Rome); relations of friendship 
between two persons rather close in age, culture, and situation 
(Seneca with Lucilius); relations with a highly placed personage to 
whom one pays homage by offering him useful advice (thus Plu­
tarch with Fundanus, to whom he rushes the notes he himself has 
taken concerning the tranquility of the soul).

The Hermeneutic if the Subject 99 
In this way there is constituted what one might call a "soul service," 
which is performed through multifarious social relations. Traditional 
eros play an occasional role in it at best. This is not to say that affec­
tive relations were not intense; they often were. Our modern catego­
ries of friendship and love are completely inadequate for interpreting 
them. The correspondence of Marcus Aurelius with Fronto can serve 
as an example of that intensity and complexity. 
This cultivation of the self comprised a set of practices designated by 
the general team askesis. It is appropriate first to analyze its objectives. 
In a passage cited by Seneca, Demetrius resorts to the very common 
metaphor of the athlete; the athlete does not learn all the possible 
moves, he does not attempt to do useless feats; he practices the few 
moves that he needs to triumph over his opponents in the wrestling 
match. In the same way, we do not have to perform feats on ourselves 
(philosophical ascesis looks with suspicion on those figures who point 
to the marvels of their abstinences, their fasts, their foreknowledge of 
the future). Like a good wrestler, we must learn only what will enable 
us to bear up against events that may occur; we must learn not to let 
ourselves be thrown by them, and not to let ourselves be overwhelmed 
by the emotions they may give rise to in ourselves. 
Now, what do we need in order to keep our control in the face of 
the events that may take place? We need "discourses": /ogoi, under­
stood as true discourses and rational discourses. Lucretius speaks of 
the veridica dicta that enable us to thwart our fears and not allow our­
selves to be disheartened by what we believe to be misfortunes. The 
equipment we need in order to confront the future consists of true dis­
courses; they are what enables us to face reality. 
Three questions about them are raised. 
1. The question of their nature. There were numerous discussions 
on this point between the philosophical schools and within the same 
currents. The main controversy had to do with the need for theoreti­
cal knowledge. On this point, the Epicureans were all in agreement: 
knowing the principles that govern the world, the nature of the gods, 
the causes of the wonders, the laws of life and death, and so on is 
absolutely necessary, in their view, if one is to prepare for the possible 
events of existence. The Stoics were divided according to their prox­
imity to cynical tenets: some attributed the greatest significance to the 
dogmata, the theoretical principles that complete the practical prescrip-

100 Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
tions; others assigned the most important place to those concrete rules 
of behavior. Seneca's Letters 90-91 layout the opposing arguments very 
clearly. 8 What should be noted here is that those true discourses we 
need relate only to what we are in our connection with the world, in 
our place in the natural order, and in our dependence or independence 
with respect to the events that occur. They are in no way a decipher­
ment of our thoughts, our representations, our desires. 
2. The second question raised concerns how these true discourses 
exist inside us. To say that they are necessary for our future is to say 
that we must be able to have recourse to them when the need is felt. 
When an unforeseen event or misfortune presents itself, we must be 
able to call upon the relevant true discourses in order to protect our­
selves; they must be at our disposal within us. The Greeks have a com­
mon expression for this, prokheiron ekhein, which the Latins translate 
as habere in manu, in promptu habere-to have near at hand. 
One needs to understand that this involves something very different 
from a simple memory that would be recalled when the occasion arose. 
Plutarch, for example, calls on several metaphors to characterize the 
presence in us of these true discourses. He compares them to a medi­
cine (pharmakon) we should be supplied with for protection against 
all the vicissitudes of existence. (Marcus Aurelius compares them to the 
instrument kit that a surgeon must always have near at hand.) Plutarch 
also speaks of them as being like those friends "the surest and best of 
which are those whose useful presence in adversity lends assistance to 
us." Elsewhere he evokes them as an inner voice that insists on being 
heard when the passions stir: these discourses must be in us "like a 
master whose voice is enough to hush the growling of the dogs." In a 
passage of the De Benificiis, one finds a gradation of this sort, going 
from the instrument at one's disposal to the automatism of a discourse 
that would speak within us of its own volition. 9 Concerning advice 
given by Demetrius, Seneca says that one must "grasp it with both 
hands" (utraque manu) and never let go; but also "cling" to it, attach 
(adfigere) it to one's mind, "making it a part of oneself" (partem sui 
facere), and finally, "by daily meditation reach the point where these 
wholesome maxims occur of their own accord." 
Here we see a movement very different from the one prescribed by 
Plato when he asks the soul to turn back on itself to rediscover its true 
nature. What Plutarch and Seneca suggest instead is the absorption of 
a truth imparted by a teaching, a reading, or a piece of advice; and one

The Hermeneutic of the Subject 101 
assimilates it so thoroughly that it becomes a part of oneself, an abid­
ing, always-active, inner principle of action. In a practice such as this, 
one does not rediscover a truth hidden deep within oneself through an 
impulse of recollection; one internalizes accepted texts through a more 
and more thorough appropriation. 
3. So a series of technical questions crops up concerning the meth­
ods of this appropriation. Obviously, memory plays a large role in it­
though not in the Platonic form of the soul rediscovering its original 
nature and its homeland but, rather, in the form of progressive exer­
cises of memorization. I would merely like to indicate some of the 
salient points in this "ascesis" of truth: 
• the importance of listening. Whereas Socrates questioned people 
and tried to get them to say what they knew (without knowing that 
they knew it), for the Stoics or the Epicureans (as in the Pythago­
rean sects) the disciple must at first keep silent and listen. One 
finds in Plutarch, or in Philo of Alexandria, a whole set of rules for 
proper listening (the physical posture to take, how to direct one's 
attention, the way to retain what has been said); 
• the importance, too, of writing. In this period, there was a cultiva­
tion of what might be called "personal writing": taking notes on 
the readings, conversations, and reflections that one hears or has 
or does; keeping notebooks of one sort or another on important 
subjects (what the Greeks called hupomnemata), which must be 
reread from time to time in order to reactualize what they contain; 
• and the importance of habitual self-reflection, but in the sense of 
exercises for committing to memory the things that one has learned. 
That is the exact technical meaning of the expression anakhoresis 
eis heauton, as Marcus Aurelius uses it: to come back inside one­
self and examine the "riches" that one has deposited there; one 
must have within oneself a kind of book that one rereads from time 
to time. This corresponds to the practice of the arts of memory that 
Frances Yates has studied. 
So we have a whole set of techniques whose purpose is to link to­
gether truth and the subject. But there should be no misunderstanding: 
it is not a matter of uncovering a truth in the subject or of making the 
soul the place where truth resides, through an essential kinship or an

102 Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
original law, the truth; nor is it a matter of making the soul the object 
of a true discourse. We are still very far from what would be a herme­
neutic of the subject. The object, rather, is to arm the subject with a 
truth it did not know, one that did not reside in it; what is wanted is 
to make this learned, memorized truth, progressively put into practice, 
a quasi subject that reigns supreme in us. 
One can distinguish between those exercises carried out in a real situ­
ation, which basically constitute training in endurance and abstinence, 
and those which constitute training in thought by means of thought. 
1. The most famous of these thought exercises was the praemeditatio 
ma/orum, a meditation on future ills. It was also one of the most dis­
puted: the Epicureans rejected it, saying that it was useless to suffer 
in advance ills that had not yet come to pass, and that it was better to 
practice calling up the memory of past pleasures as a protection against 
present ills. The strict Stoics, such as Seneca or Epictetus, but also men 
like Plutarch, whose attitude toward Stoicism is very ambivalent, prac­
tice the praemeditatio ma/orum assiduously. One needs to be clear 
about what it consists in: it appears to be a somber, pessimistic antici­
pation of the future. In reality, it is something quite different. 
In the first place, it is a matter not of visualizing the future as it is 
likely to be but, rather, very systematically imagining the worst that 
might happen, even if it is not at all likely to happen. Seneca says con­
cerning a fire that h&d destroyed the town of Lyons: this example ought 
to teach us to regard the worst as always certain. 
• Further, these things should not be considered as a possibility in the 
relatively distant future, but envisioned as already present, already 
occurring. Let us imagine, for example, that we are already exiled, 
already subjected to torture. 
• Finally, if one pictures them in their actuality, this is not in order 
to experience beforehand the pain or suffering they would cause 
us but to persuade ourselves that they are not in any sense real 
troubles, and that only the opinion we have of them lets them be 
taken for true misfortunes. 
Clearly then, this exercise consists not in contemplating a possible 
future of real evils, as a way of getting used to it, but in neutraliz-

The Hermeneutic if the Subject 
ing both the future and the evil. The future, since one envisions it as 
already given in an extreme actuality; the evil, since one practices no 
longer thinking of it as such. 
2. At the other end of these exercises, one finds those carried out in 
reality. These exercises had a long tradition behind them: they were 
practices of abstinence, privation, or physical resistance. They could 
have a purificatory value or attest the "demonic" strength of the per­
son who practiced them. Yet in the cultivation of the self, these exer­
cises have another meaning: it is a matter of establishing and testing 
the individual's independence relative to the external world. 
Two examples. The first in Plutarch, On the Daemon of Socrates. 10 
One of the speakers alludes to a practice, whose origin, moreover, he 
attributes to the Pythagoreans: first, one engages in athletic activities 
that whet the appetite; then one takes his place before tables laden with 
the most savory dishes; and, after gazing upon them, one gives them 
to the servants while taking the simple and frugal nourishment of a 
poor man for oneself. 
In Letter 18, Seneca relates that the whole town is getting ready for 
the Saturnalia. He plans, for reasons of expediency, to take part in the 
festivities, at least after a fashion; but his preparation will for several 
days consist in wearing a coarse cloak, sleeping on a pallet, and nour­
ishing himself only with hard bread. This is not in order to build an 
appetite for the feasts-it is to establish both that poverty is not an evil 
and that he is fully capable of bearing it. Other passages, in Seneca 
himself or in Epicurus, evoke the usefulness of these short periods of 
voluntary trials. Musonius Rufus also recommends periods spent in 
the country where one lives like the peasants, devoting oneself to farm 
work as they do. 
3. Between the pole of the meditatio, where one practices in thought, 
and the pole of the exercitatio, where one trains in reality, there is a 
whole series of other possible practices designed for proving oneself. 
In particular, Epictetus gives examples of these in the Discourses. 
They are interesting because quite similar ones will be found again in 
Christian spirituality. They are especially concerned with what one 
might call the "control of representations." 
Epictetus insists that one must be in an attitude of constant super­
vision over the representations that may enter the mind. He expresses 
this attitude in two metaphors: that of the night watchman who does 
not let just anyone come into the town or the house; and that of the

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
moneychanger or inspector-the arguronomos-who, when presented 
with a coin, examines it, weighs it in his hand, and checks the metal 
and the effigy. The principle that one must be like a moneychanger 
with respect to one's own thoughts is found again in Evagrius Ponticus 
and in Cassian; but, in their case, it's a matter of prescribing a herme­
neutic attitude toward oneself: decipher what there may be that is lust­
ful in our seemingly innocent thoughts, recognize those coming from 
God and those coming from the Tempter. In Epictetus something else 
is at issue: one needs to determine whether or not one is affected or 
moved by the thing that is represented, and what reason one has for 
being or not being affected in that way. 
With this in view, Epictetus recommends to his students an exer­
cise of control inspired by the Sophistic challenges that were so highly 
regarded in the schools; but instead of tackling one or another of the 
questions difficult to resolve, one will address types of situations that 
demand a reaction: "Someone's son has died.-Respond: That is be­
yond our power, so it is not an evil.-Someone's father has disinherited 
him. What do you think about it?-It is beyond our power, it is not an 
evil ... -He was distressed about it.-That does concern us, it is an 
evil.-He bore it courageously.- That concerns us, it is a good." 
One can see that this control of representations is not aimed at 
uncovering, beneath appearances, a hidden truth that would be that of 
the subject itself; rather, it finds in these representations, as they pre­
sent themselves, the occasion for recalling to mind a certain number of 
true principles-concerning death, illness, suffering, political life, and 
so on; and by means of this reminder one can see if he is able to respond 
in accordance with such principles-if they have really become, accord­
ing to Plutarch's metaphor, that voice of the master which is raised as 
soon as the passions growl and is able to silence them. 
4. At the apex of all these exercises, one finds the famous melete 
thanatou-a meditation on death or, rather, a training for it. Indeed, 
it does not consist of the mere reminder, even the insistent reminder, 
that one is fated to die; it is a way of making death actual in life. Among 
all the Stoics, Seneca was especially given to this practice. It tends to 
make one live each day as if it were the last. 
To fully understand the exercise that Seneca proposes, one needs to 
recall the correspondences traditionally established between the differ­
ent time cycles: the times of the day from dawn to dusk are related 
symbolically to the seasons of the year from spring to winter; and these

The Hermeneutic if the Subject 
seasons are related in turn to the ages of life from childhood to old age. 
The death exercise as it is evoked in certain letters of Seneca consists 
in living the long span of life as if it were as short as a day, and in liv­
ing each day as if one's entire life depended on it; every morning one 
ought to be in the childhood of his life, but one ought to live the whole 
day as if the evening would be the moment of death. In Letter 12, he 
says: "Let us go to our sleep with joy and gladness; let us say; I have 
lived." It is this same type of exercise that Marcus Aurelius was think­
ing of when he wrote that "moral perfection requires that one spend 
each day as if it were the last" (7.69). He would even have it that every 
action he performed be done "as if it were the last" (2.5). 
What accounts for the particular value of the death meditation is 
not just the fact that it anticipates what is generally held to be the 
greatest misfortune; it is not just that it enables one to convince one­
self that death is not an evil; it offers the possibility of looking back, in 
advance as it were, on one's life. By thinking of oneself as being about 
to die, one can judge each action that one is performing in terms of 
its own value. Death, said Epictetus, takes hold of the laborer in the 
midst of his labor, the sailor in the midst of his sailing: "And you, in 
the midst of what occupation do you want to be taken?" And Seneca 
envisaged the moment of death as one in which an individual would be 
able to become a sort of judge of himself and assess the moral progress 
he will have made, up to his final day. In Letter 26, he wrote: "I shall 
leave it to Death to determine what progress I have made .... I am 
making ready for the day when I am to pass judgment on myself­
whether I am merely declaiming brave sentiments or whether I really 
feel them." 
NOTE S 
1 Plato, Apologie de Socrate, trans. M. Croiset (Paris: Belles Lettres, 1925), 2ge, pp. 157-66 [The 
Apology, trans. Harold North Fowler (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1990)]. 
2 Gregory of Nyssa, Traite de la virginiflf, trans. Michel Aubineau (Paris: Cerf, 1966), pp. 411-17 
and 422-31 [Treatise on Virginity, trans. V. W. Callahan, in St. Gregory if Nyssa: Ascetical Works 
(Washington, D.C.: Catholic Universities of America Press, 1966), pp. 46-48 and p. 57]. 
3 Epicurus, Lettre a Memfcee, trans. M. Coche, in Lettres et Maximes (Villiers-sur-Mer: Megare, 
1977), §122, p. 217 ["Letter to Menoeceus," trans. Cyril Bailey, in Epicurus: The Extant Rer~ins 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1926), p. 83]. 
4 Philo of Alexandria, De la Vie contemplative, trans. F. Daumas and P. Miquel, in Oeuvres (Paris: 
Cerf, 1963), §29, p. 105 ["On the Contemplative Life," trans. F. H. Colson, in Philo in Ten 
Volumes (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1985)].

106 Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
5 Plutarch, Apophthegmata laconica, 217a: Apophtegmes laconiens, trans. F. Fuhrmann, in Oeu­
vres morales (Paris: Belles Lettres, 1988), vol. 5, pp. 171-72 ["Sayings of Spartans," trans. Frank 
Cole Babbitt, in Plutarch s Moralia (New York: Putnam's, 1951), p. 297]. 
6 Plato, Alcibiade, trans. M. Croiset (Paris: Belles Lettres, 1985), p. 99 [The First Alcibiades, trans. 
B. Jowett, in The Dialogues if Plato (New York: Macmillan, 1892), p. 496]. 
7 Epictetus, Entretiens 5.25.50, trans. J. Souilhe (Paris: Belles Lettres, 1965), vol. 5, p. 92 [The 
Discourses and Manual, trans. P. E. Matheson,"bk. 5, ch. 25 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
1916), p. 85]. 
8 Seneca, Lettres a Lucilius, trans. H. Noblot (Paris: Belles Lettres, 1945-64), vol. 4, pp. 27-50 
[Ad Lucilium Epistulae Morales, trans. Richard M. Gummere (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Uni­
versity Press, 1962), vol. 2, pp. 595-449]. 
9 Seneca, De Beniftciis 2.2: Des bienfaits, trans. F. Prechac (Paris: Belles Lettres, 1927), vol. 2, p. 
77) [De Beniftciis, trans. R. M. Gummere, in Moral Essays (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Uni­
versity Press, 1964), vol. 5, §2, p. 259]. 
10 Plutarch, Le Demon de Socrate 585a, trans. J. Hani, in Oeuvres morales (Paris: Belles Lettres, 
1980), vol. 8, p. 95 [On the Sign of Socrates 585a, trans. Phillip H. De Lacy and Benedict 
Einarsan, in Plutarch s Moralia (New York: Putnam's, 1951), vol. 7].

PART TWO



ETHICS



POLEMICS, POLITICS, AND 
PROBLEMATIZATIONS: 
A N I N T E R V lEW WIT H M I C H ELF 0 U C AU L T* 
P.R. Why is it that you don't engage in polemics? 
M.F. I like discussions, and when I am asked questions, I try to 
answer them. It's true that I don't like to get involved in polemics. If I 
open a book and see that the author is accusing an adversary of "infan­
tile leftism," I shut it again right away. That's not my way of doing 
things; I don't belong to the world of people who do things that way. I 
insist on this difference as something essential: a whole morality is at 
stake, the morality that concerns the search for the truth and the rela­
tion to the other. 
In the serious play of questions and answers, in the work of recip­
rocal elucidation, the rights of each person are in some sense imma­
nent in the discussion. They depend only on the dialogue situation. 
The person asking the questions is merely exercising the right that has 
been given him: to remain unconvinced, to perceive a contradiction, 
to require more information, to emphasize different postulates, to point 
out faulty reasoning, and so on. As for the person answering the ques­
tions, he too exercises a right that does not go beyond the discussion 
itself; by the logic of his own discourse, he is tied to what he has said 
earlier, and by the acceptance of dialogue he is tied to the questioning 
of the other. Questions and answers depend on a game-a game that 
is at once pleasant and difficult-in which each of the two partners 
*This interview was conducted by Paul Rabinow in May, 1984, just before Foucault's 
death, to answer questions frequently asked by American audiences. It was translated 
by Lydia Davis. Special thanks are due Thomas Zummer for his help in preparing it.

112 Ethics.' Subjectivity and Truth 
takes pains to use only the rights given him by the other and by the 
accepted form of the dialogue. 
The polemicist, on the other hand, proceeds encased in privileges 
that he possesses in advance and will never agree to question. On prin­
ciple, he possesses rights authorizing him to wage war and making that 
struggle a just undertaking; the person he confronts is not a partner 
in the search for the truth but an adversary, an enemy who is wrong, 
who is harmful, and whose very existence constitutes a threat. For him, 
then, the game consists not of recognizing this person as a subject hav­
ing the right to speak but of abolishing him, as interlocutor, from any 
possible dialogue; and his final objective will be not to come as close 
as possible to a difficult truth but to bring about the triumph of the just 
cause he has been manifestly upholding from the beginning. The polem­
icist relies on a legitimacy that his adversary is by definition denied. 
Perh~ps, someday, a long history will have to be written of polem­
ics, polemics as a parasitic figure on discussion and an obstacle to the 
search for the truth. Very schematically, it seems to me that today we 
can recognize the presence in polemics of three models: the religiOUS 
model, the judiciary model, and the political model. As in heresiology, 
polemics sets itself the task of determining the intangible point of 
dogma, the fundamental and necessary principle that the adversary has 
neglected, ignored, or transgressed; and it denounces this negligence 
as a moral failing; at the root of the error, it finds passion, desire, inter­
est, a whole series of weaknesses and inadmissible attachments that 
establish it as culpable. As in judiciary practice, polemics allows for no 
possibility of an equal discussion: it examines a case; it isn't dealing 
with an interlocutor, it is processing a suspect; it collects the proofs of 
his guilt, designates the infraction he has committed, and pronounces 
the verdict and sentences him. In any case, what we have here is not 
on the order of a shared investigation; the polemicist tells the truth 
in the form of his judgment and by virtue of the authority he has con­
ferred on himself. But it is the political model that is the most power­
ful today. Polemics defines alliances, recruits partisans, unites interests 
or opinions, represents a party; it establishes the other as an enemy, 
an upholder of opposed interests against which one must fight until the 
moment this enemy is defeated and either surrenders or disappears. 
Of course, the reactivation, in polemics, of these political, judiciary, 
or religious practices is nothing more than theater. One gesticulates: 
anathemas, excommunications, condemnations, battles, victories, and

Polemics, Politics, and Problematizations 
defeats are no more than ways of speaking, after all. And yet, in the 
order of discourse, th~y are also ways of acting which are not without 
consequence. There are the sterilizing effects. Has anyone ever seen a 
new idea come out of a polemic? And how could it be otherwise, given 
that here the interlocutors are incited not to advance, not to take more 
and more risks in what they say, but to fall back continually on the 
rights that they claim, on their legitimacy, which they must defend, and 
on the affirmation of their innocence? There is something even more 
serious here: in this comedy, one mimics war, battles, annihilations, 
or unconditional surrenders, putting forward as much of one's killer 
instinct as possible. But it is really dangerous to make anyone believe 
that he can gain access to the truth by such paths and thus to validate, 
even if in a merely symbolic form, the real political practices that could 
be warranted by it. Let us imagine, for a moment, that a magic wand 
is waved and one of the two adversaries in a polemic is given the abil­
ity to exercise all the power he likes over the other. One doesn't even 
have to imagine it: one has only to look at what happened during the 
debates in the USSR over linguistics or genetics not long ago. Were 
these merely aberrant deviations from what was supposed to be the 
correct discussion? Not at all-they were the real consequences of a 
polemic attitude whose effects ordinarily remain suspended. 
P.R. You have been read as an idealist, as a nihilist, as a "new phi­
losopher," an anti-Marxist, a new conservative, and so on ... Where do 
you stand? 
M.F. I think I have in fact been situated in most of the squares on the 
political checkerboard, one after another and sometimes simultane­
ously: as anarchist, leftist, ostentatious or disguised Marxist, nihilist, 
explicit or secret anti-Marxist, technocrat in the service of Gaullism, new 
liberal, and so on. An American professor complained that a crypto­
Marxist like me was invited to the USA, and I was denounced by the 
press; in Eastern European countries for being an accomplice of the 
dissidents. None of these descriptions is important by itself; taken 
together, on the other hand, they mean something. And I must admit 
that I rather like what they mean. 
It's true that I prefer not to identify myself, and that I'm amused by 
the diversity of the ways I've been judged and classified. Something 
tells me that by now a more or less approximate place should have been 
found for me, after so many efforts in such various directions; and since 
I obviously can't suspect the competence of the people who are get-

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
ting muddled up in their divergent judgments, since it isn't possible 
to challenge their inattention or their prejudices, I have to be convinced 
that their inability to situate me has something to do with me. 
And no doubt fundamentally it concerns my way of approaching 
political questions. It is true that my attitude isn't a result of the form 
of critique that claims to be a methodical examination in order to reject 
all possible solutions except for the one valid one. It is more on the 
order of "problematization"-which is to say, the development of a 
domain of acts, practices, and thoughts that seem to me to pose prob­
lems for politics. For example, I don't think that in regard to madness 
and mental illness there is any "politics" that can contain the just and 
definitive solution. But I think that in madness, in derangement, in 
behavior problems, there are reasons for questioning politics; and poli­
tics must answer these questions, but it never answers them completely. 
The same is true for crime and punishment: naturally, it would be 
wrong to imagine that politics has nothing to do with the prevention 
and punishment of crime, and therefore nothing to do with a certain 
number of elements that modify its form, its meaning, its frequency; 
but it would be just as wrong to think that there is a political formula 
likely to resolve the question of crime and put an end to it. The same 
is true of sexuality: it doesn't exist apart from a relationship to politi­
cal structures, requirements, laws, and regulations that have a primary 
importance for it; and yet one can't expect politics to provide the forms 
in which sexuality would cease to be a problem. 
It is a question, then, of thinking about the relations of these differ­
ent experiences to politics, which doesn't mean that one will seek in 
politics the main constituent of these experiences or the solution that 
will definitively settle their fate. The problems that experiences like 
these pose to politics have to be elaborated. But it is also necessary to 
determine what "posing a problem" to politics really means. Richard 
Rorty points out that in these analyses I do not appeal to any "we"-to 
any of those "wes" whose consensus, whose values, whose traditions 
constitute the framework for a thought and define the conditions in 
which it can be validated. But the problem is, precisely, to decide if it 
is actually suitable to place oneself within a "we" in order to assert the 
principles one recognizes and the values one accepts; or if it is not, 
rather, necessary to make the future formation of a "we" possible by 
elaborating the question. Because it seems to me that the "we" must 
not be previous to the question; it can only be the result-and the nec-

Polemics, Politics, and Problematizations 
essarily temporary result-of the question as it is posed in the new 
terms in which one formulates it. For example, I'm not sure that at the 
time when I wrote the history of madness, there was a preexisting and 
receptive "we" to which I would only have had to refer in order to write 
my book, and of which this book would have been the spontaneous 
expression. Laing, Cooper, Basaglia, and I had no community, nor any 
relationship; but the problem posed itself to those who had read us, 
as it also posed itself to some of us, of seeing if it were possible to estab­
lish a "we" on the basis of the work that had been done, a "we" that 
would also be likely to form a community of action. 
I have never tried to analyze anything whatsoever from the point of 
view of politics, but always to ask politics what it had to say about the 
problems with which it was confronted. I question it about the posi­
tions it takes and the reasons it gives for this; I don't ask it to deter­
mine the theory of what I do. I am neither an adversary nor a partisan 
of Marxism; I question it about what it has to say about experiences 
that ask questions of it. 
As for the events of May 1968, it seems to me they depend on another 
problematic. I wasn't in France at that time; I only returned several 
months later. And it seemed to me one could recognize completely con­
tradictory elements in it: on the one hand, an effort, which was very 
widely asserted, to ask politics a whole series of questions that were 
not traditionally a part of its statutory domain (questions about women, 
about relations between the sexes, about medicine, about mental ill­
ness, about the environment, about minorities, about delinquency); 
and, on the other hand, a desire to rewrite all these problems in the 
vocabulary of a theory that was derived more or less directly from Marx­
ism. But the process that was evident at that time led not to taking over 
the problems posed by the Marxist doctrine but, on the contrary, to a 
more and more manifest powerlessness on the part of Marxism to con­
front these problems. So that one found oneself faced with interroga­
tions that were addressed to politics but had not themselves sprung 
from a political doctrine. From this point of view, such a liberation of 
the act of questioning seemed to me to have played a positive role: 
now there was a plurality of questions posed to politics rather than 
the reinscription of the act of questioning in the framework of a politi­
cal doctrine. 
P.R. Would you say that your work centers on the relations among 
ethics, politics, and the genealogy of truth?

116 Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
M.F. No doubt one could say that in some sense I try to analyze the 
relations among science, politics, and ethics; but I don't think that 
would be an entirely accurate representation of the work I set out to 
do. I don't want to remain at that level; rather, I am trying to see how 
these processes may have interfered with one another in the formation 
of a scientific domain, a political structure, a moral practice. Let's take 
psychiatry as an example: no doubt, one can analyze it today in its epis­
temological structure-even if that is still rather loose; one can also 
analyze it within the framework of the political institutions in which it 
operates; one can also study it in its ethical implications, as regards the 
person who is the object of the psychiatry as much as the psychiatrist 
himself. But my goal hasn't been to do this; rather, I have tried to see 
how the formation of psychiatry as a science, the limitation of its field, 
and the definition of its object implicated a political structure and a 
moral practice: in the twofold sense that they were presupposed by the 
progressive organization of psychiatry as a science, and that they were 
also changed by this development. Psychiatry as we know it couldn't 
have existed without a whole interplay of political structures and with­
out a set of ethical attitudes; but inversely, the establishment of mad­
ness as a domain of knowledge [savoir] changed the political practices 
and the ethical attitudes that concerned it. It was a matter of determin­
ing the role of politics and ethics in the establishment of madness as a 
particular domain of scientific knowledge [connaissance], and also of 
analyzing the effects of the latter on political and ethical practices. 
The same is true in relation to delinquency. It was a question of 
seeing which political strategy had, by giving its status to criminality, 
been able to appeal to certain forms of knowledge [savoir] and certain 
moral attitudes; it was also a question of seeing how these modalities 
of knowledge [connaissance] and these forms of morality could have 
been reflected in, and changed by, these disciplinary techniques. In 
the case of sexuality it was the development of a moral attitude that 
I wanted to isolate; but I tried to reconstruct it through the play it 
engaged in with political structures (essentially in the relation between 
self-control [maitrise de SOlJ and domination of others) and with the 
modalities of knowledge [connaissance] (self-knowledge and knowl­
edge of different areas of activity). 
So that in these three areas-madness, delinquency, and sexuality­
I emphasized a particular aspect each time: the establishment of a cer­
tain objectivity, the development of a politics and a government of the

Polemics, Politics, and Problematizations 
self, and the elaboration of an ethics and a practice in regard to one­
self. But each time I also tried to point out the place occupied here by 
the other two components necessary for constituting a field of experi­
ence. It is basically a matter of different examples in which the three 
fundamental elements of any experience are implicated: a game of 
truth, relations of power, and forms of relation to oneself and to oth­
ers. And if each of these examples emphasizes, in a certain way, one 
of these three aspects-since the experience of madness was recently 
organized as primarily a field of knowledge [savoir], that of crime as 
an area of political intervention, while that of sexuality was defined as 
an ethical position-each time I have tried to show how the two other 
elements were present, what roles they played, and how each one was 
affected by the transformations in the other two. 
P.R. You have recently been talking about a "history of problemat­
ics." What is a history of problematics? 
M.F. For a long time, I have been trying to see if it would be pos­
sible to describe the history of thought as distinct both from the his­
tory of ideas (by which I mean the analysis of systems of representation) 
and from the history of mentalities (by which I mean the analysis of 
attitudes and types of action [schemas de comportement]). It seemed 
to me there was one element that was capable of describing the history 
of thought-this was what one could call the element of problems or, 
more exactly, problematizations. What distinguishes thought is that it 
is something quite different from the set of representations that under­
lies a certain behavior; it is also something quite different from the 
domain of attitudes that can determine this behavior. Thought is not 
what inhabits a certain conduct and gives it its meaning; rather, it is 
what allows one to step back from this way of acting or reacting, to 
present it to oneself as an object of thought and to question it as to its 
meaning, its conditions, and its goals. Thought is freedom in relation 
to what one does, the motion by which one detaches oneself from it, 
establishes it as an object, and reflects on it as a problem. 
To say that the study of thought is the analysis of a freedom does 
not mean one is dealing with a formal system that has reference only 
to itself. Actually, for a domain of action, a behavior, to enter the field 
of thought, it is necessary for a certain number of factors to have made 
it uncertain, to have made it lose its familiarity, or to have provoked a 
certain number of difficulties around it. These elements result from 
social, economic, or political processes. But here their only role is that

118 Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
of instigation. They can exist and perform their action for a very long 
time, before there is effective problematization by thought. And when 
thought intervenes, it doesn't assume a unique form that is the direct 
result or the necessary expression of these difficulties; it is an origi­
nal or specific response-often taking many forms, sometimes even 
contradictory in its different aspects-to these difficulties, which are 
defined for it by a situation or a context, and which hold true as a pos­
sible question. 
To one single set of difficulties, several responses can be made. And 
most of the time different responses actually are proposed. But what 
must be understood is what makes them simultaneously possible: it is 
the point in which their simultaneity is rooted; it is the soil that can 
nourish them all in their diversity and sometimes in spite of their con­
tradictions. To the different difficulties encountered by the practice 
regarding mental illness in the eighteenth century, diverse solutions 
were proposed: Tuke's and Pinel's are examples. In the same way, a 
whole group of solutions was proposed for the difficulties encountered 
in the second half of the eighteenth century by penal practice. Or again, 
to take a very remote example, the diverse schools of philosophy of the 
Hellenistic period proposed different solutions to the difficulties of tra­
ditional sexual ethics. 
But the work of a history of thought would be to rediscover at the 
root of these diverse solutions the general form of problematization that 
has made them possible-even in their very opposition; or what has 
made possible the transformations of the difficulties and obstacles of 
a practice into a general problem for which one proposes diverse prac­
tical solutions. It is problematization that responds to these difficulties, 
but by doing something quite other than expressing them or manifest­
ing them: in connection with them, it develops the conditions in which 
possible responses can be given; it defines the elements that will con­
stitute what the different solutions attempt to respond to. This devel­
opment of a given into a question, this transformation of a group of 
obstacles and difficulties into problems to which the diverse solutions 
will attempt to produce a response, this is what constitutes the point 
of problematization and the specific work of thought. 
It is clear how far one is from an analysis in terms of deconstruction 
(any confusion between these two methods would be unwise). Rather, 
it is a question of a movement of critical analysis in which one tries to 
see how the different solutions to a problem have been constructed; but

Polemics, Politics, and Problematizations llg 
also how these different solutions result from a specific form of prob­
lematization. And it then appears that any new solution which might 
be added to the others would arise from current problematization, 
modifying only several of the postulates or principles on which one 
bases the responses that one gives. The work of philosophical and his­
torical reflection is put back into the field of the work of thought only 
on condition that one dearly grasps problematization not as an arrange­
ment of representations but as a work of thought.



MICHEL FOUCAULT: 
AN INTERVIEW BY STEPHEN RIGGINS* 
S.R. One of the many things that a reader can unexpectedly learn from 
your work is to appreciate silence. You write about the freedom it 
makes possible, its multiple causes and meanings. For instance, you 
say in your last book that there is not one but many silences. Would 
it be correct to infer that there is a strongly autobiographical element 
in this? 
M.F. I think that any child who has been educated in a Catholic 
milieu just before or during the Second World War had the experience 
that there were many different ways of speaking as well as many forms 
of silence. There were some kinds of silence which implied very sharp 
hostility and others which meant deep friendship, emotional admira­
tion, even love. I remember very well that when I met the filmmaker 
Daniel Schmidt who visited me, I don't know for what purpose, we 
discovered after a few minutes that we really had nothing to say to each 
other. So we stayed together from about three o'clock in the afternoon 
to midnight. We drank, we smoked hash, we had dinner. And I don't 
think we spoke more than twenty minutes during those ten hours. 
From that moment a rather long friendship started. It was for me the 
first time that a friendship originated in strictly silent behavior. 
Maybe another feature of this appreciation of silence is related to the 
obligation of speaking. I lived as a child in a petit bourgeois, provin­
cial milieu in France and the obligation of speaking, of making con-
*Michel Foucault was interviewed for Ethos in English by Stephen Riggins on June 22, 
1982, in Toronto, where he was teaching a course at the third International Summer 
Institute for Semiotic and Structural Studies.

122 Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
versation with visitors, was for me something both very strange and 
very boring. I often wondered why people had to speak. Silence may 
be a much more interesting way of having a relationship with people. 
S.R. There is in North American Indian culture a much greater 
appreciation of silence than in English-speaking societies and I sup­
pose in French-speaking societies as well. 
M.F. Yes, you see, I think silence is one of those things that has 
unfortunately been dropped from our culture. We don't have a culture 
of silence; we don't have a culture of suicide either. The Japanese do, 
I think. Young Romans or young Greeks were taught to keep silent in 
very different ways according to the people with whom they were inter­
acting. Silence was then a specific form of experiencing a relationship 
with others. This is something that I believe is really worthwhile cul­
tivating. I'm in favor of developing silence as a cultural ethos. 
S.R. You seem to have a fascination with other cultures, and not 
only from the past; for the first ten years of your career you lived in 
Sweden, West Germany, and Poland. This would seem a very atypical 
career for a French academic. Can you explain why you left France and 
why, when you returned in about 1961, from what I have heard, you 
would have preferred to live in Japan? 
M.F. There is a snobbism about antichauvinism in France now. I 
hope what I say is not associated with those kinds of people. Maybe if 
I were an American or a Canadian, I would suffer from some features 
of North American culture. Anyway, I have suffered and I still suffer 
from a lot of things in French social and cultural life. That was the rea­
son why I left France in 1955. Incidentally, in 1966 and 1968 I also spent 
two years in Tunisia for purely personal reasons. 
S.R. Could you give some examples of the aspects of French society 
that you suffered from? 
M.F. Well, I think that, at the moment when I left France, freedom 
for personal life was very sharply restricted there. At this time, Sweden 
was supposed to be a much freer country. And there I had the experi­
ence that a certain kind of freedom may have, not exactly the same 
effects, but as many restrictive effects as a directly restrictive society. 
That was an important experience for me. Then I had the opportunity 
of spending one year in Poland where, of course, the restrictions and 
oppressive power of the Communist Party are really something quite 
different. In a rather short period of time I had the experience of an 
old I raditional society, as France was in the late forties and early fif-

An Interview by Stephen Riggins 123 
ties, and the new free society that was Sweden. 1 won't say 1 had the 
total experience of all the political possibilities, but 1 had a sample of 
what the possibilities of Western societies were at that moment. That 
was a good experience. 
S.R. Hundreds of Americans went to Paris in the twenties and thir­
ties for exactly the same reasons you left in the fifties. 
M.F. Yes, but now 1 don't think they come to Paris any longer for 
freedom. They come to have a taste of an old traditional culture. They 
come to France as painters went to Italy in the seventeenth century, to 
see a dying civilization. Anyway, you see, we very often have the expe­
rience of much more freedom in foreign countries than in our own. As 
foreigners we can ignore all those implicit obligations which are not 
in the law but in the general way of behaving. Secondly, merely chang­
ing your obligations is felt or experienced as a kind of freedom. 
S.R. If you don't mind, let us return for a while to your early years 
in Paris. 1 understand that you worked as a psychologist at the Hopital 
Ste. Anne in Paris. 
M.F. Yes, 1 worked there a little more than two years, 1 believe. 
S.R. And you have remarked that you identified more with the 
patients than the staff. Surely that's a very atypical experience for any­
one who is a psychologist or psychiatrist. Why did you feel, partly from 
that experience, the necessity of radically questioning psychiatry when 
so many other people were content to try to refine the concepts that 
were already prevalent? 
M.F. Actually, 1 was not officially appointed. 1 was studying psychol­
ogy in the Hopital Ste. Anne. It was the early fifties. There was no clear 
professional status for psychologists in a mental hospital. So, as a stu­
dent in psychology (I studied first philosophy and then psychology), 1 
had a very strange status there. The chif de seroice was very kind to 
me and let me do anything 1 wanted. But nobody worried about what 
I should be doing; I was free to do anything. I was actually in a position 
between the staff and the patients, and it wasn't my merit, it wasn't 
because I had a special attitude-it was the consequence of this ambi­
guity in my status which forced me to maintain a distance from the 
staff. I am sure it was not my personal merit, because I felt all that at 
the time as a kind of malaise. It was only a few years later when I 
started writing a book on the history of psychiatry that this malaise, 
this personal experience, took the form of a historical criticism or a 
structural analysis.

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
S.R. Was there anything unusual about the H6pital Ste. Anne? 
Would it have given an employee a particularly negative impression 
of psychiatry? 
M.F. Oh, no. It was as typical a large hospital as you could imagine, 
and I must say it was better than most of the large hospitals in provin­
cial towns that I visited afterward. It was one of the best in Paris. No, 
it was not terrible. That was precisely the thing that was important. 
Maybe if I had been doing this kind of work in a small provincial hos­
pital I would have believed its failures were the result of its location 
or its particular inadequacies. 
S.R. As you have just mentioned the French provinces, which is where 
you were born, in a sort of derogatory way, do you, nevertheless, have 
fond memories of growing up in Poitiers in the thirties and forties? 
M.F. Oh, yes. My memories are rather, one could not exactly say 
strange, but what strikes me now when I try to recall those impressions 
is that nearly all the great emotional memories I have are related to 
the political situation. I remember very well that I experienced one of 
my first great frights when Chancellor Dollfuss was assassinated by the 
Nazis in, I think, 1934. It is something very far from us now. Very few 
people remember the murder of Dollfuss. I remember very well that I 
was really scared by that. I think it was my first strong fright about 
death. I also remember refugees from Spain arriving in Poitiers. I re­
member fighting in school with my classmates about the Ethiopian 
War. I think that boys and girls of this generation had their childhood 
formed by these great historical events. The menace of war was our 
background, our framework of existence. Then the war arrived. Much 
more than the activities of family life, it was these events concerning 
the world which are the substance of our memory. I say "our" because 
I am nearly sure that most boys and girls in France at this moment had 
the same experience. Our private life was really threatened. Maybe 
that is the reason why I am fascinated by history and the relationship 
between personal experience and those events of which we are a part. 
I think that is the nucleus of my theoretical desires. [Laughs] 
S.R. You remain fascinated by the period even though you don't 
write about it. 
M.F. Yes, sure. 
S.R. What was the origin of your decision to become a philosopher? 
M.F. You see, I don't think I ever had the project of becoming a phi-
losopher. I had not known what to do with my life. And I think that is

An Interview by Stephen Riggins 125 
also something rather typical for people of my generation. We did not 
know when I was ten or eleven years old whether we would become 
German or remain French. We did not know whether we would die 
or not in the bombing and so on. When I was sixteen or seventeen, I 
knew only one thing: school life was an environment protected from 
exterior menaces, from politics. And I have always been fascinated by 
living protected in a scholarly environment, in an intellectual milieu. 
Knowledge is for me that which must function as a protection of indi­
vidual existence and as a comprehension of the exterior world. I think 
that's it. Knowledge as a means of surviving by understanding. 
S.R. Could you tell me a bit about your studies in Paris? Is there any­
one who had a special influence upon the work that you do today or 
any professors you are grateful to for personal reasons? 
M.F. No, I was a pupil of Althusser, and at that time the main phil­
osophical currents in France were Marxism, Hegelianism, and phenom­
enology. I must say, I have studied these but what gave me for the first 
time the desire of doing personal work was reading Nietzsche. 
S.R. An audience that is non-French is likely to have a very poor 
understanding of the aftermath of the May rebellion of '68, and you 
have sometimes said that it resulted in people being more responsive 
to your work. Can you explain why? 
M.F. I think that before '68, at least in France, you had to be as a 
philosopher a Marxist, or a phenomenologist or a structuralist, and I 
adhered to none of these dogmas. The second point is that at this time 
in France studying psychiatry or the history of medicine had no real 
status in the political field. Nobody was interested in that. The first 
thing that happened after '68 was that Marxism as a dogmatic frame­
work declined and new political, new cultural interests concerning per­
sonal life appeared. That's why I think my work had nearly no echo, 
with the exception of a very small circle, before '68. 
S.R. Some of the works you refer to in the first volume of The His­
tory of Sexuality, such as the Victorian book My Secret Life, are filled 
with sexual fantasies. It is often impossible to distinguish between fact 
and fantasy. Would there be a value in your focusing explicitly upon 
sexual fantasies and creating an archaeology of them rather than one 
of sexuality? 
M.F. [Laughs] No, I don't try to write an archaeology of sexual fan­
tasies. I try to make an archaeology of discourse about sexuality, which 
is really the relationship between what we do, what we are obliged to

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
do, what we are allowed to do, what we are forbidden to do in the field 
of sexuality, and what we are allowed, forbidden, or obliged to say 
about our sexual behavior. That's the point. It's not a problem of fan­
tasy; it's a problem of verbalization. 
S.R. Could you explain how you arrived at the idea that the sex­
ual repression that characterized eighteenth- and nineteenth-century 
Europe and North America, and which seemed so well documented 
historically, was in fact ambiguous, and that there were beneath it 
forces working in the opposite direction? 
M.F. Indeed, it is not a question of denying the existence of repres­
sion. It's one of showing that repression is always a part of a much 
more complex political strategy regarding sexuality. Things are not 
merely repressed. There is about sexuality a lot of defective regula­
tions in which the negative effects of inhibition are counterbalanced by 
the positive effects of stimulation. The way in which sexuality in the 
nineteenth century was both repressed but also put in light, underlined, 
analyzed through techniques like psychology and psychiatry shows very 
well that it was not simply a question of repression. It was much more 
a change in the economics of sexual behavior in our society. 
S.R. In your opinion, what are some of the most striking examples 
that support your hypothesis? 
M.F. One of them is children's masturbation. Another is hysteria 
and all the fuss about hysterical women. These two examples show, of 
course, repression, prohibition, interdiction, and so on; but the fact 
that the sexuality of children became a real problem for the parents, 
an issue, a source of anxiety, had a lot of effects upon the children and 
upon the parents. To take care of the sexuality of their children was 
not only a question of morality for the parents but also a question of 
pleasure. 
S.R. A pleasure in what sense? 
M.F. Sexual excitement and sexual satisfaction. 
S.F. For the parents themselves? 
M.F. Yes. Call it rape, if you like. There are texts that are very close 
to a systemization of rape. Rape by the parents of the sexual activity of 
their children. To intervene in this personal, secret activity, which mas­
turbation was, does not represent something neutral for the parents. 
It is not only a matter of power, or authority, or ethics; it's also a plea­
sure. Don't you agree with that? Yes, there is enjoyment in interven­
ing. The fact that masturbation was so strictly forbidden for children

An Interoiew by Stephen Riggins 127 
was naturally the cause of anxiety. It was also a reason for the intensi­
fication of this activity, for mutual masturbation and for the pleasure 
of secret communication between children about this theme. All this 
has given a certain shape to family life, to the relationship between chil­
dren and parents, and to the relations between children. All that has, 
as a result, [brought about] not only repression but an intensification 
both of anxieties and of pleasures. I don't want to say that the pleasure 
of the parents was the same as that of the children, or that there was 
no repression. I tried to find the roots of this absurd prohibition. 
One of the reasons why this stupid interdiction of masturbation was 
maintained for such a long time was because of this pleasure and anx­
iety and all the emotional network around it. Everyone knows. very well 
that it's impossible to prevent a child from masturbating. There is no 
scientific evidence that it harms anybody. [Laughs] One can be sure 
that it is at least the only pleasure that really harms nobody. Why has 
it been forbidden for such a long time then? To the best of my knowl­
edge, you cannot find more than two or three references in all the 
Greco-Latin literature about masturbation. It was not relevant. It was 
supposed to be, in Greek and Latin civilization, an activity either for 
slaves or for satyrs. [Laughs] It was not relevant to speak about it for 
free citizens. 
S.R. We live at a point in time when there is great uncertainty about 
the future. One sees apocalyptic visions of the future reflected widely 
in popular culture. Louis Malle's My Dinner with Andre, for example. 
Isn't it typical that, in such a climate, sex and reproduction come to 
be a preoccupation and thus writing a history of sexuality would be 
symptomatic of the time? 
M.F. No, I don't think I would agree with that. First, the preoccu­
pation with the relationship between sexuality and reproduction seems 
to have been stronger, for instance, in the Greek and Roman societies 
and in the bourgeois society of the eighteenth and nineteenth centu­
ries. No. What strikes me is the fact that now sexuality seems to be a 
question without direct relation with reproduction. It is your sexuality 
as your personal behavior which is the problem. 
Take homosexuality, for instance. I think that one of the reasons 
why homosexual behavior was not an important issue in the eighteenth 
century was due to the view that if a man had children, what he did 
besides that had little importance. During the nineteenth century, you 
begin to see that sexual behavior was important for a definition of the

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
individual self. And that is something new. It is very interesting to see 
that, before the nineteenth century, forbidden behavior-even if it 
was very severely judged-was always considered to be an excess, a 
"libertinage," as something too much. Homosexual behavior was only 
considered to be a kind of excess of natural behavior, an instinct that 
is difficult to keep within certain limits. From the nineteenth century 
on, you see that behavior like homosexuality came to be considered 
an abnormality. When I say that it was libertinage, I don't say that it 
was tolerated. 
I think that the idea of characterizing individuals through their sex­
ual behavior or desire is not to be found, or very rarely, before the nine­
teenth century. "Tell me your desires, I'll tell you who you are." This 
question is typical of the nineteenth century. 
S.R. It would not seem any longer that sex could be called the secret 
of life. Has anything replaced it in this respect? 
M.F. Of course it is not the secret of life now, since people can show 
at least certain general forms of their sexual preferences without being 
plagued or condemned. But I think that people still consider, and are 
invited to consider, that sexual desire is able to reveal what is their deep 
identity. Sexuality is not the secret, but it is still a symptom, a mani­
festation of what is the most secret in our individuality. 
S.R. The next question I would like to ask may at first seem odd, 
and if it does I'll explain why I thought it was worth asking. Does 
beauty have special meaning for you? 
M.F. I think it does for everyone. [Laughs] I am nearsighted but not 
blind to the point that it has no meaning for me. Why do you ask? I'm 
afraid I have given you proof that I am not insensitive to beauty. 
S.R. One of the things about you that is very impressive is the sort 
of monachal austerity in which you live. Your apartment in Paris is 
almost completely white; you also avoid all the objets d'art that decor­
ate so many French homes. While in Toronto during the past month 
you have on several occasions worn clothes as simple as white pants, a 
white T-shirt and a black leather jacket. You suggested that perhaps the 
reason you like the color white so much is that in Poitiers during the 
thirties and forties it was impossible for the exterior of houses to be 
genuinely white. You are staying here in a house whose white walls are 
decorated with black cut-out sculptures, and you remarked that you 
especially appreciated the straightforwardness and strength of pure 
black and white. There is also a noteworthy phrase in The History 0/

An Interview by Stephen Riggins 129 
Sexuality: "that austere monarchy of sex." You do not fit the image of 
the sophisticated Frenchman who makes an art out of living well. Also, 
you are the only French person I know who has told me he prefers 
American food. 
M.F. Yes. Sure. [Laughs] A good club sandwich with a Coke. That's 
my pleasure. It's true. With ice cream. That's true. 
Actually, I think I have real difficulty in experiencing pleasure. I 
think that pleasure is a very difficult behavior. It's not as simple as that 
to enjoy one's self. [Laughs] And I must say that's my dream. I would 
like and I hope I'll die of an overdose of pleasure of any kind. [Laughs] 
Because I think it's really difficult, and I always have the feeling that I 
do not feel the pleasure, the complete total pleasure, and, for me, it's 
related to death. 
S.R. Why would you say that? 
M.F. Because I think that the kind of pleasure I would consider as 
the real pleasure would be so deep, so intense, so overwhelming that I 
couldn't survive it. I would die. I'll give you a clearer and simpler 
example. Once I was struck by a car in the street. I was walking. And 
for maybe two seconds I had the impression that I was dying and it 
was really a very, very intense pleasure. The weather was wonderful. 
It was seven o'clock during the summer. The sun was descending. The 
sky was very wonderful and blue and so on. It was, it still is now, one 
of my best memories. [Laughs] 
There is also the fact that some drugs are really important for me 
because they are the mediation to those incredibly intense joys that 
I am looking for, and that I am not able to experience, to afford by 
myself. It's true that a glass of wine, of good wine, old and so on, may 
be enjoyable, but it's not for me. A pleasure must be something incred­
ibly intense. But I think I am not the only one like that. 
I'm not able to give myself and others those middle-range pleasures 
that make up everyday life. Such pleasures are nothing for me, and I 
am not able to organize my life in order to make place for them. That's 
the reason why I'm not a social being, why I'm not really a cultural 
being, why I'm so boring in my everyday life. [Laughs] It's a bore to 
live with me. 
S.R. A frequently quoted remark of Romain Rolland is that the French 
Romantic writers were" 'visuels' for whom music was only a noise." 
Despite the remark being an obvious exaggeration, most recent schol­
arship tends to support it. Many references to paintings occur in some

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
of your books, but few to music. Are you also representative of this 
characteristic of French culture that Rolland called attention to? 
M.F. Yes, sure. Of course French culture gives no place to music, or 
nearly no place. But it's a fact that in my personal life music played a 
great role. The first friend I had when I was twenty was a musician. 
Then afterward, I had another friend who was a composer and who is 
dead now. Through him I know all the generation of Boulez. It has 
been a very important experience for me. First, because I had contact 
with the kind of art which was, for me, really enigmatic. I was not com­
petent at all in this domain; I'm still not. But I felt beauty in something 
that was quite enigmatic for me. There are some pieces by Bach and 
Webern I enjoy, but what is, for me, real beauty is a "phrase musicale, 
un morceau de musique," that I cannot understand, something I can­
not say anything about. I have the opinion-maybe it's quite arrogant 
or presumptuous-that I could say something about any of the most 
wonderful paintings in the world. For this reason they are not abso­
lutely beautiful. Anyway, I have written something about Boulez. What 
has been for me the influence of living with a musician for several 
months. Why it was important even in my intellectual life. 
S.R. If I understand correctly, artists and writers responded to your 
work more positively at first than philosophers, sociologists, or other 
academics. 
M.F. Yes, that's right. 
S.R. Is there a special kinship between your kind of philosophy and 
the arts in general? 
M.F. Well, I think I am not in a position to answer. You see, I hate 
to say it, but it's true that I am not a really good academic. For me, 
intellectual work is related to what you could call "aestheticism," mean­
ing transforming yourself. I believe my problem is this strange relation­
ship between knowledge, scholarship, theory, and real history. I know 
very well, and I think I knew it from the moment when I was a child, 
that knowledge can do nothing for transforming the world. Maybe I am 
wrong. And I am sure I am wrong from a theoretical point of view, for 
I know very well that knowledge has transformed the world. 
But if I refer to my own personal experience, I have the feeling knowl­
edge can't do anything for us, and that political power may destroy us. 
All the knowledge in the world can't do anything against that. All this 
is related not to what I think theoretically (I know that's wrong), but I 
speak from my personal experience. I know that knowledge can trans-

An Interview by Stephen Riggins 
form us, that truth is not only a way of deciphering the world (and 
maybe what we call truth doesn't decipher anything), but that if I know 
the truth I will be changed. And maybe I will be saved. Or maybe I'll 
die, but I think that is the same anyway for me. [Laughs] 
You see, that's why I really work like a dog, and I worked like a dog 
all my life. I am not interested in the academic status of what I am 
doing because my problem is my own transformation. That's the rea­
son also why, when people say, "Well, you thought this a few years ago 
and now you say something else," my answer is ... [Laughs] "Well, do 
you think I have worked like that all those years to say the same thing 
and not to be changed?" This transformation of one's self by one's 
own knowledge is, I think, something rather close to the aesthetic 
experience. Why should a painter work if he is not transformed by his 
own painting? 
S. R. Beyond the historical dimension, is there an ethical concern 
implied in The History if Sexuality? Are you not in some ways telling 
us how to act? 
M.F. No. If you mean by ethics a code that would tell us how to act, 
then of course The History if Sexuality is not an ethics. But if by eth­
ics you mean the relationship you have to yourself when you act, then 
I would say that it intends to be an ethics, or at least to show what could 
be an ethics of sexual behavior. It would be one that would not be domi­
nated by the problem of the deep truth of the reality of our sex life. 
The relationship that I think we need to have with ourselves when we 
have sex is an ethics of pleasure, of intensification of pleasure. 
S.R. Many people look at you as someone who is able to tell them 
the deep truth about the world and about themselves. How do you 
experience this responsibility? As an intellectual, do you feel respons­
ible toward this function of seer, of shaper of mentalities? 
M.F. I am sure I am not able to provide these people with what they 
expect. [Laughs] I never behave like a prophet-my books don't tell 
people what to do. And they often reproach me for not doing so (and 
maybe they are right), and at the same time they reproach me for 
behaving like a prophet. I have written a book about the history of psy­
chiatry from the seventeenth century to the very beginning of the nine­
teenth. 1 In this book, I said nearly nothing about the contemporary sit­
uation, but people still have read it as an antipsychiatry position. Once, 
I was invited to Montreal to attend a symposium about psychiatry. At 
first, I refused to go there, since I am not a psychiatrist, even if I have

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
some experience-a very short experience as I told you earlier. But they 
assured me that they were inviting me only as a historian of psychia­
try to give an introductory speech. Since 1 like Quebec, 1 went. And 1 
was really trapped because 1 was presented by the president as the 
representative in France of antipsychiatry. Of course, there were nice 
people there who had never read a line of what I had written and they 
were convinced that 1 was an antipsychiatrist. 
1 have done nothing other than write the history of psychiatry to the 
beginning of the nineteenth century. Why should so many people, in­
cluding psychiatrists, believe that 1 am an anti psychiatrist? It's because 
they are not able to accept the real history of their institutions, which is, 
of course, a sign of psychiatry being a pseudoscience. A real science is 
able to accept even the shameful, dirty stories of its beginning. [Laughs] 
So you see, there really is a call for prophetism. I think we have to 
get rid of that. People have to build their own ethics, taking as a point 
of departure the historical analysis, sociological analysis, and so on that 
one can provide for them. 1 don't think that people who try to deci­
pher the truth should have to provide ethical principles or practical 
advice at the same moment, in the same book and the same analysis. 
All this prescriptive network has to be elaborated and transformed by 
people themselves. 
S.R. For a philosopher to have made the pages of Time magazine, 
as you did in November 1981, is an indication of a certain kind of pop­
ular status. How do you feel about that? 
M.F. When newsmen ask me for information about my work, I con­
sider that 1 have to accept. You see, we are paid by society, by the tax­
payers, to work. [Laughs] And really 1 think that most of us try to do 
our work the best we can. I think it is quite normal that this work, as 
far as it is possible, is presented and made accessible to everybody. Nat­
urally, a part of our work cannot be accessible to anybody because it is 
too difficult. The institution 1 belong to in France (I don't belong to the 
university but the College de France) obliges its members to make pub­
lic lectures, open to anyone who wants to attend, in which we have to 
explain our work. We are at once researchers and people who have to 
explain publicly our research. 1 think there is in this very old institu­
tion-it dates from the sixteenth century-something very interesting. 
The deep meaning is, 1 believe, very important. When a newsman 
comes and asks for information about my work, 1 try to provide it in 
the clearest way 1 can.

An Interoiew by Stephen Riggins 133 
Anyway, my personal life is not at all interesting. If somebody thinks 
that my work cannot be understood without reference to such and such 
a part of my life, I accept to consider the question. [Laughs] I am ready 
to answer if I agree. As far as my personal life is uninteresting, it is 
not worthwhile making a secret of it. [Laughs] By the same token, it 
may not be worthwhile publicizing it. 
NOTE 
1 Madness and Civilization (London: Tavistock, 1967).



FRIENDSHIP AS A WAY OF LIFE* 
Q. You're in your fifties. You're a reader of Le Gai Pied, which has been 
in existence now for two years. Is the kind of discourse you find there 
something positive for you? 
M.F. That the magazine exists is the positive and important thing. 
In answer to your question, I could say that I don't have to read it to 
voice the question of my age. What I could ask of your magazine is that 
I do not, in reading it, have to pose the question of my age. Now, read­
ing it. .. 
Q. Perhaps the problem is the age group of those who contribute to 
it and read it; the majority are between twenty-five and thirty-five. 
M.F. Of course. The more it is written by young people the more it 
concerns young people. But the problem is not to make room for one 
age group alongside another but to find out what can be done in rela­
tion to the quasi identification between homosexuality and the love 
among young people. 
Another thing to distrust is the tendency to relate the question of 
homosexuality to the problem of "Who am I?" and "What is the secret 
of my desire?" Perhaps it would be better to ask oneself, "What rela­
tions, through homosexuality, can be established, invented, multiplied, 
and modulated?" The problem is not to discover in oneself the truth 
of one's sex, but, rather, to use one's sexuality henceforth to arrive at a 
multiplicity of relationships. And, no doubt, that's the real reason why 
*R. de Ceccaty, J. Danet, and J. Le Bitoux conducted this interview with Foucault for 
the French magazine Gai Pied. It appeared in April Ig81. The text that appears here, 
translated by John Johnston, has been amended.

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
homosexuality is not a fonn of desire but something desirable. There­
fore, we have to work at becoming homosexuals and not be obstinate 
in recognizing that we are. The development toward which the prob­
lem of homosexuality tends is the one of friendship. 
Q. Did you think so at twenty, or have you discovered it over the 
years? 
M.F. As far back as I remember, to want guys [gar~ons] was to want 
relations with guys. That has always been important for me. Not nec­
essarily in the form of a couple but as a matter of existence: how is it 
possible for men to be together? To live together, to share their time, 
their meals, their room, their leisure, their grief, their knowledge, their 
confidences? What is it to be "naked" among men, outside of institu­
tional relations, family, profession, and obligatory camaraderie? It's a 
desire, an uneasiness, a desire-in-uneasiness that exists among a lot 
of people. 
Q. Can you say that desire and pleasure, and the relationships one 
can have, are dependent on one's age? 
M.F. Yes, very profoundly. Between a man and a younger woman, 
the marriage institution makes it easier: she accepts it and makes it 
work. But two men of noticeably different ages-what code would allow 
them to communicate? They face each other without terms or conven­
ient words, with nothing to assure them about the meaning of the 
movement that carries them toward each other. They have to invent, 
from A to Z, a relationship that is still formless, which is friendship: 
that is to say, the sum of everything through which they can give each 
other pleasure. 
One of the concessions one makes to others is not to present homo­
sexuality as anything but a kind of immediate pleasure, of two young 
men meeting in the street, seducing each other with a look, grabbing 
each other's asses and getting each other off in a quarter of an hour. 
There you have a kind of neat image of homosexuality without any pos­
sibility of generating unease, and for two reasons: it responds to a reas­
suring canon of beauty, and it cancels everything that can be troubling 
in affection, tenderness, friendship, fidelity, camaraderie, and compan­
ionship, things that our rather sanitized society can't allow a place for 
without fearing the formation of new alliances and the tying together 
of unforeseen lines of force. I think that's what makes homosexuality 
"disturbing": the homosexual mode of life, much more than the sex­
ual act itself. To imagine a sexual act that doesn't conform to law or

Friendship as a Way of Life 137 
nature is not what disturbs people. But that individuals are beginning 
to love one an9ther-there's the problem. The institution is caught in 
a contradiction; affective intensities traverse it which at one and the 
same time keep it going and shake it up. Look at the army, where love 
between men is ceaselessly provoked [appete] and shamed. Institutional 
codes can't validate these relations with multiple intensities, variable 
colors, imperceptible movements and changing forms. These relations 
short-circuit it and introduce love where there's supposed to be only 
law, rule, or habit. 
Q. You were saying a little while ago: "Rather than crying about 
faded pleasures, I'm interested in what we ourselves can do." Could 
you explain that more precisely? 
M.F. Asceticism as the renunciation of pleasure has bad connota­
tions. But ascesis is something else: it's the work that one performs on 
oneself in order to transform oneself or make the self appear which, 
happily, one never attains. Can that be our problem today? We've rid 
ourselves of asceticism. Yet it's up to us to advance into a homosexual 
ascesis that would make us work on ourselves and invent-I do not say 
discover-a manner of being that is still improbable. 
Q. That means that a young homosexual must be very cautious in 
regard to homosexual imagery; he must work at something else? 
M.F. What we must work on, it seems to me, is not so much to lib­
erate our desires but to make ourselves infinitely more susceptible to 
pleasure [plazSirs]. We must escape and help others to escape the two 
readymade formulas of the pure sexual encounter and the lovers' fusion 
of identities. 
Q. Can one see the first fruits of strong constructive relationships in 
the United States, in any case in the cities where the problem of sex­
ual misery seems under control? 
M.F. To me, it appears certain that in the United States, even if the 
basis of sexual misery still exists, the interest in friendship has become 
very important; one doesn't enter a relationship simply in order to be 
able to consummate it sexually, which happens very easily. But toward 
friendship, people are very polarized. How can a relational system be 
reached through sexual practices? Is it possible to create a homosex­
ual mode oflife? 
This notion of mode of life seems important to me. Will it require 
the introduction of a diversification different from the ones due to social 
class, differences in profession and culture, a diversification that would

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
.. Iso be a form of relationship and would be a "way of life"? A way of 
life can be shared among individuals of different age, status, and social 
activity. It can yield intense relations not resembling those that are 
institutionalized. It seems to me that a way of life can yield a culture 
and an ethics. To be "gay," I think, is not to identify with the psycho­
logical traits and the visible masks of the homosexual but to try to 
define and develop a way of life. 
Q. Isn't it a myth to say: Here we are enjoying the first fruits of a 
socialization between different classes, ages, and countries? 
M.F. Yes, like the great myth of saying: There will no longer be any 
difference between homo-and heterosexuality. Moreover, I think that 
it's one of the reasons that homosexuality presents a problem today. 
Many sexual liberation movements project this idea of "liberating your­
self from the hideous constraints that weigh upon you." Yet the affir­
mation that to be a homosexual is for a man to love another man-this 
search for a way of life runs counter to the ideology of the sexual lib­
eration movements of the sixties. It's in this sense that the mustached 
"clones" are significant. It's a way of responding: "Have nothing to fear; 
the more one is liberated, the less one will love women, the less one 
will founder in this polysexuality where there are no longer any dif­
ferences between the two." It's not at all the idea of a great commu­
nity fusion. 
Homosexuality is a historic occasion to reopen affective and rela­
tional virtualities, not so much through the intrinsic qualities of the 
homosexual but because the "slantwise" position of the latter, as it 
were, the diagonal lines he can layout in the social fabric allow these 
virtualities to come to light. 
Q. Women might object: What do men together have to win com­
pared to the relations between a man and a woman or between two 
women? 
M.F. There is a book that just appeared in the U.S. on the friend­
ships between women. l The affection and passion between women is 
well documented. In the preface, the author states that she began with 
the idea of unearthing homosexual relationships-but perceived that 
not only were these relationships not always present but that it was 
uninteresting whether relationships could be called "homosexual" or 
not. And by letting the relationship manifest itself as it appeared in 
words and gestures, other very essential things also appeared: dense, 
bright, marvelous loves and affections or very dark and sad loves. The

Friendship as a Way if Life 159 
book shows the extent to which woman's body has played a great role, 
and the importance of physical contact between women: women do 
each other's hair, help each other with make up, dress each other. 
Women have had access to the bodies of other women: they put their 
arms around each other, kiss each other. Man's body has been forbid­
den to other men in a much more drastic way. If it's true that life be­
tween women was tolerated, it's only in certain periods and since the 
nineteenth century that life between men not only was tolerated but 
rigorously necessary: very simply, during war. 
And equally in prison camps. You had soldiers and young officers 
who spent months and even years together. During World War I, men 
lived together completely, one on top of another, and for them it was 
nothing at all, insofar as death was present and finally the devotion to 
one another and the services rendered were sanctioned by the play of 
life and death. And apart from several remarks on camaraderie, the 
brotherhood of spirit, and some very partial observations, what do we 
know about these emotional uproars and storms of feeling that took 
place in those times? One can wonder how, in these absurd and gro­
tesque wars and infern~l massacres, the men managed to hold on in 
spite of everything. Through some emotional fabric, no doubt. I don't 
mean that it was because they were each other's lovers that they con­
tinued to fight; but honor, courage, not losing face, sacrifice, leaving 
the trench with the captain-all that implied a very intense emotional 
tie. It's not to say: "Ah, there you have homosexuality!" I detest that 
kind of reasoning. But no doubt you have there one of the conditions, 
not the only one, that has permitted this infernal life where for weeks 
guys floundered in the mud and shit, among corpses, starving for food, 
and were drunk the morning of the assault. 
I would like to say, finally, that something well considered and vol­
untary like a magazine ought to make possible a homosexual culture, 
that is to say, the instruments for polymorphic, varied, and individu­
ally modulated relationships. But the idea of a program of proposals 
is dangerous. As soon as a program is presented, it becomes a law, and 
there's a prohibition against inventing. There ought to be an inventive­
ness special to a, situation like ours and to these feelings, this need that 
Americans call "coming out," that is, showing oneself. The program 
must be wide open. We have to dig deeply to show how things have 
been historically contingent, for such and such reason intelligible but 
not necessary. We must make the intelligible appear against a back-

Ethics .. Subjectivity and Truth 
p;round of emptiness and deny its necessity. We must think that what 
pxisLs is far from filling all possible spaces. To make a truly unavoid­
able challenge of the question: What can be played? 
NOTE 
1 Lilian Faderman, Surpassing the Love if Men (New York: Morrow, 1980).

SEXUAL CHOICE, SEXUAL ACT* 
J.O'H. Let me begin by asking you to respond to John Boswell's recent 
book on the history of homosexuality from the beginning of the Chris­
tian era through the Middle Ages.! As an historian yourself, do you find 
his methodology valid? To what extent do you think the conclusions 
he draws contribute to a better understanding of what homosexuality 
is today? 
M.F. This is certainly a very important study whose originality is 
already evident from the way in which it poses the question. Methodo­
logically speaking, the rejection by Boswell of the categorical opposition 
between homosexual and heterosexual, which plays such a significant 
role in the way our culture conceives of homosexuality, represents an 
advance not only in scholarship but in cultural criticism as well. His 
introduction of the concept of "gay" (in the way he defines it) provides 
us both with a useful instrument of research and, at the same time, a 
better comprehension of how people actually conceive of themselves 
and their sexual behavior. On the level of investigative results, this 
methodology has led to the discovery that what has been called the 
"repression" of homosexuality does not date back to Christianity prop­
erly speaking but developed within the Christian era at a much later 
date. In this type of analysis it is important to be aware of the way in 
which people conceived of their own sexuality. Sexual behavior is not, 
as is too often assumed, a superimposition of, on the one hand, desires 
*This interview was conducted in French and translated by James O'Higgins; it first 
appeared in the "Homosexuality: Sacrilege, Vision, Politics" special issue of Salmagundi 
58-59 (Fall 1982-Winter 1983), pp. 10-24.

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
that derive from natural instincts, and, on the other hand, of permis­
sive or restrictive laws that tell us what we should or shouldn't do. Sex­
ual behavior is more than that. It is also the consciousness one has of 
what one is doing, what one makes of the experience, and the value 
one attaches to it. It is in this sense that I think the concept "gay" con­
tributes to a positive (rather than a purely negative) appreciation of the 
type of consciousness in which affection, love, desire, sexual rapport 
with people have a positive significance. 
J.O'H. I understand that your own recent work has led you to a study 
of sexuality as it was experienced in ancient Greece. 
M.F. Yes, and precisely Boswell's book has provided me with a guide 
. for what to look for in the meaning people attached to their sexual 
behavior. 
J.O'H. Does this focus on cultural context and people's discourse 
about their sexual behavior reflect a methodological decision to bypass 
the distinction between innate predisposition to homosexual behavior 
and social conditioning? Or do you have any conviction one way or the 
other on this issue? 
M.F. On this question I have absolutely nothing to say. "No comment." 
J.O'H. Does this mean you think the question is unanswerable, or 
bogus, or does it simply not interest you? 
M.F. No, none of these. I just don't believe in talking about things 
that go beyond my expertise. It's not my problem, and I don't like 
talking about things that are not really the object of my work. On this 
question I have only an opinion; since it is only an opinion, it is with­
out interest. 
J.O'H. But opinions can be interesting, don't you agree? 
M.F. Sure, I could offer my opinion, but this would only make sense 
if everybody and anybody's opinions were also being consulted. I don't 
want to make use of a position of authority while I'm being interviewed 
to traffic in opinions. 
J.O'H. Fair enough. We'll shift direction then. Do you think it is 
legitimate to speak of a class consciousness in connection with homo­
sexuals? Ought homosexuals to be encouraged to think of themselves 
as a class in the way that unskilled laborers or black people are encour­
aged to in some countries? How do you envision the political goals of 
homosexuals as a group? 
M.F. In answer to the first question, I would say that the homosex­
ual consciousness certainly goes beyond one's individual experience and

Sexual Choice, Sexual Act 143 
includes an awareness of being a member of a particular social group. 
This is an undeniable fact that dates back to ancient times. Of course, 
this aspect of their collective consciousness changes over time and 
varies from place to place. It has, for instance, on different occasions 
taken the form of membership in a kind of secret society, membership 
in a cursed race, membership in a segment of humanity at once privi­
leged and persecuted-all kinds of different modes of collective con­
sciousness, just as, incidentally, the consciousness of unskilled laborers 
has undergone numerous transformations. It is true that more recently 
certain homosexuals have, following the political model, developed or 
tried to create a certain class consciousness. My impression is that this 
hasn't really been a success, whatever the political consequences it may 
have had, because homosexuals do not constitute a social class. This 
is not to say that one can't imagine a society in which homosexuals 
would constitute a social class. But in our present economic and social 
mode of organization, I don't see this coming to pass. 
As for the political goals of the homosexual movement, two points 
can be made. First, there is the question of freedom of sexual choice 
which must be faced. I say "freedom of sexual choice" and not "free­
dom of sexual acts" because there are sexual acts like rape which 
should not be permitted whether they involve a man and a woman or 
two men. I don't think we should have as our objective some sort of 
absolute freedom or total liberty of sexual action. However, where free­
dom of sexual choice is concerned, one has to be absolutely intransi­
gent. This includes the liberty of expression of that choice. By this I 
mean the liberty to manifest that choice or not to manifest it. Now, 
there has been considerable progress in this area on the level of legis­
lation, certainly progess in the direction of tolerance, but there is still 
a lot of work to be done. 
;Second, a homosexual movement could adopt the objective of pos­
ing the question of the place in a given society which sexual choice, sex­
ual behavior, and the effects of sexual relations between people could 
have with regard to the individual. These questions are fundamentally 
obscure. Look, for example, at the confusion and equivocation that 
surround pornography, or the lack of elucidation which characterizes 
the question of the legal status that might be attached to the liaison 
between two people of the same sex. I don't mean that the legaliza­
tion of marriage among homosexuals should be an objective; rather, 
that we are dealing here with a whole series of questions concerning

144 Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
the insertion and recognition-within a legal and social framework-of 
diverse relations among individuals which must be addressed. 
J.O'H. I take it, then, your point is that the homosexual movement 
should not only give itself the goal of enlarging legal permissiveness 
but should also be asking broader and deeper questions about the stra­
tegic roles played by sexual preferences and how they are perceived. 
Is it your point that the homosexual movement should not stop at lib­
eralizing laws relating to personal sexual choice but should also be pro­
voking society at large to rethink its own presuppositions regarding 
sexuality? In other words, it isn't that homosexuals are deviants who 
should be allowed to practice in peace but, rather, that the whole con­
ceptual scheme that categorizes homosexuals as deviants must be dis­
mantled. This throws an interesting light on the question of homosexual 
educators. In the debate that arose in California, regarding the right 
of homosexuals to teach primary and secondary school, for example, 
those who argued against permitting homosexuals to teach were con­
cerned not only with the likelihood of homosexuals constituting a threat 
to innocence, in that they may be prone to seducing their students, but 
also that they might preach the gospel of homosexuality. 
M.F. The whole question, you see, has been wrongly formulated. 
Under no circumstances should the sexual choice of an individual 
determine the profession he is allowed, or forbidden, to practice. Sex­
ual practices simply fall outside the pertinent factors related to the 
suitability for a given profession. "Yes," you might say, "but what if 
the profession is used by homosexuals to encourage others to become 
homosexual ?" 
Well, let me ask you this: Do you believe that teachers who for years, 
for decades, for centuries, explained to children that homosexuality is 
intolerable; do you believe that the textbooks that purged literature and 
falsified history in order to exclude various types of sexual behavior, 
have not caused ravages at least as serious as a homosexual teacher 
who speaks about homosexuality and who can do no more harm than 
explain a given reality, a lived experience? 
The fact that a teacher is a homosexual can only have electrifying 
and intense effects on the students to the extent that the rest of society 
refuses to admit the existence of homosexuality. A homosexual teacher 
should not present any more of a problem than a bald teacher, a male 
teacher in an all-female school, a female teacher in an all-male school, 
or an Arab teacher in a school in the 16th district in Paris.

Sexual Choice, Sexual Act 145 
As for the problem of a homosexual teacher who actively tries to 
seduce his students, all I can say is that in all pedagogical situations 
the possibility of this problem is present; one finds instances of this 
kind of behavior much more rampant among heterosexual teachers­
for no other reason than that there are a lot more heterosexual teachers. 
J.O'H. There is a growing tendency in American intellectual circles, 
particularly among radical feminists, to distinguish between male and 
female homosexuality. The basis of this distinction is twofold. If the 
term homosexuality is taken to denote not merely a tendency toward 
affectional relations with members of the same sex but an inclination 
to find members of the same sex erotically attractive and gratifying, 
then it is worth insisting on the very different physical things that hap­
pen in the one encounter and the other. The second basis for the dis­
tinction is that lesbians seem in the main to want from other women 
what one finds in stable heterosexual relationships: support, affection, 
long-term commitment, and so on. If this is not the case with male 
homosexuals, then the difference may be said to be striking, if not fun­
damental. Do you think the distinction here a useful and viable one? 
Are there discernible reasons for the differences noted so insistently 
by many prominent radical feminists? 
M.F. [Laughs] All I can do is explode with laughter. 
J.O'H. Is the question funny in a way I don't see, or stupid, or both? 
M.F. Well, it is certainly not stupid, but I find it very amusing, per-
haps for reasons I couldn't give even if I wanted to. What I will say is 
that the distinction offered doesn't seem to be convincing, in terms of 
what I observe in the behavior of lesbian women. Beyond this, one 
would have to speak about the different pressures experienced by men 
and women who are coming out or are trying to make a life for them­
selves as homosexuals. I don't think that radical feminists in other 
countries are likely to see these questions quite in the way you ascribe 
to such women in American intellectual circles. 
J.O'H. Freud argued in "Psychogenesis of a Case of Hysteria in a 
Woman" that all homosexuals are liars.2 We don't have to take this 
assertion seriously to ask whether there is not in homosexuality a ten­
dency to dissimulation that might have led Freud to make his state­
ment. If we substitute for the word "lie" such words as metaphor or 
indirection, may we not be coming closer to the heart of the homosex­
ual style? Or is there any point in speaking of a homosexual style or 
sensibility? Richard Sennett, for one, has argued that there is no more

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
iI homosexual style than there is a heterosexual style. Is this your view 
as well? 
M.F. Yes, I don't think it makes much sense to talk about a homosex­
ual style. Even on the level of nature, the term homosexuality doesn't 
have much meaning. I'm reading right now, as a matter of fact, an 
interesting book that came out recently in the U.S. called Proust and 
the Art if Love.3 The author shows us how difficult it is to give mean­
ing to the proposition "Proust was a homosexual." It seems to me that 
it is finally an inadequate category-inadequate, that is, in that we can't 
really classify behavior, on the one hand, and the term can't restore a 
type of experience, on the other. One could perhaps say there is a "gay 
style," or at least that there is an ongoing attempt to recreate a certain 
style of existence, a form of existence or art of living, which might be 
called "gay." 
In answer to the question about dissimulation, it is true that, for 
instance, during the nineteenth century it was, to a certain degree, 
necessary to hide one's homosexuality. But to call homosexuals liars is 
equivalent to calling the resisters under a military occupation liars. It's 
like calling Jews "moneylenders," when it was the only profession they 
were allowed to practice. 
J .O'H. Nevertheless, it does seem evident, at least on a sociological 
level, that there are certain characteristics one can discern in the gay 
style, certain generalizations which (your laughter a moment ago not­
withstanding) recall such stereotypifications as promiscuity, anonym­
ity between sexual partners, purely physical relationships, and so on. 
M.F. Yes, but it's not quite so simple. In a society like ours, where 
homosexuality is repressed, and severely so, men enjoy a far greater 
degree of liberty than women. Men are permitted to make love much 
more often and under less restrictive conditions. Houses of prostitu­
tion exist to satisfy their sexual needs. Ironically, this has resulted in a 
certain permissiveness with regard to sexual practices between men. 
Sexual desire is considered more intense for men and therefore in 
greater need of release; so, along with brothels, one saw the emer­
gence of baths where men could meet and have sex with each other. 
The Roman baths were exactly this, a place for heterosexuals to engage 
in sexual acts. It wasn't until the sixteenth century, I believe, that these 
baths were closed as places of unacceptable sexual debauchery. Thus, 
even homosexuality benefited from a certain tolerance toward sexual 
practices, as long as it was limited to a simple physical encounter. And

Sexual Choice, Sexual Act 147 
not only did homosexuality benefit from this situation but, by a curi­
ous twist-often typical of such strategies-it actually reversed the 
standards in such a way that homosexuals came to enjoy even more 
freedom in their physical relations than heterosexuals. The effect has 
been that homosexuals now have the luxury of knowing that in a certain 
number of countries-Holland, Denmark, the United States, and even 
as provincial a country as France-the opportunities for sexual encoun­
ters are enormous. There has been, you might say, a great increase in 
consumption on this level. But this is not necessarily a natural condi­
tion of homosexuality, a biological given. 
J.O'H. The American sociologist Philip Rieff, in an essay on Oscar 
Wilde entitled "The Impossible Culture," sees Wilde as a forerunner 
of modern culture. 4 The essay begins with an extensive quotation from 
the transcript of the trial of Oscar Wilde, and goes on to raise ques­
tions about the viability of a culture in which there are no prohibitions, 
and therefore no sense of vital transgression. Consider, if you will, the 
following: 
"A culture survives the assault of sheer possibility against it only so 
far as the members of a culture learn, through their membership, how 
to narrow the range of choices otherwise open." 
"As culture sinks into the psyche and becomes character, what Wilde 
prized above all else is constrained: individuality. A culture in crisis 
favors the growth of individuality; deep down things no longer weigh 
so heavily to slow the surface play of experience. Hypothetically, if a 
culture could grow to full crisis, then everything would be expressed 
and nothing would be true." 
"Sociologically, a truth is whatever militates against the human 
capacity to express everything. Repression is truth." 
Is Rieff's response to Wilde and to the idea of culture Wilde embod­
ied at all plausible? 
M.F. I'm not sure I understand Professor Rieff's remarks. What does 
he mean, for instance, by "Repression is truth?" 
J.O'H. Actually, I think this idea is similar to claims you make in your 
own books about truth being the product of a system of exclusions, a 
network, or episteme [episteme], which defines what can and cannot 
be said. 
M.F. Well, the important question here, it seems to me, is not whether 
a culture without restraints is possible or even desirable but whether 
the system of constraints in which a society functions leaves individu-

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
als the liberty to transform the system. Obviously, constraints of any 
kind are going to be intolerable to certain segments of society. The 
necrophiliac finds it intolerable that graves are not accessible to him. 
But a system of constraint becomes truly intolerable when the individ­
uals who are affected by it don't have the means of modifying it. This 
can happen when such a system becomes intangible as a result of its 
being considered a moral or religious imperative, or a necessary con­
sequence of medical science. If Rieff means that the restrictions should 
be clear and well defined, I agree. 
J .O'H. Actually, Rieff would argue that a true culture is one in which 
the essential truths have been sunk so deep in everyone that there would 
be no need to articulate them. Clearly, in a society of law, one would 
need to make explicit a great variety of things that were not to be done, 
but the main credal assumptions would for the most part remain in­
accessible to simple articulation. Part of the thrust of Riefrs work is 
directed against the idea that it is desirable to do away with credal 
assumptions in the name of a perfect liberty, and also the idea that 
restrictions are by definition what all must aim to clear away. 
M.F. There is no question that a society without restrictions is incon­
ceivable, but I can only repeat myself in saying that these restrictions 
have to be within the reach of those affected by them so that they at 
least have the possibility of altering them. As to credal assumptions, I 
don't think that Rieff and I would agree on their value or on their 
meaning or on the devices by which they are taught. 
J.O'H. You're no doubt right about that. In any case, we can move 
now from the legal and sociological spheres to the realm of letters. I 
would like to ask you to comment on the difference between the erotic 
as it appears in heterosexual literature and the manner in which sex 
emerges in homosexual literature. Sexual discourse, as it appears in the 
great heterosexual novels of our culture-I realize that the designation 
"heterosexual novels" is itself dubious-is characterized by a certain 
modesty and discretion that seems to add to the charm of the works. 
When heterosexual writers treat sex too explicitly, it seems to lose some 
of the mysteriously evocative quality, some of the potency we find in 
novels like Anna Karenina. The point is made with great cogency in a 
number of essays by George Steiner, as a matter of fact. In contrast to 
the practice of the major heterosexual novelists, we have the example 
of various homosexual writers. I'm thinking for example of Cocteau's 
The While Paper, where he succeeds in retaining the poetic enchant-

Sexual Choice, Sexual Act 149 
ment, which heterosexual writers achieve through veiled allusion, while 
depicting sexual acts in the most graphic terms.5 Do you think such a 
difference does exist between these two types of literature, and if so, 
how would you account for it? 
M.F. That's a very interesting question. As I mentioned earlier, over 
the past few years I have been reading a lot of Latin and Greek texts 
that describe sexual practices both between men and between men and 
women; and I've been struck by the extreme prudishness of these texts 
(with certain exceptions, of course). Take an author like Lucian. Here 
we have an ancient writer who talks about homosexuality but in an 
almost bashful way. At the end of one of his dialogues, for instance, 
he evokes a scene where a man approaches a boy, puts his hand on the 
boy's knee, slides his hand under his tunic and caresses the boy's chest; 
then the hand moves down to the boy's stomach and suddenly the text 
stops there. Now, I would attribute this prudishness, which generally 
characterizes homosexual literature in ancient times, to the greater free­
dom then enjoyed by men in their homosexual practices. 
J . 0' H. I see. So the more free and open sexual practice is, the more 
one can afford to be reticent or oblique in talking about it. This would 
explain why homosexual literature is more explicit in our culture than 
heterosexual literature. But I'm still wondering how one could use this 
explanation to account for the fact that the former manages to achieve 
the same effect in the imagination of the reader as the latter achieves 
with the exact opposite tools. 
M.F. Let me try to answer your question another way. The experi­
ence of heterosexuality, at least since the Middle Ages, has always con­
sisted of two axes; on the one hand, the axis of courtship in which the 
man seduces the woman; and, on the other hand, the axis of sexual 
act itself. Now, the great heterosexual literature of the West has had to 
do essentially with the axis of amorous courtship, that is, above all, with 
that which precedes the sexual act. All the work of intellectual and cul­
tural refinement, all the aesthetic elaboration of the West, were aimed 
at courtship. This is the reason for the relative poverty of literary, cul­
tural, and aesthetic appreciation of the sexual act as such. 
In contrast, the modern homosexual experience has no relation at 
all to courtship. This was not the case in ancient Greece, however. For 
the Greeks, courtship between men was more important than between 
men and women. (Think of Socrates and Alcibiades.) But in Christian 
culture of the West, homosexuality was banished and therefore had to

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
concentrate all its energy on the act of sex itself. Homosexuals were 
not allowed to elaborate a system of courtship because the cultural 
expression necessary for such an elaboration was denied them. The 
wink on the street, the split-second decision to get it on, the speed with 
which homosexual relations are consummated: all these are products 
of an interdiction. So when a homosexual culture and literature began 
to develop it was natural for it to focus on the most ardent and heated 
aspect of homosexual relations. 
J.O'H. I'm reminded of Cassanova's famous expression that "the best 
moment in life is when one is climbing the stairs." One can hardly 
imagine a homosexual today making such a remark. 
M.F. Exactly. Rather, he would say something like: "the best moment 
of love is when the lover leaves in the taxi." 
J.O'H. I can't help thinking that this describes more or less precisely 
Swann's relations with Odette in the first volume of Proust's great 
novel. 
M.F. Well, yes, that is true. But though we are speaking there of 
a relationship between a man and a woman, we should have to take 
into account in describing it the nature of the imagination that con­
ceived it. 
J.O'H. And we would also then have to take into account the patho­
logical nature of the relationship as Proust himself conceives it. 
M.F. The question of pathology I would as well omit in this context. 
I prefer simply to return to the observation with which I began this part 
of our exchange, namely, that for a homosexual, the best moment of 
love is likely to be when the lover leaves in the taxi. It is when the act 
is over and the guy [garqon] is gone that one begins to dream about 
the warmth of his body, the quality of his smile, the tone of his voice. 
It is the recollection rather than the anticipation of the act that assumes 
a primary importance in homosexual relations. This is why the great 
homosexual writers of our culture (Cocteau, Genet, Burroughs) can 
write so elegantly about the sexual act itself, because the homosexual 
imagination is for the most part concerned with reminiscing about the 
act rather than anticipating it. And, as I said earlier, this is all due to 
very concrete and practical considerations and says nothing about the 
intrinsic nature of homosexuality. 
J.O'H. Do you think this has any bearing on the so-called prolifera­
tion of perversions one sees today? I am speaking of phenomena like 
the S&M scene, golden showers, scatological amusements, and the like.

Sexual Choice, Sexual Act 
We know these practices have existed for some time but they seem 
much more openly practiced these days. 
M.F. I would say they are much more widely practiced also. 
J. 0' H. Do you think this general phenomenon and the fact that 
homosexuality is "coming out of the closet," making public its form of 
expression, have anything to do with each other? 
M.F. I would advance the following hypothesis: In a civilization that 
for centuries considered the essence of the relation between two people 
to reside in the knowledge of whether one of the two parties was going 
to surrender to the other, all the interest and curiosity, the cunning and 
manipulation of people was aimed at getting the other to give in, to 
go to bed with them. Now, when sexual encounters become extremely 
easy and numerous, as is the case with homosexuality nowadays, com­
plications are introduced only after the fact. In this type of casual en­
counter, it is only after making love that one becomes curious about the 
other person. Once the sexual act has been consummated, you find 
yourself asking your partner, "By the way, what was your name?" 
What you have, then, is a situation where all the energy and imagi­
nation, which in the heterosexual relationship were channeled into 
courtship, now become devoted to intensifying the act of sex itself. A 
whole new art of sexual practice develops which tries to explore all the 
internal possibilities of sexual conduct. You find emerging in places like 
San Francisco and New York what might be called laboratories of sexual 
experimentation. You might look upon this as the counterpart of the 
medieval courts where strict rules of proprietary courtship were defined. 
It is because the sexual act has become so easy and available to homo­
sexuals that it runs the risk of quickly becoming boring, so that every 
effort has to be made to innovate and create variations that will enhance 
the pleasure of the act. 
J.O'H. Yes, but why have these innovations taken the specific form 
they have? Why the fascination with excretory functions, for instance? 
M.F. I find the S&M phenomenon in general to be more surprising 
than that. That is to say, sexual relations are elaborated and developed 
by and through mythical relations. S&M is not a relationship between 
he (or she) who suffers and he (or she) who inflicts suffering, but be­
Iween the master and the one on whom he exercises his mastery. What 
interests the practitioners of S&M is that the relationship is at the same 
I ime regulated and open. It resembles a chess game in the sense that 
one can win and the other lose. The master can lose in the S&M game

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
if he finds he is unable to respond to the needs and trials of his vic­
tim. Conversely, the servant can lose if he fails to meet or can't stand 
meeting the challenge thrown at him by the master. This mixture of 
rules and openness has the effect of intensifying sexual relations by 
introducing a perpetual novelty, a perpetual tension and a perpetual 
uncertainty, which the simple consummation of the act lacks. The idea 
is also to make use of every part of the body as a sexual instrument. 
Actually this is related to the famous phase animal triste post coitum. 
Since in homosexuality coitus is given immediately, the problem be­
comes "what can be done to guard against the onset of sadness?" 
J.O'H. Would you venture an explanation for the fact that bisexuality 
among women today seems to be much more readily accepted by men 
than bisexuality among men? 
M.F. This probably has to do with the role women play in the imagi­
nation of heterosexual men. Women have always been seen by them as 
their exclusive property. To preserve this image, a man had to prevent 
his woman from having too much contact with other men, so women 
were restricted to social contact with other women and more tolerance 
was exercised with regard to the physical rapport between women. By 
the same token, heterosexual men felt that if they practiced homo­
sexuality with other men this would destroy what they think is their 
image in the eyes of their women. They think of themselves as existing 
in the minds of women as master. They think that the idea of their 
submitting to another man, of being under another man in the act of 
love, would destroy their image in the eyes of women. Men think that 
women can only experience pleasure in recognizing men as masters. 
Even the Greeks had a problem with being the passive partner in a love 
relationship. For a Greek nobleman to make love to a passive male slave 
was natural, since the slave was by nature an inferior; but when two 
Greek men of the same social class made love it was a real problem 
because neither felt he should humble himself before the other. 
Today homosexuals still have this problem. Most homosexuals feel 
that the passive role is in some way demeaning. S&M has actually 
helped alleviate this problem somewhat. 
J.O'H. Is it your impression that the cultural forms growing up in 
the gay community are directed very largely to young people in that 
community? 
M.F. I think that is largely the case, though I'm not sure there is 
much to make of it. Certainly, as a fifty-year-old man, when I read

Sexual Choice, Sexual Act 153 
certain publications produced by and for gays, I find that I am not 
being taken into account at all, that I somehow don't belong. This is 
not something on the basis of which I would criticize such publications, 
which after all do what their writers and readers are interested in. But 
I can't help observing that there is a tendency among articulate gays 
to think of the major issues and questions of lifestyle as involving peo­
ple in their twenties typically. 
J.O'H. I don't see why this might not constitute the basis of a criti­
cism-not only of particular publications but of gay life generally. 
M.F. I didn't say that one might not find grounds for criticism, only 
that I don't choose to or think it useful. 
J .O'H. Why not consider in this context the worship of the youthful 
male body as the very center of the standard homosexual fantasy, and 
go on to speak of the denial of ordinary life processes entailed in this, 
particularly aging and the decline of desire? 
M.F. Look, these are not new ideas you're raising, and you know 
that. As to the worship of youthful bodies, I'm not convinced that it is 
peculiar at all to gays or in any way to be regarded as a pathology. And 
if that is the intention of your question, then I reject it. But I would also 
remind you that gays are not only involved in life processes, necessar­
ily, but very much aware of them in most cases. Gay publications may 
not devote as much space as I would like to questions of gay friend­
ship and to the meaning of relationship when there are no established 
codes or guidelines. But more and more gay people are having to face 
these questions for themselves. And, you know, I think that what most 
bothers those who are not gay about gayness is the gay lifestyle, not 
sex acts themselves. 
J.O'H. Are you referring to such things as gays fondling or caressing 
one another in public, or their wearing flashy clothing, or adopting 
clone outfits? 
M.F. These things are bound to disturb some people. But I was talk­
ing about the common fear that gays will develop relationships that are 
intense and satisfying even though they do not at all conform to the 
ideas of relationship held by others. It is the prospect that gays will 
create as yet unforeseen kinds of relationships that many people can­
not tolerate. 
J.O'H. You are referring to relationships that don't involve posses­
siveness or fidelity-to name only two of the common factors that 
might be denied?

154 Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
M.F. If the relationships to be created are as yet unforeseeable, then 
we can't really say this feature or that feature will be denied. But you 
can see how, in the military for example, love between men can develop 
and assert itself in circumstances where only dead habits and rules 
were supposed to prevail. And it is possible that changes in established 
routines will occur on a much broader scale as gays learn to express 
their feelings for one another in more various ways and develop new 
lifestyles not resembling those which have been institutionalized. 
J.O'H. Do you see it as your role to address the gay community espe­
cially on matters of general importance such as you have been raising? 
M.F. I am, of course, regularly involved in exchanges with other 
members of the gay community. We talk, we try to find ways of open­
ing ourselves to one another. But I am wary of imposing my own. views, 
or of setting down a plan, or program. I don't want to discourage in­
vention, don't want gay people to stop feeling that it is up to them to 
adjust their own relationships by discovering what is appropriate in 
their situations. 
J.O'H. You don't think there is some special advice, or a special 
perspective, that a historian or archaeologist of culture like yourself 
can offer? 
M.F. It is always useful to understand the historical contingency of 
things, to see how and why things got to be as they are. But I am not 
the only person equipped to show these things, and I want to avoid 
suggesting that certain developments were necessary or unavoidable. 
Gays have to work out some of these matters themselves. Of course, 
there are useful things I can contribute, but again, I want to avoid 
imposing my own scheme or plan. 
J.O'H. Do you think that, in general, intellectuals are more tolerant 
toward, or receptive to, different modes of sexual behavior than other 
people? If so, is this due to a better understanding of human sexuality? 
If not, how do you think that you and other intellectuals can improve 
this situation? In what way can the rational discourse on sex best be 
reoriented? 
M.F. I think that where tolerance is concerned we allow ourselves a 
lot of illusions. Take incest, for example. Incest was a popular practice, 
and I mean by this, widely practiced among the populace, for a very 
long time. It was toward the end of the nineteenth century that vari­
ous social pressures were directed against it. And it is clear that the 
great interdiction of incest is an invention of the intellectuals.

Sexual Choice, Sexual Act 155 
J.O'H. Are you referring to figures like Freud and Levi-Strauss, or 
to the class of intellectuals as a whole? 
M.F. No, I'm not aiming at anyone in particular. I'm simply pointing 
out that if you look for studies by sociologists or anthropologists of the 
nineteenth century on incest you won't find any. Sure, there were some 
scattered medical reports and the like, but the practice of incest didn't 
really seem to pose a problem at the time. 
It is perhaps true that in intellectual circles these things are talked 
about more openly, but that is not necessarily a sign of greater toler­
ance. Sometimes it means the reverse. I remember ten or fifteen years 
ago, when I used to socialize within the bourgeois milieu, that it was 
rare indeed for an evening to go by without some discussion of homo­
sexuality and pederasty-usually even before dessert. But these same 
people who spoke so openly about these matters were not likely to tol­
erate their sons being pederasts. 
As for prescribing the direction rational discourse on sex should 
take, I prefer not to legislate such matters. For one thing, the expres­
sion "intellectual discourse on sex" is too vague. There are very stupid 
things said by SOciologists, sexologists, psychiatrists, doctors, and mor­
alists, and there are very intelligent things said by members of those 
same professions. I don't think it's a question of intellectual discourse 
on sex but a question of asinine discourse and intelligent discourse. 
J.O'H. And I take it that you have lately found a number of works 
that are moving in the right direction? 
M.F. More, certainly, than I had any reason to expect I would some 
years ago. But the situation on the whole is still less than encouraging. 
NOTES 
1 John Boswell, Christianity, Social Tolerance and Homosexuality: Gay People in Western Europe 
.from the Christian Era to the Fourteenth Century (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1980). 
According to Boswell the urban culture of Roman society did not distinguish homosexuals from 
others. The literature of the early Christian Church also did not oppose gay behavior. But hos­
tility to the sexuality of gay people became more evident at the time of the dissolution of the 
Roman state and its urban centers. The eleventh century brought a renaissance of urban life 
and with it the reappearance of a more visible gay culture, which was only to be threatened a 
century later by theological and legal prejudices. The intolerance of the late Middle Ages con­
tinued to have an effect on European culture for centuries to come. To understand the nature 
of gay relationships, Boswell insists that they must be studied within temporal houndaries 
according to the customs of their day. 
2 See Standard Edition of the Complete P~ychological Works of Sigmund Freud, trans . .James 
Strachey (London: Hogarth Press, 1955), vol. 2.

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
3 J. C. Rivers, Proust and the Art if Lave: The Aesthetics a/Sexuality in the Life, Times, and Art if Marcel Proust (New York: Columbia University Press, 1980). 
4 Philip Rieff, "The Impossible Culture," Salmagundi 58-59 (FaIl1982-Winter 1983), 406-26. 
5 Jean Cocteau, Le Livre Blanc (Paris: Quatre-Chemins, 1928) [The White Paper, pref. and ills. 
by Jean Cocteau (New York: Macaulay, 1958)].

THE SOC I A L T R I U MPH 0 F THE SEX U A L WI L L* 
G.B. Today we no longer speak of sexual liberation in vague terms; 
we speak of women's rights, homosexual rights, gay rights, but we 
don't know exactly what is meant by "rights" and "gay." In countries 
where homosexuality as such is outlawed, everything is simpler since 
everything is yet to be done, but in northern European countries where 
homosexuality is no longer officially prohibited, the future of gay rights 
is posed in different terms. 
M.F. I think we should consider the battle for gay rights as an epi­
sode that cannot be the final stage. For two reasons: first because a 
right, in its real effects, is much more linked to attitudes and patterns 
of behavior than to legal formulations. There can be discrimination 
against homosexuals even if such discriminations are prohibited by law. 
It is therefore necessary to struggle to establish homosexual lifestyles, 
existential choices [des choir d'existence] in which sexual relations with 
people of the same sex will be important. It's not enough as part of a 
more general way of life, or in addition to it, to be permitted to make 
love with someone of the same sex. The fact of making love with some­
one of the same sex can very naturally involve a whole series of choices, 
a whole series of other values and choices for which there are not yet 
real possibilities. It's not only a matter of integrating this strange little 
practice of making love with someone of the same sex into preexisting 
cultures; it's a matter of constructing [creer] cultural forms. 
'This interview was conducted in French and translated by Brendan Lemon. Given on 
October 20, 1981, it was published in Christopher Street 6:4 (May 1982), pp. 36-41. The 
I('xl that appears here has been slightly amended.

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
G.B. But there are always things in the course of daily life which 
obstruct the creation of these ways of living. 
M.F. Yes, but that's where there's something new to be done. That 
in the name of respect for individual rights someone is allowed to do 
as he wants, great! But if what we want to do is to create a new way of 
life [mode de vie], then the question of individual rights is not perti­
nent. In effect, we live in a legal, social, and institutional world where 
the only relations possible are extremely few, extremely simplified, and 
extremely poor. There is, of course, the relation of marriage, and the 
relations of family, but how many other relations should exist, should 
be able to find their codes not in institutions but in possible supports, 
which is not at all the case! 
G.B. The essential question is that of supports, because the relations 
exist-or at least they try to exist. The problem comes because certain 
things are decided not by law-making bodies but by executive order. 
In Holland, certain legal changes have lessened the power of families 
and have permitted the individual to feel stronger in the relations he 
wishes to form. For example, inheritance laws [droits] between people 
of the same sex not tied by blood are the same as those of a married 
heterosexual couple. 
M.F. That's an interesting example, but it represents only a first step, 
because if you ask people to reproduce the marriage bond for their per­
sonal relationship to be recognized, the progress made is slight. We live 
in a relational world that institutions have considerably impoverished. 
SOciety and the institutions which frame it have limited the possibility 
of relationships because a rich relational world would be very complex 
to manage. We should fight against the impoverishment of the rela­
tional fabric. We should secure recognition for relations of provisional 
coexistence, adoption .... 
G.B. Of children. 
M.F. Or-why not?-of one adult by another. Why shouldn't I adopt 
a friend who's ten years younger than I am? And even if he's ten years 
older? Rather than arguing that rights are fundamental and natural to 
the individual, we should try to imagine and create a new relational 
right that permits all possible types of relations to exist and not be pre­
vented, blocked, or annulled by impoverished relational institutions. 
G.B. More concretely, shouldn't the legal, financial, and social ad­
vantages enjoyed by a married heterosexual couple be extended to all 
types of relationships? That's an important practical question, isn't it?

The Social Triumph if the Sexual Will 159 
M.F. Certainly, but once again I think that's hard work, though very, 
very interesting. Right now I'm fascinated by the Hellenistic and Roman 
world before Christianity. Take, for example, relations of friendship. 
They played an important part, but there was a supple institutional 
framework for them-even if it was sometimes constraining-with a 
system of obligations, tasks, reciprocal duties, a hierarchy between 
friends, and so on. I don't think we should reproduce that model. But 
you can see how a system of supple and relatively codified relations 
could exist for a long time and support a certain number of important 
and stable relations, which we now have great difficulty defining. When 
you read an account of two friends from the period, you always won­
der what it really is. Did they make love together? Did they have com­
mon interests? No doubt, it's neither of those things, or both. 
G.B. In Western societies, the only notion upon which legislation is 
based is that of the citizen, or of the individual. How do we reconcile 
the desire to validate relations which have no legal sanction with a 
law-making body which confirms that all citizens have equal rights? 
There are still questions with no answers-that of the single person, 
for example. 
M.F. Of course. The single person must be recognized as having rela­
tions with others quite different from those of a married couple, for 
example. We often say that the single person suffers from solitude 
because he is suspected of being an unsuccessful or rejected husband. 
G.B. Or someone with "questionable morals." 
M.F. Yes, someone who couldn't get married. When in reality the 
life of solitude is often the result of the poverty of possible relation­
ships in our society, where institutions make insufficient and necessar­
ily rare all relations that one could have with someone else and could 
be intense, rich-even if they were provisional-even and especially if 
they took place outside the framework of marriage. 
G.B. All that makes us foresee that the gay movement has a future 
which goes beyond gays themselves. In Holland, it is surprising to see at 
what point gay rights interest more than homosexuals, because people 
want to direct their own lives and their relationships. 
M.F. Yes, I think that there is an interesting part to play, one that 
fascinates me: the question of gay culture-which not only includes 
novels written by pederasts about pederasty, I mean culture in the 
large sense, a culture that invents ways of relating, types of existence, 
types of values, types of exchanges between individuals which are really

160 Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
new and are neither the same as, nor superimposed on, existing cul­
tural forms. If that's possible, then gay culture will be not only a choice 
of homosexuals for homosexuals-it would create relations that are, 
at certain points, transferable to heterosexuals. We have to reverse 
things a bit. Rather than saying what we said at one time, "Let's try to 
re-introduce homosexuality into the general norm of social relations," 
let's say the reverse-"No! Let's escape as much as possible from the 
type of relations that society proposes for us and try to create in the 
empty space where we are new relational possibilities." By proposing 
a new relational right, we will see that nonhomosexual people can 
enrich their lives by changing their own schema of relations. 
G.B. The word gay itself is a catalyst that has the power to negate 
what the word "homosexuality" stood for. 
M.F. That's important because by getting away from the categoriza­
tion homosexuality-heterosexuality, I think that gays have taken an 
important, interesting step: they define their problems differently by 
trying to create a culture that makes sense only in relation to a sexual 
experience and a type of relation that is their own. By taking the plea­
sure of sexual relations away from the area of sexual norms and its cat­
egories, and in so doing making the pleasure the crystallizing point of 
a new culture-I think that's an interesting approach. 
G.B. That's what interests people, actually. 
M.F. Today the important questions are no longer linked to the prob­
lem of repression, which doesn't mean that there aren't still many 
repressed people, and above all doesn't mean that we should overlook 
that and not struggle so that people stop being oppressed; of course I 
don't mean that. But the innovative direction we're moving in is no 
longer the struggle against repression. 
G.B. The development of what used to be called a "ghetto," which 
now consists of bars, cafes, and baths, has perhaps been a phenome­
non as radical and innovative as the struggle against discriminatory leg­
islation. Of course, some people would say that the former would exist 
without the latter, and they're probably right. 
M.F. Yes, but I don't think we should have an attitude toward the 
last ten or fifteen years which consists of stamping out the past as if it 
were a long error that we're finally leaving behind. A lot of change has 
come about in behavior, and this took courage, but we should no longer 
have only one model of behavior and one set of problems. 
G.B. The fact that bars have-for many-stopped being private clubs

The Social Triumph if the Sexual Will 
indicates what transformations are taking place in the way homosexu­
ality is lived. The dramatic part of the phenomenon-making it exist­
has become a relic. 
M.F. Absolutely, but from another point of view, I think that's due 
to the fact that we've reduced the guilt involved in making a very clear 
separation between the life of men and the life of women, the "mono­
sexual" relation. With the universal condemnation of homosexuality, 
there was also a lessening of the monosexual relation-it was permit­
ted only in places like prisons and army barracks. It's curious to note 
that homosexuals were also uneasy about monosexuality. 
G.B. How so? 
M.F. For a while, people were saying that when everyone started 
having homosexual relations, we could all finally have good relations 
with women. 
G.B. Which was of course a fantasy. 
M.F. That idea seemed to imply a difficulty in admitting that a 
monosexual relation was possible, and could be perfectly satisfying 
and compatible with relating to women-if we wanted that. That con­
demnation of monosexuality is disappearing, and we see women also 
affirming their right and desire for monosexuality. We shouldn't be 
afraid of that, even if it reminds us of college dorms, seminaries, army 
barracks, or prisons. We should acknowledge that "monosexuality" can 
be something rich. 
G. B. In the sixties, the integration of the sexes was seen as the only 
civilized arrangement, and this created, in effect, a lot of hostility about 
"monosexual" groups like schools or private clubs. 
M.F. We were right to condemn institutional monosexuality that was 
constricting, but the promise that we would love women as soon as we 
were no longer condemned for being gay was utopian. And a utopia 
in the dangerous sense, not because it promised good relations with 
women but because it was at the expense of monosexual relations. In 
the often-negative response some French people have toward certain 
types of American behavior, there is still that disapproval of mono­
sexuality. So occasionally we hear: "What? How can you approve of 
those macho models? You're always with men, you have mustaches and 
leather jackets, you wear boots, what kind of masculine image is that?" 
Maybe in ten years we'll laugh about it all. But I think in the schema 
of a man affirming himself as a man, there is a movement toward rede­
fining the monosexual relation. It consists of saying, "Yes, we spend

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
our time with men, we have mustaches, and we kiss each other," with­
out one of the partners having to play the nelly [ephebe] or the effemi­
nate, fragile boy. 
G.B. Thus, the criticism of the machismo of the new gay man is an 
attempt to make us feel guilty and is full of the same cliches that have 
plagued homosexuality up to now? 
M.F. We have to admit this is all something very new and practically 
unknown in Western societies. The Greeks never admitted love be­
tween two adult men. We can certainly find allusions to the idea of love 
between young men, when they were soldiers, but not for any others. 
G.B. This would be something absolutely new? 
M.F. It's one thing to be permitted sexual relations, but the very rec­
ognition by the individuals themselves of this type of relation, in the 
sense that they give them necessary and sufficient importance-that 
they acknowledge them and make them real-in order to invent other 
ways of life, yes, that's new. 
G.B. Why has the idea of a relational right, stemming from "gay 
rights," come about first in Anglo-Saxon countries? 
M.F. That's linked to many things, certainly to the laws regarding 
sexuality in Latin countries. We see for the first time a negative aspect 
of the Greek heritage, the fact that the love of one man for another is 
only valid in the form of classic pederasty. We should also take into con­
sideration another phenomenon: in countries that are largely Protes­
tant, associative rights were much more developed for obvious religious 
reasons. I would add, however, that relational rights are not exactly 
associative rights-the latter are an advance of the late nineteenth cen­
tury. The relational right is the right to gain recognition in an institu­
tional sense for the relations of one individual to another individual, 
which is not necessarily connected to the emergence of a group. It's 
very different. It's a question of imagining how the relation of two indi­
viduals can be validated by society and benefit from the same advan­
tages as the relations-perfectly honorable-which are the only ones 
recognized: marriage and the family.

SEX, POWER, AND 
THE POL I TIC S 0 F IDE N TIT Y* 
Q. You suggest in your work that sexual liberation is not so much the 
uncovering of secret truths about one's self or one's desire as it is a part 
of the process of defining and constructing desire. What are the prac­
tical implications of this distinction? 
M.F. What I meant was that I think what the gay movement needs 
now is much more the art of life than a science or scientific knowledge 
(or pseudoscientific knowledge) of what sexuality is. Sexuality is a part 
of our behavior. It's a part of our world freedom. Sexuality is something 
that we ourselves create-it is our own creation, and much more than 
the discovery of a secret side of our desire. We have to understand that 
with our desires, through our desires, go new forms of relationships, 
new forms of love, new forms of creation. Sex is not a fatality: it's a 
possibility for creative life. 
Q. -That's basically what you're getting at when you suggest that we 
should try to become gay-not just to reassert ourselves as gay. 
M.F. Yes, that's it. We don't have to discover that we are homosexuals. 
Q. Or what the meaning of that is? 
M.F. Exactly. Rather, we have to create a gay life. To become. 
Q. And this is something without limits? 
M.F. Yes, sure, I think when you look at the different ways people 
have experienced their own sexual freedoms-the way they have cre­
ated their works of art-you would have to say that sexuality, as we now 
know it, has become one of the most creative sources of our society and 
*This interview was conducted by B. Gallagher and A. Wilson in Toronto in June 1982. 
It appeared in The Advocate 400 (7 August 1984), pp. 26-30 and 58.

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
our being. My view is that we should understand it in the reverse way: 
the world regards sexuality as the secret of the creative cultural life; it 
is, rather, a process of our having to create a new cultural life under­
neath the ground of our sexual choices. 
Q. Practically speaking, one of the effects of trying to uncover that 
secret has meant that the gay movement has remained at the level of 
demanding civil or human rights around sexuality. That is, sexual lib­
eration has remained at the level of demanding sexual tolerance. 
M.F. Yes, but this aspect must be supported. It is important, first, 
to have the possibility-and the right-to choose your own sexuality. 
Human rights regarding sexuality are important and are still not re­
spected in many places. We shouldn't consider that such problems are 
solved now. It's quite true that there was a real liberation process in 
the early seventies. This process was very good, both in terms of the 
situation and in terms of opinions, but the situation has not definitely 
stabilized. Still, I think we have to go a step further. I think that one 
of the factors of this stabilization will be the creation of new forms 
of life, relationships, friendships in society, art, culture, and so on 
through our sexual, ethical, and political choices. Not only do we have 
to defend ourselves, not only affirm ourselves, as an identity but as a 
creative force. 
Q. A lot of that sounds like what, for instance, the women's move­
ment has done, trying to establish their own language and their own 
culture. 
M.F. Well, I'm not sure that we have to create our own culture. We 
have to create culture. We have to realize cultural creations. But, in 
doing so, we come up against the problem of identity. I don't know 
what we would do to form these creations, and I don't know what 
forms these creations would take. For instance, I am not at all sure that 
the best form of literary creations by gay people is gay novels. 
Q. In fact, we would not even want to say that. That would be based 
on an essentialism that we need to avoid. 
M.F. True. What do we mean for instance, by "gay painting"? Yet, 
I am sure that from the point of departure of our ethical choices, we 
can create something that will have a certain relationship to gayness. 
But it must not be a translation of gayness in the field of music or paint­
ing or what have you, for I do not think this can happen. 
Q. How do you view the enormous proliferation in the last ten or 
fifteen years of male homosexual practices: the sensualization, if you

Sex, Power, and the Politics if Identity 
like, of neglected parts of the body and the articulation of new plea­
sures? I am thinking, obviously, of the salient aspects of what we call 
the ghetto-porn movies, clubs for S&M or fistfucking, and so forth. 
Is this merely an extension into another sphere of the general prolif­
eration of sexual discourses since the nineteenth century, or do you 
see other kinds of developments that are peculiar to this present his­
torical context? 
M.F. Well, I think what we want to speak about is precisely the inno­
vations those practices imply. For instance, look at the S&M subcul­
ture, as our good friend Gayle Rubin would insist. I don't think that 
this movement of sexual practices has anything to do with the disclo­
sure or the uncovering of S&M tendencies deep within our uncon­
scious, and so on. I think that S&M is much more than that; it's the 
real creation of new possibilities of pleasure, which people had no idea 
about previously. The idea that S&M is related to a deep violence, that 
S&M practice is a way of liberating this violence, this aggression, is stu­
pid. We know very well what all those people are doing is not aggres­
sive; they are inventing new possibilities of pleasure with strange parts 
of their body-through the eroticization of the body. I think it's a kind 
of creation, a creative enterprise, which has as one of its main features 
what I call the desexualization of pleasure. The idea that bodily plea­
sure should always come from sexual pleasure as the root of all our pos­
sible pleasure-I think that's something quite wrong. These practices 
are insisting that we can produce pleasure with very odd things, very 
strange parts of our bodies, in very unusual situations, and so on. 
Q. So the conflation of pleasure and sex is being broken down. 
M.F. That's it precisely. The possibility of using our bodies as a 
possible source of very numerous pleasures is something that is very 
important. For instance, if you look at the traditional construction of 
pleasure, you see that bodily pleasure, or pleasures of the flesh, are 
always drinking, eating, and fucking. And that seems to be the limit 
of the understanding of our body, our pleasures. What frustrates me, 
for instance, is the fact that the problem of drugs is always envisaged 
only as a problem of freedom and prohibition. I think that drugs must 
become a part of our culture. 
Q. As a pleasure? 
M.F. As a pleasure. We have to study drugs. We have to experience 
drugs. We have to do good drugs that can produce very intense pleasure. 
I think this puritanism about drugs, which implies that you can either

166 Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
be for drugs or against drugs, is mistaken. Drugs have now become a 
part of our culture. Just as there is bad music and good music, there 
are bad drugs and good drugs. So we can't say we are "against" drugs 
any more than we can say we're "against" music. 
Q. The point is to experiment with pleasure and its possibilities. 
M.F. Yes. Pleasure also must be a part of our culture. It is very inter­
esting to note, for instance, that for centuries people generally, as well 
as doctors, psychiatrists, and even liberation movements, have always 
spoken about desire, and never about pleasure. "We have to liberate 
our desire," they say. No! We have to create new pleasure. And then 
maybe desire will follow. 
Q. Is it significant that there are, to a large degree, identities form­
ing around new sexual practices, like S&M? These identities help in 
exploring such practices and defending the right to engage in them. But 
are they also limiting in regards to the possibilities of individuals? 
M.F. Well, if identity is only a game, if it is only a procedure to have 
relations, social and sexual-pleasure relationships that create new 
friendships, it is useful. But if identity becomes the problem of sexual 
existence, and if people think that they have to "uncover" their "own 
identity," and that their own identity has to become the law, the prin­
ciple, the code of their existence; if the perennial question they ask is 
"Does this thing conform to my identity?" then, I think, they will turn 
back to a kind of ethics very close to the old heterosexual virility. If we 
are asked to relate to the question of identity, it must be an identity to 
our unique selves. But the relationships we have to have with ourselves 
are not ones of identity, rather, they must be relationships of differen­
tiation, of creation, of innovation. To be the same is really boring. We 
must not exclude identity if people find their pleasure through this iden­
tity, but we must not think of this identity as an ethical universal rule. 
Q. But up to this point, sexual identity has been politically very useful. 
M.F. Yes, it has been very useful, but it limits us, and I think we 
have-and can have-a right to be free. 
Q. We want some of our sexual practices to be ones of resistance in 
a political and social sense. Yet how is this possible, given that control 
can be exercised by the stimulation of pleasure? Can we be sure that 
these new pleasures won't be exploited in the way advertising uses the 
stimulation of pleasure as a means of social control? 
M.F. We can never be sure. In fact, we can always be sure it will hap­
pen, and that everything that has been created or acquired, any ground

Sex, Power, and the Politics of Identity 
that has been gained will, at a certain moment be used in such a way. 
That's the way we live, that's the way we struggle, that's the way of 
human history. And I don't think that is an objection to all those move­
ments or all those situations. But you are quite right in underlining that 
we always have to be quite careful and to be aware of the fact that we 
must move on to something else, that we have other needs as well. The 
S&M ghetto in San Francisco is a good example of a community that 
has experimented with, and formed an identity around, pleasure. This 
ghettoization, this identification, this procedure of exclusion and so 
on-all of these have, as well, produced their countereffects. I dare not 
use the word dialectics-but this comes rather close to it. 
Q. You write that power is not just a negative force but a productive 
one; that power is always there; that where there is power, there is 
resistance; and that resistance is never in a position of externality vis­
a-vis power. If this is so, then how do we come to any other conclu­
sion than that we are always trapped inside that relationship-that we 
can't somehow break out of it. 
M.F. Well, I don't think the word trapped is a correct one. It is a 
struggle, but what I mean by power relations is the fact that we are in 
a strategic situation toward each other. For instance, being homosexu­
als, we are in a struggle with the government, and the government is in 
a struggle with us. When we deal with the government, the struggle, 
of course, is not symmetrical, the power situation is not the same; but 
we are in this struggle, and the continuation of this situation can influ­
ence the behavior or nonbehavior of the other. So we are not trapped. 
We are always in this kind of situation. It means that we always have 
possibilities, there are always possibilities of changing the situation. We 
cannot jump outside the situation, and there is no point where you are 
free from all power relations. But you can always change it. So what I've 
said does not mean that we are always trapped, but that we are always 
free-well, anyway, that there is always the pOSSibility of changing. 
Q. So resistance comes from within that dynamic? 
M.F. Yes. You see, if there was no resistance, there would be no 
power relations. Because it would simply be a matter of obedience. 
You have to use power relations to refer to the situation where you're 
not doing what you want. So resistance comes first, and resistance re­
mains superior to the forces of the process; power relations are obliged 
to change with the resistance. So I think that resistance is the main 
word, the key word, in this dynamic.

168 Ethics.' Subjectivity and Truth 
Q. Politically speaking, probably the most important part of looking 
at power is that, according to previous conceptions, "to resist" was 
simply to say no. Resistance was conceptualized only in terms of nega­
tion. Within your understanding, however, to resist is not simply a 
negation but a creative process; to create and recreate, to change the 
situation, actually to be an active member of that process. 
M.F. Yes, that is the way I would put it. To say no is the minimum 
form of resistance. But, of course, at times that is very important. You 
have to say no as a decisive form of resistance. 
Q. This raises the question of in what way, and to what degree, can 
a dominated subject (or subjectivity) actually create its own discourse. 
In traditional power analysis, the omnipresent feature of analysis is the 
dominant discourse, and only as a subsidiary are there reactions to, 
or within, that discourse. However, if what we mean by resistance in 
power relations is more than negation, then aren't some practices like, 
say, lesbian S&M, actually ways for dominated subjects to formulate 
their own languages? 
M.F. Well, you see, I think that resistance is a part of this strategic 
relationship of which power consists. Resistance really always relies 
upon the situation against which it struggles. For instance, in the gay 
movement the medical definition of homosexuality was a very impor­
tant tool against the oppression of homosexuality in the last part of the 
nineteenth century and in the early twentieth century. This medicali­
zation, which was a means of oppression, has always been a means of 
resistance as well-since people could say, "If we are sick, then why 
do you condemn us, why do you despise us?" and so on. Of course, 
this discourse now sounds rather naIve to us, but at the time it was 
very important. 
I should say, also, that I think that in the lesbian movement, the fact 
that women have been, for centuries and centuries, isolated in society, 
frustrated, despised in many ways, and so on, has given them the real 
possibility of constituting a society, of creating a kind of social relation 
between themselves, outside the social world that was dominated by 
males. Lillian Faderman's book Surpassing the Love of Men is very 
interesting in this regard. It raises the question: What kind of emo­
tional experience, what kind of relationships, were possible in a world 
where women in society had no social, no legal, and no political power? 
And she argues that women used that isolation and lack of power. 
Q. If resistance is a process of breaking out of discursive practices,

Sex, Power, and the Politics of Identity 169 
it would seem that the case that has a prima facie claim to be truly 
oppositional might be something like lesbian S&M. To what degree 
can such practices and identities be seen as challenging the dominant 
discourse? 
M.F. What I think is interesting now, in relation to lesbian S&M, is 
that they can get rid of certain stereotypes of femininity which have 
been used in the lesbian movement-a strategy that the movement has 
erected from the past. This strategy has been based on their oppres­
sion. But now, maybe, these tools, these weapons are obsolete. We can 
see that lesbian S&M tried to get rid of all those old stereotypes of fem­
ininity, of antimale attitude and so on. 
Q. What do you think we can learn about power and, for that mat­
ter, about pleasure from the practice of S&M-that is, the explicit 
eroticization of power? 
M.F. One can say that S&M is the eroticization of power, the erotici­
zation of strategic relations. What strikes me with regard to S&M is 
how it differs from social power. What characterizes power is the fact 
that it is a strategic relation which has been stabilized through insti­
tutions. So the mobility in power relations is limited, and there are 
strongholds that a:r:e very, very difficult to suppress because they have 
been institutionalized and are now very pervasive in courts, codes, 
and so on. All this means that the strategic relations of people are 
made rigid. 
On this point, the S&M game is very interesting because it is a stra­
tegic relation, but it is always fluid. Of course, there are roles, but 
everybody knows very well that those roles can be reversed. Some­
times the scene begins with the master and slave, and at the end the 
slave has become the master. Or, even when the roles are stabilized, 
you know very well that it is always a game. Either the rules are trans­
gressed, or there is an agreement, either explicit or tacit, that makes 
them aware of certain boundaries. This strategic game as a source of 
bodily pleasure is very interesting. But I wouldn't say that it is a repro­
duction, inside the erotic relationship, of the structures of power. It is 
an acting-out of power structures by a strategic game that is able to give 
sexual pleasure or bodily pleasure. 
Q. How does this strategic relation in sex differ for that in power 
relations? 
M.F. The practice of S&M is the creation of pleasure, and there is 
an identity with that creation. And that's why S&M is really a subcul-

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
ture. It's a process of invention. S&M is the use of a strategic relation­
ship as a source of pleasure (physical pleasure). It is not the first time 
that people have used strategic relations as a source of pleasure. For 
instance, in the Middle Ages there was the institution of "courtly love," 
the troubadour, the institutions of the love relationships between the 
lady and the lover, and so on. That, too, was a strategic game. You even 
find this between boys and girls when they are dancing on Saturday 
night. They are acting out strategic relations. What is interesting is that, 
in this heterosexual life, those strategic relations come before sex. It's 
a strategic relation in order to obtain sex. And in S&M those strategic 
relations are inside sex, as a convention of pleasure within a particu­
lar situation. 
In the one case, the strategic relations are purely social relations, and 
it is your social being that is involved; while, in the other case, it is your 
body that is involved. And it is this transfer of strategic relations from 
the court( ship) to sex that is very interesting. 
Q. You mentioned in an interview in Gai Pied a year or two ago that 
what upsets people most about gay relations is not so much sexual acts 
per se but the potential for affectional relationships carried on outside 
the normative patterns. These friendships and networks are unfore­
seen. Do you think what frightens people is the unknown potential of 
gay relations, or would you suggest that these relations are seen as pos­
ing a direct threat to social institutions? 
M.F. One thing that interests me now is the problem of friendship. 
For centuries after antiquity, friendship was a very important kind of 
social relation: a social relation within which people had a certain free­
dom, certain kind of choice (limited of course), as well as very intense 
emotional relations. There were also economic and social implications 
to these relationships-they were obliged to help their friends, and 
so on. I think that in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, we see 
these kinds of friendships disappearing, at least in the male society. 
And friendship begins to become something other than that. You can 
find, from the sixteenth century on, texts that explicitly criticize friend­
ship as something dangerous. 
The army, bureaucracy, administration, universities, schools, and so 
on-in the modern senses of these words-cannot function with such 
intense friendships. I think there can be seen a very strong attempt in 
all these institutions to diminish or minimize the affectional relations. 
I think this is particularly important in schools. When they started

Sex, Power, and the Politics of Identity 171 
grade schools with hundreds of young boys, one of the problems was 
how to prevent them not only from having sex, of course, but also from 
developing friendships. For instance, you could study the strategy of 
Jesuit institutions about this theme of friendship, since the Jesuits knew 
very well that it was impossible for them to suppress this. Rather, they 
tried to use the role of sex, of love, of friendship, and at the same time 
to limit it. I think now, after studying the history of sex, we should try 
to understand the history of friendship, or friendships. That history is 
very, very important. 
And one of my hypotheses, which I am sure would be borne out if we 
did this, is that homosexuality became a problem-that is, sex between 
men became a problem-in the eighteenth century. We see the rise of 
it as a problem with the police, within the justice system, and so on. I 
think the reason it appears as a problem, as a social issue, at this time 
is that friendship had disappeared. As long as friendship was some­
thing important, was socially accepted, nobody realized men had sex 
together. You couldn't say that men didn't have sex together-it just 
didn't matter. It had no social implication, it was culturally accepted. 
Whether they fucked together or kissed had no importance. Absolutely 
no importance. Once friendship disappeared as a culturally accepted 
relation, the issue arose: "What is going on between men?" And that's 
when the problem appears. And if men fuck together, or have sex to­
gether, that now appears as a problem. Well, I'm sure I'm right, that 
the disappearance of friendship as a social relation and the declara­
tion of homosexuality as a social/political/medical problem are the 
same process. 
Q. If the important thing now is to explore anew the possibilities of 
friendships, we should note that, to a large degree, all the social insti­
tutions are designed for heterosexual friendships and structures, and 
the denial of homosexual ones. Isn't the real task to set up new social 
relations, new value structures, familial structures, and so on? One of 
the things gay people don't have is easy access to all the structures and 
institutions that go along with monogamy and the nuclear family. What 
kinds of institutions do we need to begin to establish, in order not just 
to defend ourselves but also to create new social forms that are really 
going to be alternative? 
M.F. Institutions. I have no precise idea. I think, of course, that to 
use the model of family life, or the institutions of the family, for this 
purpose and this kind of friendship would be quite contradictory. But

172 Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
it is quite true that since some of the relationships in society are pro­
tected forms of family life, an effect of this is that the variations which 
are not protected are, at the same time, often much richer, more inter­
esting and creative than the others. But, of course, they are much more 
fragile and vulnerable. The question of what kinds of institutions we 
need to create is an important and crucial issue, but one that I cannot 
give an answer to. I think that we have to try to build a solution. 
Q. To what degree do we want, or need, the project of gay libera­
tion today to be one that refuses to chart a course and instead insists 
on opening up new venues? In other words, does your approach to sex­
ual politics deny the need for a program and insist on experimenta­
tion with new kind of relations? 
M.F. I think that one of the great experiences we've had since the 
last war is that all those social and political programs have been a great 
failure. We have come to realize that things never happen as we expect 
from a political program, and that a political program has always, or 
nearly always, led to abuse or political domination from a bloc-be it 
from technicians or bureaucrats or other people. But one of the devel­
opments of the sixties and seventies which I think has been a good 
thing is that certain institutional models have been experimented with 
without a program. Without a program does not mean blindness-to 
be blind to thought. For instanc~, in France there has been a lot of crit­
icism recently about the fact that there are no programs in the various 
political movements about sex, about prisons, about ecology, and so 
on. But in my opinion, being without a program can be very useful 
and very original and creative, if it does not mean without proper 
reflection about what is going on, or without very careful attention to 
what's possible. 
Since the nineteenth century, great political institutions and great 
political parties have confiscated the process of political creation; that 
is, they have tried to give to political creation the form of a political 
program in order to take over power. I think what happened in the six­
ties and early seventies is something to be preserved. One of the things 
that I think should be preserved, however, is the fact that there has 
been political innovation, political creation, and political experimenta­
tion outside the great political parties, and outside the normal or ordi­
nary program. It's a fact that people's everyday lives have changed from 
the early sixties to now, and certainly within my own life. And surely 
that is not due to political parties but is the result of many movements.

Sex, Power, and the Politics of Identity 
These social movementg have really changed our whole lives, our men­
tality, our attitudes, and the attitudes and mentality of other people­
people who do not belong to these movements. And that is something 
very important and positive. I repeat, it is not the normal and old tra­
ditional political organizations that have led to this examination.



SEXUALITY AND SOLITUDE 
I n a work consecrated to the moral treatment of madness and pub­
lished in 1840, a French psychiatrist, Leuret, a tells of the manner in 
which he treated one of his patients-treated and of course, as you may 
imagine, cured. One morning he placed Mr. A., his patient, in a shower 
room. He makes him recount in detail his delirium. "But all that," said 
the doctor, "is nothing but madness. Promise me not to believe in it 
anymore." The patient hesitates, then promises. "That is not enough," 
replies the doctor. "You have already made me similar promises and 
you haven't kept them." And he turns on the cold shower above the 
patient's head. "Yes, yes! I am mad!" the patient cries. The shower is 
turned off; the interrogation is resumed. "Yes. I recognize that I am 
mad," the patient repeats. "But," he adds, "I recognize it because you 
are forcing me to do so." Another shower. "Well, well," says Mr. A., 
"I admit it. I am mad, and all that was nothing but madness." 
To make somebody suffering from mental illness recognize that he 
is mad is a very ancient procedure in traditional therapy. In the works 
of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, one finds many examples 
of what one might call "truth therapies." But the technique used by 
Leuret is altogether different. Leuret is not trying to persuade his 
patient that his ideas are false or unreasonable. What happens in the 
head of Mr. A. is a matter of perfect indifference to Leuret. The doc­
tor wishes to obtain a precise act, the explicit affirmation: "I am mad." 
Since I first read this passage of Leuret, about twenty years ago, I kept 
in mind the project of analyzing the form and the history of such a 
bizarre practice. Leuret is satisfied when and only when his patient

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
says, "I am mad," or: "That was madness." Leuret's assumption is that 
madness as a reality disappears when the patient asserts the truth and 
says he is mad. 
We have, then, the reverse of the performative speech act. The affir­
mation destroys in the speaking subject the reality that made the same 
affirmation true. What conception of truth of discourse and of subjec­
tivity is taken for granted in this strange and yet widespread practice? 
In order to justify the attention I am giving to what is seemingly so spe­
cialized a subject, let me take a step back for a moment. In the years 
that preceded the Second World War, and even more so after the war, 
philosophy in continental Europe and in France was dominated by the 
philosophy of subject. I mean that philosophy took as its task par excel­
lence the foundation of all knowledge and the principle of all signifi­
cation as stemming from the meaningful subject. The importance given 
to this question was due to the impact of Husserl, but the centrality of 
the subject was also tied to an institutional context, for the French uni­
versity, since philosophy began with Descartes, could only advance in 
a Cartesian manner. But we must also take into account the political 
conjunct. Given the absurdity of wars, slaughters, and despotism, it 
seemed to be up to the individual subject to give meaning to his exis­
tential choices. With the leisure and distance that came after the war, 
this emphasis on the philosophy of subject no longer seemed so self­
evident. Hitherto-hidden theoretical paradoxes could no longer be 
avoided. This philosophy of consciousness had paradoxically failed to 
found a philosophy of knowledge, and especially of scientific knowl­
edge. Also, this philosophy of meaning had failed to take into account 
the formative mechanisms of signification and the structure of systems 
of meaning. 
With the all too easy clarity of hindsight-of what Americans call the 
"Monday-morning quarterback"-let me say that there were two pos­
sible paths that led beyond this philosophy of subject. The first of these 
was the theory of objective knowledge as an analysis of systems of 
meaning, as semiology. This was the path of logical positivism. The 
second was that of a certain school of linguistics, psychoanalysis, and 
anthropology-all grouped under the rubric of Structuralism. These 
were not the directions I took. Let me announce once and for all that 
I am not a structuralist, and I confess, with the appropriate chagrin, 
that I am not an analytic philosopher. Nobody is perfect. But I have 
tried to explore another direction. I have tried to get out from the phi-

Sexuality and Solitude 177 
losophy of the subject, through a genealogy of the modern subject as a 
historical and cultural reality-which means as something that can 
eventually change. That, of course, is politically important. One can 
proceed with this general project in two ways. In dealing with mod­
ern theoretical constructions, we are concerned with the subject in gen­
eral. In this way, I have tried to analyze the theories of the subject as a 
speaking, living, working being in the seventeenth and eighteenth cen­
turies. One can also deal with the more practical understanding found 
in those institutions where certain subjects became objects of knowl­
edge and of domination: asylums, prisons, and so on. 
I wished to study those forms of understanding which the subject 
creates about himself. But since I started with this last type of prob­
lem, I have been obliged to change my mind on several points. Let me 
introduce a kind of auto-critique. It seems, according to some sugges­
tions of Jiirgen Habermas, that one can distinguish three major types 
of technique: the techniques that permit one to produce, to transform, 
to manipulate things; the techniques that permit one to use sign sys­
tems; and finally, the techniques that permit one to determine the con­
duct of individuals, to impose certain ends or objectives. That is to say, 
techniques of production, techniques of signification or communication, 
and techniques of domination. But I became more and more aware that 
in all societies there is another type of technique: techniques that per­
mit individuals to effect, by their own means, a certain number of oper­
ations on their own bodies, their own souls, their own thoughts, their 
own conduct, and this in a manner so as to transform themselves, mod­
ify themselves, and to attain a certain state of perfection, happiness, 
purity, supernatural power. Let us call these techniques "technologies 
of the self." 
If one wants to analyze the genealogy of the subject in Western civi­
lization, one must take into account not only techniques of domination 
but also techniques of the self. One must show the interaction between 
these types of technique. When I was studying asylums, prisons, and 
so on, I perhaps insisted too much on the techniques of domination. 
What we call "discipline" is something really important in this kind 
of institution; but it is only one aspect of the art of governing people 
in our societies. Having studied the field of power relations taking tech­
niques of domination as a point of departure, I would like, in the years 
to come, to study power relations starting from the techniques of the 
self. In every culture, I think, this self technology implies a set of truth

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
obligations: discovering the truth, being enlightened by truth, telling 
the truth. All these are considered important either for the constitu­
tion of, or the transformation of, the self. 
Now, what about truth as a duty in our Christian societies? As every­
body knows, Christianity is a confession. This means that Christianity 
belongs to a very special type of religion-those which impose obliga­
tions of truth on the practitioners. Such obligations in Christianity are 
numerous. For instance, there is the obligation to hold as truth a set 
of propositions that constitute dogma, the obligation to hold certain 
books as a permanent source of truth, and obligations to accept the 
decisions of certain authorities in matters of truth. But Christianity 
requires another form of truth obligation. Everyone in Christianity has 
the duty to explore who he is, what is happening within himself, the 
faults he may have committed, the temptations to which he is exposed. 
Moreover, everyone is obliged to tell these things to other people, and 
thus to bear witness against himself. 
These two ensembles of obligation-those regarding the faith, the 
book, the dogma, and those regarding the self, the soul, and the heart­
are linked together. A Christian needs the light of faith when he wants 
to explore himself, Conversely, his access to the truth can't be conceived 
of without the purification of his soul. The Buddhist, too, must go to 
the light and discover the truth about himself; but the relation between 
these two obligations is quite different in Buddhism and in Christianity. 
In Buddhism, it is the same type of enlightenment which leads you to 
discover what you are and what is the truth. In this simultaneous en­
lightenment of yourself and the truth, you discover that your self was 
only an illusion. I would like to underline that the Christian discovery 
of the self does not reveal the self as an illusion. It gives place to a task 
that cannot be anything else but undefined. This task has two objec­
tives. First, there is the task of clearing up all the illusions, tempta­
tions, and seductions that can occur in the mind, and of discovering 
the reality of what is going on within ourselves. Second, one must get 
free from any attachment to this self, not because the self is an illu­
sion but because the self is much too real. The more we discover the 
truth about ourselves, the more we must renounce ourselves; and the 
more we want to renounce ourselves, the more we need to bring to 
light the reality of ourselves. That is what we would call the spiral of 
truth formulation and reality renouncement which is at the heart of 
Christian techniques of the self.

Sexuality and Solitude 179 
Recently, Professor Peter Brown stated to me that what we have to 
understand is why it is that sexuality became, in Christian cultures, the 
seismograph of our subjectivity. It is a fact, a mysterious fact, that in 
this indefinite spiral of truth and reality in the self sexuality has been 
of major importance since the first centuries of our era. It has become 
more and more important. Why is there such a fundamental connec­
tion between sexuality, subjectivity, and truth obligation? This is the 
point at which I met Richard Sennett's work. 
Our point of departure in the seminar has been a passage of St. 
Fran~ois de Sales. Here is the text in a translation made at the begin­
ning of the seventeenth century: "I will tell you a point of the elephant's 
honesty. An elephant never changes his mate. He loves her tenderly. 
With her he couples not, but from three years to three years. And that 
only for five days, and so secretly that he is never seen in the act. But 
the sixth day, he shows himself abroad again, and the first thing he 
does is to go directly to some river and wash his body, not willing to 
return to his troupe of companions till he be purified. Be not these 
goodly and honest qualities in a beast by which he teaches married folk 
not to be given too much to carnal and sensual pleasures?"b 
Everybody may recognize here the pattern of decent sexual behav­
ior: monogamy, faithfulness, and procreation as the main, or maybe the 
single, justification for the sexual acts-sexual acts that remain, even 
in such conditions, intrinsically impure. Most of us are inclined, I think, 
to attribute this pattern either to Christianity or to modern Christian 
society as it developed under the influence of capitalist or so-called 
bourgeois morality. But what struck me when I started studying this 
pattern is the fact that one can also find it in Latin and even Hellenistic 
literature. One finds the same ideas, the same words, and eventually 
the same reference to the elephant. It is a fact that the pagan philoso­
phers ;in the centuries before and after the death of Christ proposed a 
sexual ethics that was very similar to the alleged Christian ethics. In 
our seminar, it was very convincingly stressed that this philosophical 
pattern of sexual behavior, this elephant pattern, was not at that time 
the only one to be known and put into practice; it was in competition 
with several others. Yet this pattern soon became predominant because 
it was related to a social transformation involving the disintegration of 
the city-states, the development of the imperial bureaucracy, and the 
increasing influence of the provincial middle class. 
During this period, we may witness an evolution toward the nuclear

180 Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
family, real monogamy, faithfulness between married people, and dis­
tress about sexual acts. The philosophical campaign in favor of the ele­
phant pattern was both an effect and an adjunct of this transformation. 
If these assumptions are correct, we must concede that Christianity did 
not invent this code of sexual behavior. Christianity accepted it, rein­
forced it, and gave it a much larger and more widespread strength than 
it had before. But the so-called Christian morality is nothing more than 
a piece of pagan ethics inserted into Christianity. Shall we say then that 
Christianity did not change the state of things? Early Christians intro­
duced important changes, if not in the sexual code itself, at least in the 
relationships everyone has to his own sexual activity. Christianity pro­
posed a new type of experience of oneself as a sexual being. 
To make things clearer, I will compare two texts-one written by 
Artemidorus, a pagan philosopher of the third century, and the other 
the well-known fourteenth book of The City of God by Augustine. 
Artemidorus wrote a book about the interpretation of dreams in the 
third century after the death of Christ, but he was a pagan. Three chap­
ters of this book are devoted to sexual dreams. What is the meaning, 
or, more precisely, what is the prognostic value, of a sexual dream? It 
is significant that Artemidorus interpreted dreams in a way contrary 
to Freud, and gives an interpretation of sexual dreams in terms of eco­
nomics, social relations, success and reverses in political activity and 
everyday life. For instance, if you dream that you have sex with your 
mother, that means that you will succeed as a magistrate, since your 
mother is obviously the symbol of your city or country. 
It is also significant that the social value of the dream depends not on 
the nature of the sexual act but mainly on the social status of the part­
ners. For instance, for Artemidorus it is not important in your dream 
whether you had sex with a girl or with a boy. The problem is to know 
if the partner was rich or poor, young or old, slave or free, married or 
not. Of course, he takes into account the question of the sexual act, but 
he sees it only from the point of view of the male. The only act he 
knows or recognizes as sexual is penetration. For him, penetration is 
not only a sexual act but part of the social role of a man in a city. I 
would say that for Artemidorus sexuality is relational, and that sexual 
relations cannot be dissociated from social relations. 
Now let us turn to Augustine's text, whose meaning is the point at 
which we want to arrive in our analysis. In The City if God, and later 
on in the Contra Julian, Augustine gives a rather horrifying descrip-

Sexuality and Solitude 
tion of the sexual act. He sees the sexual act as a kind of spasm. All 
the body, says Augustine, is shaken by terrible jerks; one entirely loses 
control of oneself. "This sexual act takes such a complete and passion­
ate possession of the whole man, both physically and emotionally, that 
what results is the keenest of all pleasures on the level of sensations, 
and at the crisis of excitement it practically paralyzes all power of delib­
erate thought." It is worthwhile to note that this description is not an 
invention of Augustine: you can find the same in the medical and pagan 
literature of the previous century. Moreover, Augustine's text is almost 
the exact transcription of a passage written by the pagan philosopher, 
Cicero, in the Hortensius. 
The surprising point is not that Augustine would give such a classi­
cal description of the sexual act, but the fact that, having given such a 
horrible description, he then admits that sexual relations could have 
taken place in Paradise before the Fall. This is all the more remark­
able since Augustine is one of the first Christian Fathers to admit the 
possibility. Of course, sex in Paradise could not have the epileptic form 
that we unfortunately know now. Before the Fall, Adam's body, every 
part of it, was perfectly obedient to the soul and the will. If Adam 
wanted to procreate in Paradise, he could do it in the same way and 
with the same control as he could, for instance, sow seeds in the earth. 
He was not involuntarily excited. Every part of his body was like the 
fingers, which one can control in all their gestures. Sex was a kind of 
hand gently sowing the seed. But what happened with the Fall? He rose 
up against God with the first sin; he tried to escape God's will and to 
acquire a will of his own, ignoring the fact that the existence of his own 
will depended entirely on the will of God. As a punishment for this 
revolt, and as a consequence of this will to will independently from 
God, Adam lost control of himself. He wanted to acquire an auton­
om01.is will and lost the ontological support for that will. That then 
became mixed in an indissociable way with involuntary movements, 
and this weakening of Adam's will had a disastrous effect. His body, 
and parts of his body, stopped obeying his commands, revolted against 
him, and the sexual parts of his body were the first to rise up in this 
disobedience. The famous gesture of Adam covering his genitals with 
a fig leaf is, according to Augustine, due not to the simple fact that 
Adam was ashamed of their presence but to the fact that his sexual 
organs were moving by themselves without his consent. Sex in erec­
tion is the image of man revolted against God. The arrogance of sex is

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
the punishment and consequence of the arrogance of man. His uncon­
trolled sex is exactly the same as what he himself has been toward 
God-a rebel. 
Why have I insisted so much on what may be nothing more than one 
of those exegetic fantasies of which Christian literature has been so 
prodigal? I think this text bears witness to the new type of relationship 
which Christianity established between sex and subjectivity. Augustine's 
conception is still dominated by the theme and form of male sexual­
ity. But the main question is not, as it was in Artemidorus, the prob­
lem of penetration-it is the problem of erection. As a result, it is not 
the problem of a relationship to other people but the problem of the 
relationship of oneself to oneself, or, more precisely, the relationship 
between one's will and involuntary assertions. 
The principle of autonomous movements of sexual organs is called 
libido by Augustine. The problem of libido, of its strength, origin, and 
effect, thus becomes the main issue of one's will. It is not an external 
obstacle to the will; it is a part, an internal component, of the will. And 
it is not the manifestation of petty desires. Libido is the result of one's 
will when it goes beyond the limits God originally set for it. As a con­
sequence, the means of the spiritual struggle against libido do not con­
sist, as with Plato, in turning our eyes upward and memorizing the 
reality we have previously known and forgotten; the spiritual struggle 
consists, on the contrary, in turning our eyes continuously downward 
or inward in order to decipher, among the movements of the soul, 
which ones come from the libido. The task is at first indefinite, since 
libido and will can never be substantially dissociated from one another. 
And this task is not only an issue of mastership but also a question of 
the diagnosis of truth and illusion. It requires a permanent hermeneu­
tics of oneself. 
In such a perspective, sexual ethics imply very strict truth obligations. 
These consist not only in learning the rules of a moral sexual behavior 
but also in constantly scrutinizing ourselves as libidinal beings. Shall 
we say that, after Augustine, we experience our sex in the head? Let 
us say at least that, in Augustine's analysis, we witness a reallibidini­
zation of sex. His moral theology is, to a certain extent, a systemat­
ization of a lot of previous speculation, but it is also an ensemble of 
spiritual techniques. 
When one reads the ascetic and monastic literature of the fourth and 
fifth centuries, one cannot but be struck by the fact that these tech-

Sexuality and Solitude 
niques are not directly concerned with the effective control of sexual 
behavior. There is little mention of homosexual relations, in spite of the 
fact that most ascetics lived in permanent and numerous communities. 
The techniques were mainly concerned with the stream of thoughts 
flowing into consciousness, disturbing by their multiplicity the neces­
sary unity of contemplation and secretly conveying images or sugges­
tions from Satan. The monk's task was not the philosopher's task: to 
acquire mastership over oneself by the definitive victory of the will. It 
was perpetually to control one's thoughts, examining them to see if they 
were pure, whether something dangerous was not hiding in or behind 
them, if they were not conveying something other than what primarily 
appeared, if they were not a form of illusion and seduction. Such data 
have always to be considered with suspicion; they need to be scrutinized 
and tested. According to Cassian, for instance, one must be toward one­
self as a moneychanger, who must try the coins he receives. Real purity 
is not acquired when one can lie down with a young and beautiful boy 
without even touching him, as Socrates did with Alcibiades. A monk 
was really chaste when no impure image occurred in his mind, even 
during the night, even during dreams. The criterion of purity does not 
consist in keeping control of oneself even in the presence of the most 
desirable people; it consists in discovering the truth in myself and de­
feating the illusions in myself, in cutting out the images and thoughts 
my mind continuously produces. Hence the axis of the spiritual struggle 
against impurity. The main question of sexual ethics has moved from 
relations to people, and from the penetration model to the relation to 
oneself and to the erection problem: I mean to the set of internal move­
ments that develop from the first and nearly imperceptible thought to 
the final but still solitary pollution. However different and eventually 
contradictory they were, a common effect was elicited: sexuality, sub­
jectivity, and truth were strongly linked together. This, I think, is the 
religious framework in which the masturbation problem-which was 
nearly ignored or at least neglected by the Greeks, who considered mas­
turbation a thing for slaves and for satyrs, but not for free citizens­
appeared as one of the main issues of the sexual life . 
NOTES 
a In this talk, which was given in English and first appeared in the London Review of Books (3:9 
Cu MaV-5 June 19B!]: ,), 5, and 6), Foucault misspoke, or was misheard, in calling the doctor 
"Louren." Its French translation, which we follow, corrects the error. The French editors fur-

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
ther provide the source of the anecdote: F. Leuret, Du traitement moral de lafolie (Paris: 
Bailliere, 1840), pp. 197-98. 
b Franliois de Sales, Introduction a la vie devotee (Dole: Bluzet-Guimier, 1988), bk. 3, ch. 39, 
pp. 431-32. The seminar to which Foucault refers here was conducted with Richard Sennett at 
New York University's Institute for the Humanities in November 1980. A statement by Sennett 
accompanies Foucault's in the London Review.

THE BATTLE FOR CHASTITY* 
Le battle for chastity is discussed in detail by John Cassian in the 
sixth chapter of the Institutiones, "Concerning the spirit of fornication," 
and in several of his Conferences: the fourth on "the lusts of the flesh 
and of the spirit," the fifth on "the eight principal vices," the twelfth 
on "chastity," and the twenty-second on "night visions." It ranks sec­
ond in a list of eight battles, I in the shape of a fight against the spirit 
of fornication. As for fornication itself, it is subdivided into three cate­
gories. 2 On the face of it a very unjuridicallist, if one compares it with 
the catalog of sins that are to be found when the medieval Church 
organizes the sacrament of penance on the lines of a penal code. But 
Cassian's specifications obviously have a different meaning. 
Let us first examine the place of fornication among the other sin­
ful tendencies. 
Cassian arranges his eight sins in a particular order. He sets up pairs 
of vices that seem linked in some specifically close way:3 pride and 
vainglory, sloth and accidie, avarice and wrath. Fornication is coupled 
with greed, for several reasons. They are two "natural" vices, innate 
*The opening paragraph of the original text, a contribution to a 1982 volume on occiden­
tal sexualities edited by Philippe Aries and Andre Bejin, is omitted in this translation. 
The paragraph describes the text as an extract from the third volume of The History of 
Sexuality; but the description precedes Foucault's decision to relegate discussion of the 
period discussed in the text to a fourth volume, Aveux de la chair [Confessions qf the 
Flesh], which remains unpublished. The full paragraph reads: "Ce texte est extra it du 
troisieme volume de I'Histoire de la sexualite. Apres avoir consulte Philippe Aries sur 
I 'orientation generale du present recueil, j'ai pense que ce texte consonait avec les autres 
etudes. II nous semble en if.fet que l'idee qu'on sefait d'ordinaire d'une ethique sexuelle 
chretienne est a reviser profondement; et que, d'autre part, la valeur centrale de fa ques-

186 Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
and hence very difficult to cure. They are also the two vices that involve 
the participation of the body, not only in their growth but also in achiev­
ing their object; and finally they also have a direct causal connection­
overindulgence in food and drink fuels the urge to commit fornication. 4 
In addition, the spirit of fornication occupies a position of peculiar 
importance among the other vices, either because it is closely bound 
with greed, or simply by its very nature. 
First, the causal chain. Cassian emphasizes the fact that the vices do 
not exist in isolation, even though an individual may be particularly 
affected by one vice or another. 5 There is a causal link that binds them 
all together. It begins with greed, which arises in the body and inflames 
the spirit of fornication; these two engender avarice, understood as an 
attachment to worldly wealth, which in turn leads to rivalries, quarrel­
ing, and wrath. The result is despondency and sorrow, provoking the 
sin of accidie and total disgust with monastic life. Such a progression 
implies that one will never be able to conquer a vice unless one can 
conquer the one on which it leans: "The defeat of the first weakens the 
one that depends on it; victory over the former leads to the collapse 
of the latter without further effort." As with the others, the greed­
fornication pair, like "a huge tree whose shadow stretches afar," has 
to be uprooted. Hence the importance for the ascetic of fasting as a way 
of conquering greed and suppressing fornication. Therein lies the basis 
of the practice of asceticism, for it is the first link in the causal chain. 
The spirit of fornication is seen as being in an odd relationship to 
the last vices on the list, especially pride. In fact, for Cassian, pride and 
vainglory do not form part of the causal chain of other vices. Far from 
being generated by them, they result from victory over them: 6 "carnal 
pride," that is, flaunting one's fasts, one's chastity, one's poverty, and 
so on before other people, and "spiritual pride," which makes one 
think that one's progress is all due to one's own merits.7 One vke that 
springs from the defeat of another means a fall that is that much greater. 
tion de la masturbation a une toute autre origine que la campagne des medecins aux 
XVIIIe et XIxe silxles" ("This text is an extract from the third volume of The History if 
Sexuality. After having discussed with Philippe Aries the general orientation of the pres­
ent collection, I thought that the text was consonant with the other studies. It indeed 
seems to us that the idea one ordinarily has of a Christian sexual ethics should be 
profoundly revised; and that, moreover, the central value of the question of masturba­
tion has an altogether other origin from that of the doctors' campaign of the eighteenth 
and nineteenth centuries"). The text that appears here, translated by Anthony Forster 
and originally published in western Sexuality, ed. P. Aries and A. Bejin (Oxford: Basil 
Blackwell, 1985), has been amended.

The Battle for Chastity 
And fornication, the most disgraceful of all the vices, the one that is 
most shameful, is the consequence of pride-a chastisement but also a 
temptation, the proof God sends to the presumptuous mortal to remind 
him that he is always threatened by the weakness of the flesh if the 
grace of God does not come to his help. "Because someone has for long 
exulted in the pureness of his heart and his body, it naturally follows ... 
that in the back of his mind he rather prides himself on it ... so it is a 
good thing for the Lord to desert him, for his own good. The pureness 
which has been making him so self-assured begins to worry him, and 
in the midst of his spiritual well-being he finds himself faltering."8 
When the soul has only itself to combat, the wheel comes full circle, 
the battle begins again, and the prickings of the flesh are felt anew, 
showing the inevitable continuance of the struggle and the threat of a 
perpetual recurrence. 
Finally, fornication has, as compared with other vices, an ontologi­
cal particularity that gives it a special ascetic importance. Like greed, 
it is rooted in the body and impossible to beat without chastisement. 
While wrath or despondency can be fought only in the mind, fornica­
tion cannot be eradicated without "mortifying the flesh, by vigils, fasts 
and back-breaking labor."9 This does not exclude-on the contrary­
the battle the mind has to wage against itself, since fornication may be 
born of thoughts, images, and memories. "When the Devil, with sub­
tle cunning, has insinuated into our hearts the memory of a woman, 
beginning with our mother, our sisters, or certain pious women, we 
should as quickly as possible expel these memories for fear that, if we 
linger on them too long, the tempter may seize the opportunity to lead 
us unwittingly to think about other women." 10 Nevertheless, there is 
one fundamental difference between fornication and greed. The fight 
against the latter has to be carried on with a certain restraint, since 
one cannot give up all food: "The requirements of life have to be pro­
vided for ... for fear lest the body, deprived through our own error, may 
lose the strength to carry out the necessary spiritual exercises. "11 This 
natural propensity for eating has to be kept at arm's length, treated 
unemotionally, but not abolished. It has its own legitimacy; to repudi­
ate it totally, that is to say, to the point of death, would be to burden 
one's soul with a crime. On the other hand, there are no holds barred 
in the fight against the spirit of fornication; everything that can direct 
our steps to it must be eradicated, and no call of nature can be allowed 
to justify the satisfaction of a need in this domain. This is an appetite

188 Ethics .. Subjectivity and Truth 
whose suppression does not lead to our bodily death, and it must be 
totally eradicated. Of the eight sins, fornication is the only one that is 
at once innate, natural, physical in origin, and needing to be as totally 
destroyed as the vices of the soul, such as avarice and pride. There 
must be severe mortification therefore, which lets us live in our bod­
ies while releasing us from the flesh. "Depart from this flesh while liv­
ing in the body." 12 It is into this region beyond nature, but in our earthly 
lives, that the fight against fornication leads us. It "drags us from the 
slough of the earth." It causes us to live in this world a life that is not 
of this world. Because this mortification is the harshest, it promises the 
most to us in this world below: "rooted in the flesh," it offers "the cit­
izenship which the saints have the promise of possessing once they are 
delivered from the corruption of the flesh. "13 
Thus, one sees how fornication, though just one of the elements in 
the table of vices, has its own special position, heading the causal chain, 
and is the sin chiefly responsible for backsliding and battles, at one of 
the most difficult and decisive points in the struggle for an ascetic life. 
In his fifth Conference, Cassian divides fornication into three varie­
ties. The first consists of the "joining together of the two sexes" (com­
mixtio sex us utriusque); the second takes place "without contact with 
the woman" (absque femineo tactu)-the damnable sin of Onan; the 
third is "conceived in the mind and the thoughts. "14 Almost the same 
distinction is repeated in the twelfth Conference: "carnal conjuncti0n" 
(carnalis commixtio), which Cassian callsfornicatio in its restricted 
sense; next uncleanness, immunditia, which takes place without con­
tact with a woman, while one is either sleeping or awake, and which 
is due to "the negligence of an unwatchful mind"; finally there is libido, 
which develops in "the dark corners of the soul" without "physical pas­
sion" (sine passione corporis). 15 These distinctions are important, for 
they alone help one to understand what Cassian meant by the general 
termfornicatio, to which he gives no definition elsewhere; but they are 
particularly important for the way he uses these three categories-in 
a way that differs so much from what one finds in earlier texts. 
There already existed a traditional trilogy of the sins of the flesh: 
adultery, fornication (meaning sexual relations outside marriage), and 
"the corruption of children." At least these are the three categories to 
be found in the Didache: "Thou shalt not commit adultery; thou shalt 
not commit fornication; thou shalt not seduce young boys." 16 And these 
are what we find in the "Epistle of Saint Barnabas": "Do not commit

The Battle for Chastity 189 
fornication or adultery; do not corrupt the young." 17 We often find later 
that only the first two precepts are imposed, fornication covering all 
sexual offenses, and adultery covering those which infringe the mar­
riage vows.18 But, in any case, these were habitually accompanied by 
precepts about covetousness in thought or sight or anything that might 
lead one to commit a forbidden sexual act: "Refrain from covetousness, 
for it leads to fornication; abstain from obscene talk and brazen looks, 
for all this sort of thing leads to adultery. "19 
Cassian's analysis has two special features: one is that he does not 
deal separately with adultery, but places it with fornication in its lim­
ited sense; and the other is that he devotes attention mostly to the other 
two categories. Nowhere in the various texts in which he speaks of the 
battle for chastity does he refer to actual sexual relations. Nowhere are 
the various sins set out dependent on actual sexual relations-the part­
ner with whom it was committed, his or her age, or possible degree 
of consanguinity. Not one of the categories that in the Middle Ages 
were to be built up into a great code of sins is to be found here. Doubt­
less, Cassian, who was addressing an audience of monks who had taken 
vows to renounce all sexual relations, felt he could skip these prelim­
inaries. One notices, however, that on one very important aspect of 
celibacy, where Basil of Caesarea and Chrysostom had given explicit 
advice,2o Cassian does make discreet allusion: "Let no one, especially 
when among young folk, remain alone with another, even for a short 
time, or withdraw with him or take him by the hand. "21 He carries on 
his discussion as if he is only interested in his last two categories (about 
what goes on without sexual relationship or physical passion), as if he 
was passing over fornication as a physical union of two individuals and 
only devoting serious attention to behavior which up until then had 
been severely censured only when leading up to real sexual acts. 
Yet even though Cassian's analysis ignores physical sex, and its sphere 
of action is quite solitary and secluded, his reasoning is not purely neg­
ative. The whole essence of the fight for chastity is that it aims at a 
target which has nothing to do with actions or relationships; it concerns 
a different reality than that of a sexual connection between two indi­
viduals. A passage in the twelfth Conference reveals the nature of this 
reality: in it Cassian describes the six stages that mark the advance 
toward chastity. The object of the description is not to define chastity 
itself but to pick out the negative signs by which one can trace prog­
ress toward it-the various signs of impurity that disappear one by

19° Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
one-and so to get an idea of what one must contend with in the fight 
for chastity. 
First sign of progress: When the monk awakes he is not "smitten 
by a carnal impulse" (impugnatione carnali non eliditur), that is, the 
mind [arne] is no longer troubled by physical reactions over which the 
will has no control. 
Second stage: If "voluptuous thoughts" (voluptariae cogitationes) 
should arise in the monk's mind, he does not let it dwell on them. He 
can stop thinking about things that have arisen in his mind involuntar­
ily and in spite of himself.22 
Third stage: When a glimpse of the world outside can no longer 
arouse lustful feelings, and one can look upon a woman without any 
feeling of desire. 
Fourth stage: One no longer in one's waking hours feels any, even 
the most innocent, movement of the flesh. Does Cas sian mean that 
there is no movement of the flesh, and that therefore one has total con­
trol over one's own body? Probably not, since elsewhere he often insists 
on the persistence of involuntary bodily movements. The term he uses, 
peiferre, signifies no doubt that such movements are not capable of 
affecting the mind [arne], which thus does not suffer from them. 
Fifth stage: "If the subject of a discourse or the logical consequence 
of a reading involves the idea of human procreation, the mind does not 
allow itself to be touched by the remotest thought of sexual pleasure, 
but contemplates the act in a mood of calmness and purity, as a simple 
function, a necessary adjunct to the prolongation of the human race, 
and departs no more affected by the recollection of it than if it had been 
thinking about brickmaking or some other trade." 
Finally, the last stage is reached when our sleep is not troubled by 
the vision of a seductive woman. Even though we may not think it a 
sin to be subject to such illusions, it is however a sign that some lust­
ful feeling still lurks in the depths of our being.23 
Amid all this description of the different symptoms of fornication, 
gradually fading out as one approaches the state of chastity, there is no 
mention of relationships with others, no acts, not even any intention 
of committing one. In fact, there is no fornication in the strict sense of 
the word. This microcosm of the solitary life lacks the two major ele­
ments on which is centered not only the sexual ethic of the philoso­
phers of the ancient world but also that of a Christian like Clement of 
Alexandria (at least in Epistle 2 of his Pedagogus), namely, the sexual

The Battle for Chastity 
union of two individuals (sunousia) and the pleasure of the act (aphro­
disia). Cassian is interested in the movements of the body and the mind 
[arne], images, feelings, memories, faces in dreams, the spontaneous 
movements of thoughts, the consenting (or refusing) will, waking and 
sleeping. And two poles are sketched out which, it must be stressed, 
do not coincide with the body and soul. They are, first, the involun­
tary pole, which consists either of physical movements or of feelings 
evoked by memories and images that survive from the past and ferment 
in the mind, besieging and enticing the will; and, second, the pole of 
the will itself, which accepts or repels, averts its eyes or allows itself 
to be ensnared, holds back or consents. On the one side, then, bodily 
and mental reflexes that bypass the mind [arne] and, becoming infected 
with impurity, may proceed to corruption [pollution], and on the other 
side, an internal play of thoughts. Here we find the two kinds of "for­
nication" as broadly defined by Cassian, to which he confines the whole 
of his analysis, leaving aside the question of physical sex. His theme is 
irnrnunditia, something that catches the mind [arne], waking or sleep­
ing, off its guard and can lead to pollution, without any contact with 
another; and the libido, which develops in thE: dark comers of the mind 
[arne]. In this connection, Cassian reminds us that libido has the same 
origin as libet ("it pleases") .24 
The spiritual battle and the advance toward chastity, whose six stages 
are described by Cassian, can thus be seen as a task of dissociation. We 
are now far away from the rationing of pleasure and its strict limita­
tion to permissible actions; far away, too, from the idea of a separation 
as drastic as possible between mind [arne] and body. But what does con­
cern us is a never-ending struggle over the movements of our thoughts 
(whether they extend or reflect those of our body, or whether they 
motivate them), over its simplest manifestations, over the factors that 
can activate it. The aim is that the subject should never be affected in 
his effort by the obscurest or the most seemingly "unwilled" presence 
of will. The six stages that lead to chastity represent steps toward the 
disinvolvement of the will. The first step is to exclude its involvement 
in bodily reactions; then exclude it from the imagination (not to linger 
on what crops up in one's mind); then exclude it from the action of 
the senses (cease to be conscious of bodily movements); then exclude it 
from figurative involvement (cease to think of things as possible objects 
of desire); and, finally, oneiric involvement (the desires that may be 
stirred by images that appear, albeit spontaneously, in dreams). This

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
sort of involvement, of which the willful act or the explicit will to com­
mit an act is the most visible form, Cassian calls concupiscence. It is 
against this that spiritual combat-and the effort at dissociation, at 
disimplication that it pursues-is turned. 
Here is the reason why, all through this battle against the spirit of 
fornication and for chastity, the sole fundamental problem is that of 
pollution-whether as something that is subservient to the will and a 
possible form of self-indulgence, or as something happening spon­
taneously and involuntarily in sleep or dreams. So important is it that 
Cassian makes the absence of erotic dreams and nocturnal pollution a 
sign that one has reached the pinnacle of chastity. He often returns to 
this topic: "The proof that one has achieved this state of purity will be 
that no apparition will beguile us when resting or stretched out in 
sleep"25; or again, "This is the sum of integrity and the final proof: 
that we are not visited by voluptuous thoughts during sleep and that 
we should be unaware of the pollutions to which we are subjected by 
nature. "26 The whole of the twenty-second Conference is devoted to the 
question of "nocturnal pollutions" and "the necessity of using all our 
strength to be delivered from them." And on various occasions, Cassian 
calls to mind holy characters like Serenus, who had attained such a 
high degree of virtue that they were never troubled by inconveniences 
of this kind. 27 
Obviously, in a rule of life where renunciation of all sexual rela­
tions was absolutely basic, it was quite logical that this topic should 
assume such importance. One is reminded of the importance, in groups 
inspired by Pythagorean ideas, accorded the phenomena of sleep and 
dreams for what they reveal about the quality of existence, and to the 
self-purification that was supposed to guarantee its serenity. Above all, 
one must realize that nocturnal pollution raised problems where rit­
ual purity was concerned, and it was precisely these problems which 
prompted the twenty-second Conference: can one draw near to the 
"holy altars" and partake of the bread and wine when one has suffered 
nocturnal defilement?28 But even if all these reasons can explain such 
preoccupations among the theoreticians of monastic life, they cannot 
account for the absolutely central position occupied by the question of 
voluntary/involuntary pollution in the whole discussion of the battle 
for chastity. Pollution was not simply the object of a stricter ban than 
anything else, or harder to control. It was a yardstick [analyseur] of 
concupiscence, in that it helped to decide-in the light of what formed

The Battle for Chastity 193 
its background, initiated it, and finally unleashed it-the part played 
by the will in forming these images, feelings, and memories in the 
mind [arne]. The monk concentrates his whole energy on never letting 
his will be involved in this reaction, which goes from the body to the 
mind [arne] and from the mind [arne] to the body, and over which the 
will may have a hold, either to encourage it or halt it through mental 
activity. The first five stages of the advance toward chastity constitute 
increasingly subtle disengagements of the will from the increasingly 
restricted reactions that may bring on this pollution. 
There remains the final stage, attainable by holiness: absence of 
"absolutely" involuntary pollutions during sleep. Again, Cassian points 
out that these pollutions are not necessarily all involuntary. Overeating 
and impure thoughts during the day all show that one is willing, if not 
intending, to have them. He makes a distinction between the type of 
dream that accompanies them and the images' degree of impurity. Any­
one who is taken by surprise would be wrong to blame his body or 
sleep: "It is a sign of the corruption that festers within, and not just a 
product of the night. Buried in the depth of the soul, the corruption 
has come to the surface during sleep, revealing the hidden fever of pas­
sions with which we have become infected by glutting ourselves all day 
long on unhealthy emotions. "29 Finally, there is the pollution that is 
totally involuntary, devoid of the pleasure that implies consent, with­
out even the slightest trace of a dream image. Doubtless this is the goal 
attainable by the ascetic who has practiced with sufficient rigor; the pol­
lution is only a "residue" in which the person concerned plays no part. 
"We have to repress the reactions of our minds and the emotions of our 
bodies until the flesh can satisfy the demands of nature without giv­
ing rise to any pleasurable feelings, getting rid of the excess of our bod­
ily humors without any unhealthy urges and without having to plunge 
back into the battle for our chastity. "30 Since this is a supranatural phe­
nomenon, only a supranatural power can give us this freedom, spiritual 
grace. This is why nonpollution is the sign of holiness, the stamp of 
the highest chastity possible, a blessing one may hope for but not attain. 
For his part, man must do nothing less than remain in relation to 
himself in a state of perpetual vigilance even as far as the least impulses 
that might be produced in his body or his soul are concerned. To stay 
awake night and day-at night for the day and in the day thinking of 
the night to come. "As purity and vigilance during the day dispose one 
to be chaste during the night, so too nocturnal vigilance replenishes the

194 Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
strength of the heart to observe chastity during the day. "31 This vigi­
lance means exerting the sort of "discrimination" that lies at the heart 
of the self-analysis [techniques de soi-meme] developed in active spiri­
tuality. The work of the miller sorting out his grain, the centurion pick­
ing his troops, the moneychanger who weighs coins before accepting 
or refusing them-this is how the monk must unceasingly treat his own 
thoughts, so as to identify those which may bring temptation. Such an 
effort will allow him to sort out his thoughts according to their origin, 
to distinguish them by their quality, and to separate the objects they 
represent from the pleasure they can evoke. This is an endless task of 
analysis that one must apply to oneself and, by the duty of confession, 
to our relations with others.32 Neither the idea of the inseparability of 
chastity and "fornication" affirmed by Cassian, nor the way in which 
he analyzes them, nor the different elements that, according to him, 
inhere in them, nor the connections he establishes between them­
pollution, libido, concupiscence-can be understood without reference 
to the techniques of self-analysis [technologies de soi] that characterize 
monastic life and the spiritual battle it traverses. 
Do we find that, between Tertullian and Cas sian, prohibitions have 
been intensified, an even greater importance attached to absolute con­
tinence, and the sexual act increasingly stigmatized? This is not the way 
the question should be framed. 
The organization of monasticism and the dimorphism that de­
veloped between monastic and secular life brought aqout important 
changes in the problem of sexual renunciation. They brought with them 
the development of very complex techniques of self-analysis [techni­
ques de SOl]. So, in the very manner in which sex was renounced there 
appeared a rule of life and a mode of analysis which, in spite of obvi­
ous continuities, showed important differences with the past. With 
Tertullian, the state of virginity implied the external and internal pos­
ture of one who has renounced the world and has adopted the rules 
governing appearance, behavior, and general conduct this renunciation 
involves. In the mystique of virginity which developed after the thir­
teenth century, the rigor of this renunciation (in line with the theme, 
already found in Tertullian, of union with Christ) transforms the neg­
ative aspect of continence into the promise of spiritual marriage. With 
Cassian, who describes rather than innovates, there occurs a sort of 
double action, a withdrawal that also reveals hidden depths within. 
This has nothing to do with the internalization of a whole list of for-

The Battle for Chastity 195 
bidden things, merely substituting the prohibition of the intention for 
that of the act itself. It is, rather, the opening up of an area (whose 
importance has already been stressed by the writings of Gregory of 
Nyssa and, especially, of Basil of Ancyra) which is that of thought, oper­
ating erratically and spontaneously, with its images, memories, and 
perceptions, with movements [mouvements] and impressions trans­
mitted from the body to the mind [arne] and the mind [arne] to the 
body. This has nothing to do with a code of permitted or forbidden 
actions but is a whole technique for analyzing and diagnosing thought, 
its origins, its qualities, its dangers, its potential for temptation, and 
all the dark forces that can lurk behind the mask it may assume. Given 
the objective of expelling for good everything impure or conducive to 
impurity, this can only be achieved by eternal vigilance, a suspicious­
ness directed every moment against one's thought, an endless self­
questioning to flush out any secret fornication lurking in the inmost 
recesses of the mind [arne]. 
In this chastity-oriented asceticism [ascese] one can see a process of 
"subjectivation" which has nothing to do with a sexual ethic based on 
physical self-control. But two things stand out. This subjectivation is 
linked with a process of familiarization which makes the obligation 
to seek and state the truth about oneself an indispensable and perma­
nent condition of this asceticism; and if there is subjectivation, it also 
involves an indeterminate objectivization of the self by the self-inde­
terminate in the sense that one must be forever extending as far as pos­
sible the range of one's thoughts, however insignificant and innocent 
they may appear to be. Moreover, this subjectivation, in its quest for 
the truth about oneself, functions through complex relations with oth­
ers, and in many ways. One must rid oneself of the power of the Other, 
the Enemy, who hides behind seeming likenesses of oneself, and eter­
nal warfare must be waged against this Other, which one cannot win 
without the help of the Almighty, who is mightier than he. Finally, con­
fession to others, submission to their advice, and permanent obedience 
to one's superiors are essential in this battle. 
These new modalities taken up regarding sexual ethics in monastic 
life, the buildup of a new relationship between the subject and the truth, 
and the establishment of complex relations of obedience to the other 
all form part of a whole whose coherence is well illustrated in Cassian's 
text. No new point of departure is involved. Going back in time before 
Christianity, one may find many of these elements in embryonic form

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
and sometimes fully shaped in ancient philosophy-Stoic or Neopla­
tonic, for instance. Moreover, Cassian himself presents in a systematic 
way (how far he makes his own contribution is another question which 
need not concern us here) a sum of experience which he asserts to be 
that of Eastern monasticism. In any case, study of a text of this kind 
shows that it hardly makes sense to talk about a "Christian sexual 
ethic," still less about a "Judeo-Christian" one. So far as considera­
tion of sexual behavior was concerned, some fairly involved thinking 
went on between the Hellenistic period and Saint Augustine. Certain 
important events stand out, such as the guidelines for conscience laid 
down by the Stoics and the Cynics, the organization of monasticism, 
and many others. On the other hand, the coming of Christianity, con­
sidered as a massive rupture with earlier moralities and the dominant 
introduction of a quite different one, is barely noticeable. As Peter 
Brown says, in speaking of Christianity as part of our reading of the 
giant mass of antiquity, the topography of the parting of the waters is 
hard to pin down. 
NOTES 
1 The seven others are greed, avarice, wrath, sloth, accidie, vainglory, and pride. 
2 Conftrences 5.11 and 12.2. 
3 Conferences 5.10. 
4 Institlltions 5, and Conferences 5. 
5 Conferences 5.13-14. 
6 Conftrences 5.10. 
7 Institlltions 12.2. 
8 Coriferences 12.6. For examples of lapses into pride and presumptuousness, see Co'!forences 2.1,) 
and especially Institlltions 12.20-21, where offenses against humility are punished by the most 
humiliating temptation, that of a desire contra Ilsllm natllrae. 
9 Conftrences 504-
10 Institlltions 6.13. 
11 Ibid., 5.8. 
12 Ibid., 6.6. 
I') Ibid., 6.6. 
14 Coriferences 5.11. 
15 Ibid., 12.2. 
16 Didache 2.2.

The Battle for Chastity 197 
17 Epistle of Saint Barnabas 19.4' Earlier on, dealing with forbidden foods, the same text inter­
prets the ban on eating hyena flesh as forbidding adultery, of hare as forbidding the seduction 
of children, of weasel as forbidding oral sex. 
18 For instance Saint Augustine, Sermon 56. 
19 Didache3·3· 
20 Basil of Caesa rea , Exhortation to Renounce the World 5: "Eschew all dealing, all relations with 
young men of your own age. Avoid them as you would fire. Many, alas, are those who through 
mixing with them, have been consigned by the Enemy to burn eternally in hell-fire." See the 
precautions laid down in The Great Precepts (34) and The Short Precepts (220); see also John 
Chrysostom, Adversus oppugnatores vitae monasticae. 
21 Institutions 2.15. Those who infringe this rule commit a grave offense and are under suspicion 
(conjurationis pravique consilii). Are these words hinting at amorous behavior, or are they 
simply aimed at the danger of members of the same community showing particular favor to 
one another? Similar recommendations are to be found in Institutions 4.16. 
22 The word used by Cassian for dwelling on such thoughts is immorari. Later, delectatio morosa 
has an important place in the medieval sexual ethic. 
23 Conferences 12·7· 
24 Conferences 5.11 and 12.2. 
25 Institutions 6.10. 
26 Ibid., 6.20. 
27 Conferences 7.1, 1:l.7. Other allusions to this theme in Institutions '2 .13. 
28 Conferences 22.5. 
29 Institutions 6.11. 
)0 Ibid., 6.22. 
')1 Ibid., 6.23. 
)2 See, in the twenty-second Conferences (6), the case of a consultation over a monk, who each 
time he was going to communion suffered a nocturnal visitation and dared not participate in 
the holy mysteries. The "spiritual physicians" after an interrogation and discussions diagnosed 
that it was the Devil who sent these visitations so as to prevent the monk from attending the 
desired communion. To abstain was to fall into the Devil's trap; to communicate in spite of 
everything was to defeat him. Once this decision had been taken, the Devil appeared no more.



PREFACE TO THE 
HISTORY OF SEXUALITY, VOLUME TWO* 
In thi, series of researches on sexuality, it was not my aim to recon­
stitute the history of sexual behavior-by studying its successive forms, 
their respective models, how they spread, how they conflicted or agreed 
with laws, rules, customs, or conventions. Nor did I intend to analyze 
religious, moral, medical, or biological ideas about sexuality. Not that 
such inquiries should be considered illegitimate, impossible, or ster­
ile; plenty of work has proved otherwise. But I wanted to confront this 
very everyday notion of sexuality, step away from it, monitor [eprouver] 
its familiar evidence, and analyze the theoretical and practical content 
in which it made its appearance and with which it is still associated. 
I wanted to undertake a history in which sexuality would not be con­
ceived as a general type of behavior whose particular elements might 
vary according to demographic, economic, social, or ideological condi­
tions, any more than it would be seen as a collection of representations 
(scientific, religious, moral) which, though diverse and changeable, are 
joined to an invariant reality. My object was to analyze sexuality as a 
historically singular form of experience. Taking this historical singular­
ity into account does not mean overinterpreting the recent emergence 
of the term sexuality, or taking it for granted that the word has brought 
in its trail the reality to which it refers. Rather, it means an effort to 
*The first paragraph of the French text, omitted here, reads: "This volume appears later 
than I had foreseen and in a quite different form." In fact, the text does not serve as 
the preface to the second volume of The History of Sexuality. Foucault replaced it with a 
much longer version, and chose to publish it separately. It initially appeared in English 
translation in The Foucault Reader, ed. P. Rabinow (New York: Pantheon Books, 1984), 
pp. 333-39. The translation, by William Smock, is reproduced here slightly amended.

'200 Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
treat sexuality as the correlation of a domain of knowledge [savoir], a 
type of normativity, and a mode of relation to the self; it means trying 
to decipher how, in Western societies, a complex experience is consti­
tuted from and around certain forms of behavior: an experience that 
conjoins a field of knowledge [connaissance] (with its own concepts, 
theories, diverse disciplines), a collection of rules (which differentiate 
the permissible from the forbidden, natural from monstrous, normal 
from pathological, what is decent from what is not, and so on), and a 
mode of relation between the individual and himself (which enables 
him to recognize himself as a sexual subject amid others). 
To study forms of experience in this way-in their history-is an idea 
that originated with an earlier project, in which I made use of the 
methods of existential analysis in the field of psychiatry and in the 
domain of "mental illness." For two reasons, not unrelated to each 
other, this project left me unsatisfied: its theoretical weakness in elab­
orating the notion of experience, and its ambiguous link with a psy­
chiatric practice, which it simultaneously ignored and took for granted. 
One could deal with the first problem by referring to a general theory 
of the human being, and treat the second altogether differently by turn­
ing, as is so often done, to the "economic and social context"; one could 
choose, by doing so, to accept the resulting dilemma of a philosophi­
cal anthropology and a social history. But I wondered whether, rather 
than playing on this alternative, it would not be possible to consider 
the very historicity of forms of experience. This entailed two negative 
tasks: first, a "nominalist" reduction of philosophical anthropology and 
the notions that could rest upon it, and second, a shift of domain to 
the concepts and methods of the history of societies. On the positive 
side, the task was to bring to light the domain where the formation, 
development, and transformation of forms of experience can situate 
themselves-that is, a history of thought. By "thought," I mean what 
establishes, in a variety of possible forms, the play of true and false, 
and consequently constitutes the human being as a knowing subject 
[sujet de connaissance]; in other words, it is the basis for accepting or 
refusing rules, and constitutes human beings as social and juridical sub­
jects; it is what establishes the relation with oneself and with others, 
and constitutes the human being as ethical subject. 
"Thought," understood in this way, then, is not to be sought only in 
theoretical formulations such as those of philosophy or science; it can

Priface to The History of Sexuality, Volume Two 201 
and must be analyzed in every manner of speaking, doing, or behav­
ing in which the individual appears and acts as knowing subject [sujet 
de connaissance], as ethical or juridical subject, as subject conscious of 
himself and others. In this sense, thought is understood as the very 
form of action-as action insofar as it implies the play of true and false, 
the acceptance or refusal of rules, the relation to oneself and others. 
The study of forms of experience can thus proceed from an analysis of 
"practices" -discursive or not-as long as one qualifies that word to 
mean the different systems of action insofar as they are inhabited by 
thought as I have characterized it here. 
Posing the question in this way brings into play certain altogether 
general principles. Singular forms of experience may perfectly well 
harbor universal structures; they may well not be independent of the 
concrete determinations of social existence. However, neither those 
determinations nor those structures can allow for experiences (that is, 
for understandings of a certain type, for rules of a certain form, for cer­
tain modes of consciousness of oneself and of others) except through 
thought. There is no experience that is not a way of thinking and can­
not be analyzed from the viewpoint of the history of thought; this is 
what might be called the principle of irreducibility of thought. Accord­
ing to a second principle, this thought has a historicity which is proper 
to it. That it should have this historicity does not mean it is deprived 
of all universal form but, rather, that the putting into play of these 
universal forms is itself historical. And that this historicity should be 
proper to it means not that it is independent of all the other historical 
determinations (of an economic, social, or political order) but that it 
has complex relations with them, which always leave their specificity 
to the forms, transformations, and events of thought. This is what could 
be called the principle of singularity of the history of thought: there are 
events of thought. There is a third and final principle implied by this 
enterprise: an awareness that criticism-understood as analysis of the 
historical conditions that bear on the creation of links to truth, to rules, 
and to the self-does not mark out impassable boundaries or describe 
closed systems; it brings to light transformable singularities. These 
transformations could not take place except by means of a working of 
thought upon itself; that is the principle of the history of thought as 
critical activity. All of this bears upon the work and teaching I have 
labeled "the history of systems of thought"; it infers a double refer­
ence-to philosophy, which must be asked to explain how thought

202 Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
could have a history, and to history, which must be asked to produce 
the various forms of thought in whatever concrete forms they may 
assume (system of representations, institutions, practices). What is 
the price to philosophy of a history of thought? What is the effect, 
within history, of thought and the events that are proper to it? In what 
way do individual or collective experiences arise from singular forms 
of thought-that is, from what constitutes the subject in its relations to 
the true, to rules, to itself? It is easy to see how the reading of Nietzsche 
in the early fifties has given access to these kinds of questions, by break­
ing with the double tradition of phenomenology and Marxism. 
I know this rereading is schematic: things did not really unfold so 
neatly, and there were many obscurities and hesitations along the way. 
But in Madness and Civilization I was trying, after all, to describe a 
locus of experience from the viewpoint of the history of thought, even 
if my usage of the word "experience" was very floating. Looking at 
practices of internment, on the one hand, and medical procedures, on 
the other, I tried to analyze the genesis, during the seventeenth and 
eighteenth centuries, of a system of thought as the matter of possible 
experiences: first, the formation of a domain of recognitions [connais­
sances] that constitute themselves as specific knowledge [savoir] of 
"mental illness"; second, the organization of a normative system built 
on a whole technical, administrative, juridical, and medical appara­
tus whose purpose was to isolate and take custody of the insane; and 
finally, the definition of a relation to oneself and to others as possible 
subjects of madness. It is also these three axes and the play between 
types of understanding [savoir], forms of normality, and modes of rela­
tion to oneself and others which seemed to me to give individual cases 
the status of significant experiences-cases such as those of Pierre 
Riviere or Alexina B.-and to assign a like importance to that perma­
nent dramatization of family affairs which one finds in the lettres de 
cachet (whereby people committed their relatives to asylums) in the 
eighteenth century. 
Yet the relative importance of these three axes is not always the same 
for all forms of experience. And, moreover, it was necessary to elabo­
rate the analysis of each a little more precisely, starting with the prob­
lem of the formation of domains of knowledge [savoir]. The work was 
directed along two lines: first, in the "vertical" dimension, taking the 
example of sickness, and studying how an institutional organization 
for therapy, instruction, and research is related to the constitution of a

Priface to The History of Sexuality, Volume Two 203 
clinical medicine articulated on the development of pathological anat­
omy. The object was to bring out the complex causalities and recipro­
cal determinations affecting, on the one hand, the development of a 
certain kind of medical knowledge [savoir] and, on the other, the trans­
formations of an institutional field linked directly to social and political 
changes. Then, once scientific knowledge [savoir] was endowed with 
its own rules for which external determinations could not account-its 
own structure as discursive practice-I tried to show what common, 
but transformable, criteria-what epistemes [ipistemes]-governed 
those bodies of knowledge which, from the seventeenth to the early 
nineteenth centuries, had been charged with explaining certain aspects 
of human activity or existence: the wealth men produce, exchange, and 
circulate; the linguistic signs they use to communicate; and the collec­
tivity of living things to which they belong. 
It is the second axis-the relation to rules-that I wanted to explore 
using the example of punitive practices. It was a matter not of study­
ing the theory of penal law itself, or the evolution of such and such 
penal institution, but of analyzing the formation of a certain "punitive 
rationality" whose appearance might seem that much more surprising 
in that it offered, as its principal means of action, a practice of impris­
onment which had long been and still was criticized at the time. Instead 
of seeking the explanation in a general conception of the law, or in the 
evolving modes of industrial production (as Rusche and Kirchheimer 
did), it seemed to me far wiser to look at the workings of power. I was 
concerned not with some omnipresent power, almighty and above all 
clairvoyant, diffusing itself throughout the social body in order to con­
trol it down to the tiniest detail, but with the refinement, the elab­
oration, and the installation since the seventeenth centu ry of techniques 
for "governing" individuals-that is, for "guiding their conduct"-in 
domains as different as the school, the army, and the workshop. The 
new punitive rationality must be relocated in the context of this tech­
nology, itself linked to the demographic, economic, and political changes 
that accompany the development of industrial states. Accordingly, the 
analysis does not revolve around the general principle of the law or the 
myth of power, but concerns itself with the complex and multiple prac­
tices of a "governmentality" that presupposes, on the one hand, rational 
forms, technical procedures, instrumentations through which to oper­
ate, and, on the other, strategic games that subject the power relations 
they are supposed to guarantee to instability and reversal. Starting from

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
an analysis of these forms of "government," one can see how criminal­
ity was constituted as an object of knowledge [savoir], and how a certain 
"consciousness" of criminality could be formed (including the image 
that criminals might have of themselves, and the representation of 
criminals which the rest of us might entertain). 
The project of a history of sexuality was linked to a desire on my part 
to analyze more closely the third of the axes that constitute any matrix 
of experience: the modality of relation to the self. Not that sexuality can­
not and should not-like madness, sickness, or criminality-be envis­
aged as a locus of experience, one that includes a domain of knowledge 
[savoir], a system of rules, and a model for relations to the self. How­
ever, the relative importance of the last element recommends it as a 
guiding thread for the very history of this experience and its formation; 
my planned study of children, women, and "perverts" as sexual sub­
jects was to have followed those lines. 
I found myself confronted with a choice that was a long time in 
unraveling: a choice between fidelity to the chronological outline I 
had originally imagined, and a different line of inquiry in which the 
modes of relation to the self took precedence. The period when this 
singular form of experience, sexuality, took shape is particularly com­
plex: the very important role played at the end of the eighteenth and 
in the nineteenth centuries by the formation of domains of knowledge 
[savoir] about sexuality from the points of view of biology, medicine, 
psychopathology, sociology, and ethnology; the determining role also 
played by the normative systems imposed on sexual behavior through 
the intermediary of education, medicine, and justice made it hard to 
distinguish the form and effects of the relation to the self as particular 
elements in the constitution of this experience. There was always the 
risk of reproducing, with regard to sexuality, forms of analysis focused 
on the organization of a domain of learning [connaissance] , 'or on the 
techniques of control and coercion, as in my previous work on sickness 
or criminality. In order better to analyze the forms of relation to the 
self, in and of themselves, I found myself spanning eras in a way that 
took me farther and farther from the chronological outline I had first 
decided on, both in order to address myself to periods when the effect 
of scientific know ledges and the complexity of normative systems were 
less, and in order eventually to make out forms of relation to the self 
different from those characterizing the experience of sexuality. And that

Priface to The History of Sexuality, Volume Two 205 
is how, little by little, I ended up placing the work's emphasis on what 
was to have been simply the point of departure or historical background; 
rather than placing myself at the threshold of the formation of the expe­
rience of sexuality, I tried to analyze the formation of a certain mode 
of relation to the self in the experience of the flesh. This called for a 
marked chronological displacement because it became obvious that I 
should study the period in late antiquity when the principal elements 
of the Christian ethic of the flesh were being formulated. And it led 
in turn to a rearrangement of my original plan, a considerable delay 
in publication, and the hazards of studying material I had barely heard 
of six or seven years ago. But I reflected that, after all, it was best to 
sacrifice a definite program to a promising line of approach. I also 
reminded myself that it would probably not be worth the trouble of 
making books if they failed to teach the author something he had not 
known before, if they did not lead to unforeseen places, and if they did 
not disperse one toward a strange and new relation with himself. The 
pain and pleasure of the book is to be an experience.



SELF WRITING 
Lese pages are part of a series of studies on "the arts of oneself," 
that is, on the aesthetics of existence and the government of oneself 
and of others in Greco-Roman culture during the first two centuries 
of the empire. 
The Vila Antonii of Athanasius presents the written notation of actions 
and thoughts as an indispensable element of the ascetic life. "Let this 
observation be a safeguard against sinning: let us each note and write 
down our actions and impulses of the soul as though we were to report 
them to each other; and you may rest assured that from utter shame of 
becoming known we shall stop sinning and entertaining sinful thoughts 
altogether. Who, having sinned, would not choose to lie, hoping to 
escape detection? Just as we would not give ourselves to lust within 
sight of each other, so if we were to write down our thoughts as if tell­
ing them to each other, we shall so much the more guard ourselves 
against foul thoughts for shame of being known. Now, then, let the 
written account stand for the eyes of our fellow ascetics, so that blush­
ing at writing the same as if we were actually seen, we may never pon­
der evil. Molding ourselves in this way, we shall be able to bring our 
body into subjection, to please the Lord and to trample under foot the 
machinations of the Enemy."! Here, writing about oneself appears 
clearly in its relationship of complementarity with reclusion: it palli­
ates the dangers of solitude; it offers what one has done or thought to 
a possible gaze; the fact of obliging oneself to write plays the role of 
a companion by giving rise to the fear of disapproval and to shame.

208 Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
Hence, a first analogy can be put forward: what others are to the ascetic 
in a community, the notebook is to the recluse. But, at the same time, 
a second analogy is posed, one that refers to the practice of ascesis as 
work not just on actions but, more precisely, on thought: the constraint 
that the presence of others exerts in the domain of conduct, writing 
will exert in the domain of the inner impulses of the soul. In this sense, 
it has a role very close to that of confession to the director, about which 
John Cassian will say, in keeping with Evagrian spirituality, that it must 
reveal, without exception, all the impulses of the soul (omnes cogi­
tationes). Finally, writing about inner impulses appears, also accord­
ing to Athanasius's text, as a weapon in spiritual combat. While the 
Devil is a power who deceives and causes one to be deluded about one­
self (fully half of the Vita Antonii is devoted to these ruses), writing 
constitutes a test and a kind of touchstone: by bringing to light the 
impulses of thought, it dispels the darkness where the enemy's plots 
are hatched. This text-one of the oldest that Christian literature has 
left us on the subject of spiritual writing-is far from exhausting all the 
meanings and forms the latter will take on later. But one can focus on 
several of its features that enable one to analyze retrospectively the role 
of writing in the philosophical cultivation of the self just before Chris­
tianity: its close link with companionship, its application to the impulses 
of thought, its role as a truth test. These diverse elements are found 
already in Seneca, Plutarch, Marcus Aurelius, but with very different 
values and following altogether different procedures. 
No technique, no professional skill can be acquired without exercise; 
nor can the art of living, the tekhne tou biou, be learned without an 
askesis that should be understood as a training of the self by oneself. 
This was one of the traditional principles to which the Pythagoreans, 
the Socratics, the Cynics had long attached a great importance. It seems 
that, among all the forms taken by this training (which included absti­
nences, memorizations, self-examinations, meditations, silence, and 
listening to others), writing-the act of writing for oneself and for 
others-came, rather late, to playa considerable role. In any case, the 
texts from the imperial epoch relating to practices of the self placed a 
good deal of stress on writing. It is necessary to read, Seneca said, but 
also to write.2 And Epictetus, who offered an exclusively oral teaching, 
nonetheless emphasizes several times the role of writing as a personal 
exercise: one should "meditate" (meletan), write (graphein), train one-

Self Writing 
self (gumnazein): "May these be my thoughts, these my studies, writ­
ing or reading, when death comes upon me."3 Or further: "Let these 
thoughts be at your command [prokheiron] by night and day: write 
them, read them, talk of them, to yourself and to your neighbor ... if 
some so-called undesirable event should befall you, the first immedi­
ate relief to you will be that it was not unexpected."4 In these texts by 
Epictetus, writing appears regularly associated with "meditation," with 
that exercise of thought on itself that reactivates what it knows, calls 
to mind a principle, a rule, or an example, reflects on them, assimi­
lates them, and in this manner prepares itself to face reality. Yet one 
also sees that writing is associated with the exercise of thought in two 
different ways. One takes the form of a linear "series": it goes from 
meditation to the activity of writing and from there to gumnazein, that 
is, to training and trial in a real situation-a labor of thought, a labor 
through writing, a labor in reality. The other is circular: the medita­
tion precedes the notes which enable the rereading which in turn re­
initiates the meditation. In any case, whatever the cycle of exercise in 
which it takes place, writing constitutes an essential stage in the process 
to which the whole askesis leads: namely, the fashioning of accepted 
discourses, recognized as true, into rational principles of action. As an 
element of self-training, writing has, to use an expression that one finds 
in Plutarch, an ethopoietic function: it is an agent of the transforma­
tion of truth into ethos. 
This ethopoietic writing, such as it appears through the documents 
of the first and the second centuries, seems to have lodged itself out­
side of two forms that were already well known and used for other pur­
poses: the hupomnemata and the correspondence. 
THE HUPOMNEMATA 
Hupomnemata, in the technical sense, could be account books, public 
registers, or individual notebooks serving as memory aids. Their use 
as books of life, as guides for conduct, seems to have become a com­
mon thing for a whole cultivated public. One wrote down quotes in 
them, extracts from books, examples, and actions that one had wit­
nessed or read about, reflections or reasonings that one had heard or 
that had come to mind. They constituted a material record of things 
read, heard, or thought, thus offering them up as a kind of accumulated 
treasure for subsequent rereading and meditation. They also formed a

'210 Ethics .. Subjectivity and Truth 
raw material for the drafting of more systematic treatises, in which one 
presented arguments and means for struggling against some weakness 
(such as anger, envy, gossip, flattery) or for overcoming some difficult 
circumstance (a grief, an exile, ruin, disgrace). Thus, when Fundamus 
requests advice for struggling against the agitations of the soul, Plutarch 
at that moment does not really have the time to compose a treatise 
in the proper form, so he will send him, in their present state, the 
hupomnemata he had written himself on the theme of the tranquil­
ity of the soul; at least this is how he introduces the text of the Peri 
euthumias. 5 Feigned modesty? Doubtless this was a way of excusing the 
somewhat disjointed character of the text, but the gesture must also be 
seen as an indication of what these notebooks were-and of the use to 
make of the treatise itself, which kept a little of its original form. 
These hupomnemata should not be thought of simply as a memory 
support, which might be consulted from time to time, as occasion arose; 
they are not meant to be substituted for a recollection that may fail. 
They constitute, rather, a material and a framework for exercises to be 
carried out frequently: reading, rereading, meditating, conversing with 
oneself and with others. And this was in order to have them, according 
to the expression that recurs often, prokheiron, ad manum, in promptu. 
"Near at hand," then, not just in the sense that one would be able to 
recall them to consciousness, but that one should be able to use them, 
whenever the need was felt, in action. It is a matter of constituting a 
logos bioethikos for oneself, an equipment of helpful discourses, cap­
able-as Plutarch says-of elevating the voice and silencing the pas­
sions like a master who with one word hushes the growling of dogs.6 
And for that they must not simply be placed in a sort of memory cabi­
net but deeply lodged in the soul, "planted in it," says Seneca, and they 
must form part of ourselves: in short, the soul must make them not 
merely its own but itself. The writing of the hupomnemata is an impor­
tant relay in this subjectivation of discourse. 
However personal they may be, these hupomnemata ought not to be 
understood as intimate journals or as those accounts of spiritual expe­
rience (temptations, struggles, downfalls, and victories) that will be 
found in later Christian literature. They do not constitute a "narrative 
of oneself"; they do not have the aim of bringing to the light of day the 
arcana conscientiae, the oral or written confession of which has a puri­
ficatory value. The movement they seek to bring about is the reverse 
of that: the intent is not to pursue the unspeakable, nor to reveal the

Self Writing '211 
hidden, nor to say the unsaid, but on the contrary to capture the already­
said, to collect what one has managed to hear or read, and for a pur­
pose that is nothing less than the shaping of the self. 
The hupomnemata need to be resituated in the context of a tension 
that was very pronounced at the time. Inside a culture strongly stamped 
by traditionality, by the recognized value of the already-said, by the 
recurrence of discourse, by "citational" practice under the seal of antiq­
uity and authority, there developed an ethic quite explicitly oriented by 
concern for the self toward objectives defined as: withdrawing into 
oneself, getting in touch with oneself, living with oneself, relying on 
oneself, benefiting from and enjoying oneself. Such is the aim of the 
hupomnemata: to make one's recollection of the fragmentary logos, 
transmitted through teaching, listening, or reading, a means of estab­
lishing a relationship of oneself with oneself, a relationship as adequate 
and accomplished as possible. For us, there is something paradoxical 
in all this: how could one be brought together with oneself with the 
help of a timeless discourse accepted almost everywhere? In actual fact, 
if the writing of hupomnemata can contribute to the formation of the 
self through these scattered logoi, this is for three main reasons: the 
limiting effects of the coupling of writing with reading, the regular 
practice of the disparate that determines choices, and the appropria­
tion which that practice brings about. 
1. Seneca stresses the point: the practice of the self involves read­
ing, for one could not draw everything from one's own stock or arm 
oneself by oneself with the principles of reason that are indispensable 
for self-conduct: guide or example, the help of others is necessary. But 
reading and writing must not be dissociated; one ought to "have alter­
nate recourse" to these two pursuits and "blend one with the other." 
If too much writing is exhausting (Seneca is thinking of the demands 
of style), excessive reading has a scattering effect: "In reading of many 
books is distraction." 7 By going constantly from book to book, without 
ever stopping, without returning to the hive now and then with one's 
supply of nectar-hence without taking notes or constituting a trea­
sure store of reading-one is liable to retain nothing, to spread oneself 
across different thoughts, and to forget oneself. Writing, as a way of 
gathering in the reading that was done and of collecting one's thoughts 
about it, is an exercise of reason that counters the great deficiency 
of slullilia, which endless reading may favor. Sluitilia is defined by 
mental agitation, distraction, change of opinions and wishes, and con-

212 Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
sequently weakness in the face of all the events that may occur; it is 
also characterized by the fact that it turns the mind toward the future, 
makes it interested in novel ideas, and prevents it from providing a 
fixed point for itself in the possession of an acquired truth.8 The writ­
ing of hupomnemata resists this scattering by fixing acquired elements, 
and by constituting a share of the past, as it were, toward which it is 
always possible to turn back, to withdraw. This practice can be con­
nected to a very general theme of the period; in any case, it is common 
to the moral philosophy of the Stoics and that of the Epicureans-the 
refusal of a mental attitude turned toward the future (which, due to its 
uncertainty, causes anxiety and agitation of the soul) and the positive 
value given to the possession of a past that one can enjoy to the full and 
without disturbance. The hupomnemata contribute one of the means 
by which one detaches the soul from concern for the future and redi­
rects it toward contemplation of the past. 
2. Yet while it enables one to counteract dispersal, the writing of the 
hupomnemata is also (and must remain) a regular and deliberate prac­
tice of the disparate. It is a selecting of heterogeneous elements. In this, 
it contrasts with the work of the grammarian, who tries to get to know 
an entire work or all the works of an author; it also conflicts with the 
teaching of professional philosophers who subscribe to the doctrinal 
unity of a school. It does not matter, says Epictetus, whether one has 
read all of Zeno or Chrysippus; it makes little difference whether one 
has grasped exactly what they meant to say, or whether one is able to 
reconstruct their whole argument. 9 The notebook is governed by two 
principles, which one might call "the local truth of the precept" and 
"its circumstantial use value." Seneca selects what he will note down 
for himself and his correspondents from one of the philosophers of 
his own sect, but also from Democritus and Epicurus. 10 The essential 
requirement is that he be able to consider the selected sentence as a 
maxim that is true in what it asserts, suitable in what it prescribes, and 
useful in terms of one's circumstances. Writing as a personal exercise 
done by and for oneself is an art of disparate truth-or, more exactly, 
a purposeful way of combining the traditional authority of the already­
said with the singularity of the truth that is affirmed therein and the 
particularity of the circumstances that determine its use. "So you should 
always read standard authors; and when you crave a change, fall back 
upon those whom you read before. Each day acquire something that 
will fortify you against poverty, against death, indeed against other

Self Writing 213 
misfortunes as well; and after you have run over many thoughts, select 
one to be thoroughly digested that day. This is my own custom; from 
the many things which I have read, I claim some part for myself. The 
thought for today is one which I discovered in Epicurus; for I am wont 
to cross over even to the enemy's camp,-not as a deserter, but as a 
scout [tanquam explorator]." 11 
3. This deliberate heterogeneity does not rule out unification. But the 
latter is not implemented in the art of composing an ensemble; it must 
be established in the writer himself, as a result of the hupomnemata, 
of their construction (and hence in the very act of writing) and of their 
consultation (and hence in their reading and their rereading). Two 
processes can be distinguished. On the one hand, it is a matter of uni­
fying these heterogeneous fragments through their subjectivation in the 
exercise of personal writing. Seneca compares this unification, accord­
ing to quite traditional metaphors, with the bee's honey gathering, or 
the digestion of food, or the adding of numbers forming a sum: "We 
should see to it that whatever we have absorbed should not be allowed 
to remain unchanged, or it will be no part of us. We must digest it; 
otherwise it will merely enter the memory and not the reasoning power 
[in memoriam non in ingenium]. Let us loyally welcome such foods and 
make them our own, so that something that is one may be formed out 
of many elements, just as one number is formed of several elements. "12 
The role of writing is to constitute, along with all that reading has con­
stituted, a "body" (quicquid lectione collectum est, stilus redigat in cor­
pus). And this body should be understood not as a body of doctrine but, 
rather-following an often-evoked metaphor of digestion-as the very 
body of the one who, by transcribing his readings, has appropriated 
them and made their truth his own: writing transforms the thing seen 
or heard "into tissue and blood" (in vires et in sanguinem). It becomes 
a principle of rational action in the writer himself. 
Yet, conversely, the writer constitutes his own identity through this 
recollection of things said. In this same Letter 84-which constitutes 
a kind of short treatise on the relations between reading and writing­
Seneca dwells for a moment on the ethical problem of resemblance, 
of faithfulness and originality. One should not, he explains, reshape 
what one retains from an author in such a way that the latter might be 
recognized; the idea is not to constitute, in the notes that one takes and 
in the way one restores what one has read through writing, a series of 
"portraits," recognizable but "lifeless" (Seneca is thinking here of those

214 Ethics,' Subjectivity and Truth 
portrait galleries by which one certified his birth, asserted his status, 
and showed his identity through reference to others). It is. one's own 
soul that must be constituted in what one writes; but, just as a man 
bears his natural resemblance to his ancestors on his face, so it is good 
that one can perceive the filiation of thoughts that are engraved in his 
soul. Through the interplay of selected readings and assimilative writ­
ing, one should be able to form an identity through which a whole spir­
itual genealogy can be read. In a chorus there are tenor, bass, and 
baritone voices, men's and women's tones: "The voices of the individ­
ual singers are hidden; what we hear is the voices of all together ... I 
would have my mind of such a quality as this; it should be equipped 
with many arts, many precepts, and patterns of conduct taken from 
many epochs of history; but all should blend harmoniously into one." n 
CORRESPONDENCE 
Notebooks, which in themselves constitute personal writing exercises, 
can serve as raw material for texts that one sends to others. In return, 
the missive, by definition a text meant for others, also provides occa­
sion for a personal exercise. For, as Seneca points out, when one writes 
one reads what one writes, just as in saying something one hears one­
self saying it. The letter one writes acts, through the very action of writ­
ing, upon the one who addresses it, just as it acts through reading and 
rereading on the one who receives it. In this dual function, correspon­
dence is very close to the hupomnemata, and its form is often very simi­
lar. Epicurean literature furnishes examples of this. The text known as 
the "Letter to Pythocles" begins by acknowledging receipt of a letter 
in which the student has expressed his affection for the teacher and 
has made an effort to "recall the [Epicurean] arguments" enabling one 
to attain happiness; the author of the reply gives his endorsement: the 
attempt was not bad; and he sends in return a text-a summary of 
Epicurus's Peri phuseos-that should serve Pythocles as material for 
memorization and as a support for his meditation. 14 
Seneca's letters show an activity of direction brought to bear, by a 
man who is aged and already retired, on another who still occupies 
important public offices. But in these letters, Seneca does not just give 
him advice and comment on a few great principles of conduct for his 
benefit. Through these written lessons, Seneca continues to exercise 
himself, according to two principles that he often invokes: it is neces-

Self Writing 215 
sary to train oneself all one's life, and one always needs the help of 
others in the soul's labor upon itself. The advice he gives in Letter 7 
constitutes a description of his own relations with Lucilius. There he 
characterizes the way in which he occupies his retirement with the two­
fold work he carries out at the same time on his correspondent and on 
himself: withdrawing into oneself as much as possible; attaching one­
self to those capable of having a beneficial effect on oneself; opening 
one's door to those whom one hopes to make better-"The process is 
mutual; for men learn while they teach." 15 
The letter one sends in order to help one's correspondent-advise 
him, exhort him, admonish him, console him-constitutes for the writer 
a kind of training: something like soldiers in peacetime practicing the 
manual of arms, the opinions that one gives to others in a pressing sit­
uation are a way of preparing oneself for a similar eventuality. For 
example, Letter 99 to Lucilius: it is in itself the copy of another mis­
sive that Seneca had sent to Marullus, whose son had died some time 
before. 16 The text belongs to the "consolation" genre: it offers the cor­
respondent the "logical" arms with which to fight sorrow. The inter­
vention is belated, since Marullus, "shaken by the blow," had a moment 
of weakness and "lapsed from his true self"; so, in that regard, the let­
ter has an admonishing role. Yet for Lucilius, to whom it is also sent, 
and for Seneca who writes it, it functions as a principle of reactiva­
tion-a reactivation of all the reasons that make it possible to overcome 
grief, to persuade oneself that death is not a misfortune (neither that 
of others nor one's own). And, with the help of what is reading for the 
one, writing for the other, Lucilius and Seneca will have increased their 
readiness for the case in which this type of event befalls them. The 
consolatio that should assist and correct Marullus is at the same time 
a useful praemeditatio for Lucilius and Seneca. The writing that aids 
the addressee arms the writer-and possibly the third parties who 
read it. 
Yet it also happens that the soul service rendered by the writer to 
his correspondent is handed back to him in the form of "return advice"; 
as the person being directed progresses, he becomes more capable, in 
his turn, of giving opinions, exhortations, words of comfort to the one 
who has undertaken to help him. The direction does not remain one­
way for long; it serves as a context for exchanges that help it become 
more egalitarian. Letter 34 already signals this movement, starting 
from a situation in which Seneca could nonetheless tell his correspon-

216 Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
dent: "I claim you for myself. .. I exhorted you, I applied the goad and 
did not permit you to march lazily, but roused you continually. And now 
I do the same; but by this time I am now cheering on one who is in 
the race and so in turn cheers me on."17 And in the following letter, 
he evokes the reward for perfect friendship, in which each of the two 
will be for the other the continuous support, the inexhaustible help, 
that will be mentioned in Letter 109: "Skilled wrestlers are kept up to 
the mark by practice; a musician is stirred to action by one of equal 
proficiency. The wise man also needs to have his virtues kept in action; 
and as he prompts himself to do things, so he is prompted by another 
wise man. "18 
Yet despite all these points in common, correspondence should not 
be regarded simply as an extension of the practice of hupomnemata. 
It is something more than a training of oneself by means of writing, 
through the advice and opinions one gives to the other: it also consti­
tutes a certain way of manifesting oneself to oneself and to others. The 
letter makes the writer "present" to the one to whom he addresses it. 
And present not simply through the information he gives concerning 
his life, his activities, his successes and failures, his good luck or mis­
fortunes; rather, present with a kind of immediate, almost physical 
presence. "I thank you for writing to me so often; for you are revealing 
yourself to me [te mihi ostendzS] in the only way you can. I never receive 
a letter from you without being in your company forthwith. If the pic­
tures of our absent friends are pleasing to us ... how much more pleas­
ant is a letter, which brings us real traces, real evidence of an absent 
friend! For that which is sweetest when we meet face to face is afforded 
by the impress of a friend's hand upon his letter-recognition." 19 
To write is thus to "show oneself," to project oneself into view, to 
make one's own face appear in the other's presence. And by this it 
should be understood that the letter is both a gaze that one focuses on 
the addressee (through the missive he receives, he feels looked at) and 
a way of offering oneself to his gaze by what one tells him about one­
self. In a sense, the letter sets up a face-to-face meeting. Moreover 
Demetrius, explaining in De elocutione what the epistolary style should 
be, stressed that it could only be a "simple" style, free in its composi­
tion, spare in its choice of words, since in it each one should reveal his 
soul. 20 The reciprocity that correspondence establishes is not simply 
that of counsel and aid; it is the reciprocity of the gaze and the exami­
nation. The letter that, as an exercise, works toward the subjectivation

Self Writing 217 
of true discourse, its assimilation and its transformation as a "personal 
asset," also constitutes, at the same time, an objectification of the soul. 
It is noteworthy that Seneca, commencing a letter in which he must 
layout his daily life to Lucilius, recalls the moral maxim that "we 
should live as if we lived in plain sight of all men,"21 and the philo­
sophical principle that nothing of ourselves is concealed from god who 
is always present to our souls. Through the missive, one opens oneself 
to the gaze of others and puts the correspondent in the place of the 
inner god. It is a way of giving ourselves to that gaze about which we 
must tell ourselves that it is plunging into the depths of our heart (in 
pectis intimum introspicere) at the moment we are thinking. 
The work the letter carries out on the recipient, but is also brought 
to bear on the writer by the very letter he sends, thus involves an "intro­
spection"; but the latter is to be understood not so much as a deci­
pherment of the self by the self as an opening one gives the other onto 
oneself. Still, we are left with a phenomenon that may be a little sur­
prising, but which is full of meaning for anyone wishing to write a his­
tory of the cultivation of the self: the first historical developments of 
the narrative of the self are not to be sought in the direction of the "per­
sonal notebooks," the hupomnemata, whose role is to enable the for­
mation of the self out of the collected discourse of others; they can be 
found, on the other hand, in the correspondence with others and the 
exchange of soul service. And it is a fact that in the correspondence of 
Seneca with Lucilius, of Marcus Aurelius with Fronto, and in certain 
of Pliny's letters, one sees a narrative of the self develop that is very 
different from the one that could be found generally in Cicero's letters 
to his acquaintances: the latter involved accounting for oneself as a sub­
ject of action (or of deliberation for action) in connection with friends 
and enemies, fortunate and unfortunate events. In Seneca and Marcus 
Aurelius, occasionally in Pliny as well, the narrative of the self is the 
account of one's relation to oneself; there one sees two elements stand 
out clearly, two strategic points that will later become the privileged 
objects of what could be called the writing of the relation to the self: 
the interferences of soul and body (impressions rather than actions), 
and leisure activity (rather than external events); the body and the days. 
1. Health reports traditionally are part of the correspondence. But 
they gradually increased in scope to include detailed description of the 
bodily sensations, the impressions of malaise, the various disorders one 
might have experienced. Sometimes one seeks to introduce advice on

218 Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
regimen that one judges useful to one's correspondent. 22 Sometimes, 
too, it is a question of recalling the effects of the body on the soul, the 
reciprocal action of the latter, or the healing of the former resulting 
from the care given to the latter. For example, the long and important 
Letter 78 to Lucilius: it is devoted for the most part to the problem of 
the "good use" of illnesses and suffering; but it opens with the recol­
lection of a grave illness that Seneca had suffered in his youth, which 
was accompanied by a moral crisis. Seneca relates that he also experi­
enced, many years before, the "catarrh," the "short attacks of fever" 
Lucilius complains of: "I scorned it in its early stages. For when 1 was 
still young, 1 could put up with hardships and show a bold front to ill­
ness. But 1 finally succumbed, and arrived at such a state that 1 could 
do nothing but snuffle, reduced as 1 was to the extremity of thinness. 
1 often entertained the impulse of ending my life then and there; but 
the thought of my kind old father kept me back." And what cured him 
were the remedies of the soul. Among them, the most important were 
his friends, who "helped me greatly towards good health; 1 used to be 
comforted by their cheering words, by the hours they spent at my bed­
side, and by their conversation. "23 It also happens that the letters retrace 
the movement that has led from a subjective impression to an exercise 
of thought. Witness that meditation walk recounted by Seneca: "I found 
it necessary to give my body a shaking up, in order that the bile which 
had gathered in my throat, if that was the trouble, might be shaken out, 
or, if the very breath [in my lungs] had become, for some reason, too 
thick, that the jolting, which 1 have felt was a good thing for me, might 
make it thinner. So 1 insisted on being carried longer than usual, along 
an attractive beach, which bends between Cumae and Servilius Vatia's 
country house, shut in by the sea on one side and the lake on the other, 
just like a narrow path. It was packed under foot, because of a recent 
storm .... As my habit is, 1 began to look about for something there that 
might be of service to me, when my eyes fell upon the villa which had 
once belonged to Vatia. "24 And Seneca tells Lucilius what formed his 
meditation on retirement-solitude and friendship. 
2. The letter is also a way of presenting oneself to one's correspon­
dent in the unfolding of everyday life. To recount one's day-not because 
of the importance of the events that may have marked it, but precisely 
even though there was nothing about it apart from its being like all the 
others, testifying in this way not to the importance of an activity but to 
the quality of a mode of being-forms part of the epistolary practice:

Self Writing 219 
Lucilius finds it natural to ask Seneca to "give [him] an account of each 
separate day, and of the whole day too." And Seneca accepts this obli­
gation all the more willingly as it commits him to living under the gaze 
of others without having anything to conceal: "I shall therefore do as 
you bid, and shall gladly inform you by letter what I am doing, and in 
what sequence. I shall keep watching myself continually, and-a most 
useful habit-shall review each day." Indeed, Seneca evokes this spe­
cific day that has gone by, which is at the same time the most ordi­
nary of all. Its value is owing to the very fact that nothing has happened 
which might have diverted him from the only thing that is important 
for him: to attend to himself. "Today has been unbroken; no one has 
filched the slightest part of it from me." A little physical training, a bit 
of running with a pet slave, a bath in water that is barely lukewarm, a 
simple snack of bread, a very short nap. But the main part of the day­
and this is what takes up the longest part of the letter-is devoted to 
meditating on the theme suggested by a Sophistic syllogism of Zeno's, 
concerning drunkenness. 25 
When the missive becomes an account of an ordinary day, a day to 
oneself, one sees that it relates closely to a practice that Seneca dis­
creetly alludes to, moreover, at the beginning of Letter 85, where he 
evokes the especially useful habit of "reviewing one's day": this is 
the self-examination whose form he had described in a passage of the 
De lra.26 This practice-familiar in different philosophical currents: 
Pythagorean, Epicurean, Stoic-seems to have been primarily a men­
tal exercise tied to memorization: it was a question of both constituting 
oneself as an "inspector of oneself," and hence of gauging the common 
faults, and of reactivating the rules of behavior that one must always 
bear in mind. Nothing indicates that this "review of the day" took the 
form of a written text. It seems therefore that it was in the epistolary 
relation-and, consequently, in order to place oneself under the other's 
gaze-that the examination of conscience was formulated as a written 
account of oneself: an account of the everyday banality, an account of 
correct or incorrect actions, of the regimen observed, of the physical or 
mental exercises in which one engaged. One finds a notable example 
of this conjunction of epistolary practice with self-examination in a let­
ter from Marcus Aurelius to Franto. It was written during one of those 
stays in the country which were highly recommended as moments of 
detachment from public activities, as health treatments, and as occa­
sions for attending to oneself. In this text, one finds the two combined

220 Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
themes of the peasant life-healthy because it was natural-and the life 
of leisure given over to conversation, reading, and meditation. At the 
same time, a whole set of meticulous notations on the body, health, 
physical sensations, regimen, and feelings shows the extreme vigilance 
of an attention that is intensely focused on oneself. "We are well. 1 slept 
somewhat late owing to my slight cold, which seems now to have sub­
sided. So from five A.M. till nine 1 spent the time partly in reading some 
of Cato's Agriculture and partly in writing not such wretched stuff, by 
heaven, as yesterday. Then, after paying my respects to my father, 1 re­
lieved my throat, 1 will not say by gargling-though the word gargansso 
is 1 believe, found in Novius and elsewhere-but by swallowing honey 
water as far as the gullet and ejecting it again. After easing my throat 1 
went off to my father and attended him at a sacrifice. Then we went to 
luncheon. What do you think 1 ate? A wee bit of bread, though 1 saw oth­
ers devouring beans, onions, and herrings full of roe. We then worked 
hard at grape-gathering, and had a good sweat, and were merry .... 
After six o'clock we came home. 
"I did but little work and that to no purpose. Then 1 had a long chat 
with my little mother as she sat on the bed .... Whilst we were chat­
tering in this way and disputing which of us two loved the one or other 
of you two the better, the gong sounded, an intimation that my father 
had gone to his bath. So we had supper after we had bathed in the 
oil-press room; 1 do not mean bathed in the oil-press room, but when 
we had bathed, had supper there, and we enjoyed hearing the yokels 
chaffing one another. After coming back, before 1 turn over and snore, 
1 get my task done [meum penso explico] and give my dearest of masters 
an account of the day's doings [did rationem mea suavissimo magistro 
reddo] and if 1 could miss him more, 1 would not grudge wasting away 
a little more. "27 
The last lines of the letter clearly show how it is linked to the prac­
tice of self-examination: the day ends, just before sleep, with a kind 
of reading of the day that has passed; one rolls out the scroll on which 
the day's activities are inscribed, and it is this imaginary book of mem­
ory that is reproduced the next day in the letter addressed to the one 
who is both teacher and friend. The letter to Fronto recopies, as it were, 
the examination carried out the evening before by reading the mental 
book of conscience. 
It is clear that one is still very far from that book of spiritual combat 
to which Athanasius refers a few centuries later, in the Life of Saint

Self Writing 221 
Antony But one can also measure the extent to which this procedure of 
self-narration in the daily run of life, with scrupulous attention to what 
occurs in the body and in the soul, is different from both Ciceronian 
correspondence and the practice of hupomnemata, a collection of things 
read and heard, and a support for exercises of thought. In this case­
that of the hupomnemata-it was a matter of constituting oneself as 
a subject of rational action through the appropriation, the unification, 
and the subjectivation of a fragmentary and selected already-said; in 
the case of the monastic notation of spiritual experiences, it will be a 
matter of dislodging the most hidden impulses from the inner recesses 
of the soul, thus enabling oneself to break free of them. In the case of 
the epistolary account of oneself, it is a matter of l?ringing into congru­
ence the gaze of the other and that gaze which one aims at oneself 
when one measures one's everyday actions according to the rules of a 
technique of living. 
NOTES 
Saint Athanasi us, Vita Antonii: Vie et conduite de notre Saint-Pere Antoine, ecrite et adressee aux 
moines habitant en pays etranger, par notre Saint-Pere Athanase, eveque d'Alexandrie, trans. 
B. Lavaud (repub. Paris: Cerf, 1989), pp. 6g-70 [The LifC of Saint Antony, trans. Robert T. Meyer 
(Westminster, Md.: Newman, 1950), §55, pp. 67-68]. 
2 Seneca, Lettres a Lucilius, trans. H. Nublot (Paris: Belles Lettres, 1945-64), vol. 3 (1957), bk. 11, 
let. 84, §I, p. 121 [Ad Lucilium Epistulae Morales, with an English translation by Richard M. 
Gummere (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1961), vol. 2, let. 84, p. 277]. 
'j Epictetus, Entreliens, trans. J. Souilhe (Paris: Belles Lettres, 196)), vol. 3, bk. 3, ch. 5: "A ceux 
qui quittent I'ecole pour raisons de sante," §ll, p. :.13 [The Discourses and Manual, trans. P. E. 
Matheson (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1916), vol. :.I, bk. 3= "Against those who make ill­
ness an excuse for leaving the lecture-room," p. 20J. 
4 Ibid., bk. 3, ch. 24: "Qu'i1 ne faut pas s'emouvoir pour ce yui ne depend pas de nous," §103, 
P.109 [ch. 24: "That We Ought Not Spend Our Feelings on Things Beyond Our Power," p. 99]. 
5 Plutarch, De Tranquillitate, 464C. 
6 Ibid., 465c. 
7 Seneca, Lettres, vol. I (1945), bk. I, let. 2, §3, p. 6 [vol. I, let. 2, §3, p. 7]. 
8 Ibid., vol. 2 (1947), bk. 5, let. 52, §§1-2, pp. 41-4:.1 [vol. I, let. 52, p. 345]. 
9 Epictetus, Entretiens, vol. 2, bk. I, ch. 17: "De la Necessite de la logiyue," §§ 11-14, p. 65 [vol. I, 
bk. I, ch. 17, p. 95: "That the Processes of Logic Are Necessary"J. 
10 Seneca, Lettres, vol. 1(1945), bk. I, lets. 2, §5, 1'.6; 3, §6, p. 9; 4, §1O, p. 12; 7, §ll, PI" 21-22; 8, 
§§7-8, p. 24, etc. [vol. I, lets. 2, §5, p. 9;:.1, §6, 1'.13; 4, §IO, p. 19; 7, §ll, pp. 35-37; 8, §§7-9, 
P·4IJ. 
11 Ibid., let. 2, §§4-'j, p. 6 [vol. I, let. 2, §§4-5, p. 9].

222 Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
12 Ibid., vol. 3 (1957), bk. ll, let. 84, §§6-7, p. 123 [let. 84, §§6-7, p. 281]. 
13 Ibid., §§9-1O, p. 124 [§§9-1O, pp. 281-83]. 
14 Lettre a Pythocles, trans. A. Ernout, in Lucretius, De Rerum natura: Commentaire par Alfred 
Ernout et Leon Robin (Paris: Belles Lettres, 1925), vol. I, §§84-85, p. 87 ["Letter to Pythocles," 
in Epicurus: The Extant Remains, trans. Cyril Bailey (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1926), 
p. 57]. 
15 Seneca, Lettres, vol. I (1945), bk. I, let. 7, §8, p. 21 [vol. I, let. 7, §8, p. 35]. 
16 Ibid., vol. 4 (1962), bk. 16, let. 99, pp. 125-34 [vol. 3, let. 99, pp. 129-49]. 
17 Ibid., vol. I (1945), bk. 4, let. 34, §2, p. 190 [vol. I, let. 34, §2, p. 241]. 
18 Ibid., vol. 4 (1962), bk. 18, let. 109, §2, p. 190 [vol. 3, let. 109, §2, p. 255]. 
19 Ibid., vol. I (1945), bk. 4, let. 40, §I, p. 161 [vol. I, let. 40, §I, pp. 263-65]. 
20 Demetrius of Phaleron, De Elocutione 4.§§223-25. 
21 Seneca, Lettres, vol. 3 (1957), bk. 10, let. 83, §I, p. llO [vol. 2, let. 84, §I, p. 259]. 
22 Pliny, The Younger, Lettres, bk. 3, let. I, trans. A.-M. Guillemin (Paris: Belles Lettres, 1927), 
vol. I, pp. 97-100 [Pliny, Letters and Panegyrecus, trans. Betty Radice (Cambridge, Mass.: 
Harvard University Press, 1969), vol. I, bk. 3, §I, pp. 159-63]. 
23 Seneca, Lettres, vol. 3 (1957), bk. 9, let. 78, §§1-4, pp. 71-72 [vol. 2, let. 78, §§1-4, pp. 181-83]. 
24 Ibid., vol. 2 (1947), bk. 6, let. 55, §§2-3, pp. 56-57, or also let. 57, §§2-3, p. 67 [vol. I, let. 55, 
§§2-3, pp. 365-67, or also let. 57, §§2-3, pp. 383-85]. 
25 Ibid., vol. 3 (1957), bk. 10, let. 83, §§2-3, pp. llO-ll [vol. 2, let. 83, §§2-3, pp. 259-61]. 
26 Seneca, De Ira: De la Co/ere, trans. A. Bourgery, let. 36, §§1-2, in Dialogues (Paris: Belles 
Lettres, 1922), vol. I, pp. 102-103 [let. 36, §§1-2, in Moral Essays, trans. John W. Basore (Cam­
bridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1958), vol. I, pp. 339-41]. 
27 Marcus Aurelius, Lettres, bk. 4, let. 6, trans. A. Cassan (Paris: Levavasseur, 1830), pp. 249-51 
[in The Correspondence of Marcus Cornelius Franto, trans. C. R. Haines (Cambridge, Mass.: 
Harvard University Press, 1982), vol. I, p. 183].

TECHNOLOGIES OF THE SELF* 
I 
Technologies of the Self 
When I began to study the rules, duties, and prohibitions of sexuality, 
the interdictions and restrictions associated with it, I was concerned 
not simply with the acts that were permitted and forbidden but with 
the feelings represented, the thoughts, the desires one might experi­
ence, the inclination to seek within the self any hidden feeling, any 
movement of the soul, any desire disguised under illusory forms. There 
is a very significant difference between interdictions about sexuality and 
other forms of interdiction. Unlike other interdictions, sexual inter­
dictions are constantly connected with the obligation to tell the truth 
about oneself. 
Two facts may be raised against me: first, that confession played an 
important part in penal and religious institutions for all offenses, not 
only in sex. But the task of analyzing one's sexual desire is always more 
important than analyzing any other kind of sin. 
I am also aware of the second objection: that sexual behavior more 
than any other was submitted to very strict rules of secrecy, decency, 
and modesty so that sexuality is related in a strange and complex way 
both to verbal prohibition and to the obligation to tell the truth, of 
hiding what one does and of deciphering who one is. 
*This text derives from a seminar Foucault gave at the University of Vermont in Octo­
ber 1982. It appears here amended for style and clarity; it has been supplemented with 
notes to correspond to the text in Dils el ecrils.

224 Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
The association of a prohibition and a strong injunction to speak is 
a constant feature of our culture. The theme of the renunciation of the 
flesh was linked to the confession of the monk to the abbot, to the 
monk confiding to the abbot everything that was on his mind. 
I conceived of a rather odd project: not the study of the evolution of 
sexual behavior but of the historical study of the link between the obli­
gation to tell the truth and the prohibitions weighing on sexuality. I 
asked: How had the subject been compelled to decipher himself in 
regard to what was forbidden? It is a question that interrogates the 
relation between asceticism and truth. 
Max Weber posed the question: If one wants to behave rationally and 
regulate one's action according to true principles, what part of one's 
self should one renounce? What is the ascetic price of reason? To what 
kind of asceticism should one submit? I posed the opposite question: 
How have certain kinds of interdictions required the price of certain 
kinds of knowledge about oneself? What must one know about one­
self in order to be willing to renounce anything? 
Thus, I arrived at the hermeneutics of technologies of the self in 
pagan and early Christian practice. I encountered certain difficulties 
in this study because these practices are not well known. First, Chris­
tianity has always been more interested in the history of its beliefs than 
in the history of real practices. Second, such a hermeneutics was never 
organized into a body of doctrine like textual hermeneutics. Third, 
the hermeneutics of the self has been confused with'theologies of the 
soul-concupiscence, sin, and the fall from grace. Fourth, a herme­
neutics of the self has been diffused across Western culture through 
numerous channels and integrated with various types of attitudes and 
experience, so that it is difficult to isolate and separate it from our own 
spontaneous experiences. 
Context if Study 
My objective for more than twenty-five years has been to sketch out a his­
tory of the different ways in our culture that humans develop knowledge 
about themselves: economics, biology, psychiatry, medicine, and penol­
ogy. The main point is not to accept this knowledge at face value but to 
analyze these so-called sciences as very specific "truth games" related 
to specific techniques that huamn beings use to understand themselves. 
As a context, we must understand that there are four major types of

Technologies of the Self 
these "technologies," each a matrix of practical reason: (1) technologies 
of production, which permit us to produce, transform, or manipulate 
things; (2) technologies of sign systems, which permit us to use signs, 
meanings, symbols, or signification; (3) technologies of power, which 
determine the conduct of individuals and submit them to certain ends 
or domination, an objectivizing of the subject; (4) technologies of the 
self, which permit individuals to effect by their own means, or with the 
help of others, a certain number of operations on their own bodies and 
souls, thoughts, conduct, and way of being, so as to transform them­
selves in order to attain a certain state of happiness, purity, wisdom, 
perfection, or immortality. 
These four types of technologies hardly ever function separately, 
although each one of them is associated with a certain type of domi­
nation. Each implies certain modes of training and modification of indi­
viduals, not only in the obvious sense of acquiring certain skills but also 
in the sense of acquiring certain attitudes. I wanted to show both their 
specific nature and their constant interaction. For instance, the relation 
between manipulating things and domination appears clearly in Karl 
Marx's Capital, where every technique of production requires modifi­
cation of individual conduct-not only skills but also attitudes. 
Usually, the first two technologies are used in the study of the sci­
ences and linguistics. It is the last two, the technologies of domination 
and self, which have most kept my attention. I have attempted a his­
tory of the organization of knowledge with respect to both domination 
and the self. For example, I studied madness not in terms of the cri­
teria of formal sciences but to show what type of management of indi­
viduals inside and outside of asylums was made possible by this strange 
discourse. This encounter between the technologies of domination of 
others and those of the self I call" governmentality." 
Perhaps I've insisted too much on the technology of domination and 
power. I am more and more interested in the interaction between one­
self and others, and in the technologies of individual domination, in 
the mode of action that an individual exercises upon himself by means 
of the technologies of the self. 
The Development cifTechnologies olthe Self 
I wish to sketch out the evolution of the hermeneutics of the self in two 
different contexts that are historically contiguous: (1) Greco-Roman phi-

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
losophy in the first two centuries A.D. of the early Roman Empire, and 
(2) Christian spirituality and the monastic principles developed in the 
fourth and fifth centuries of the late Roman Empire. 
Moreover, I wish to take up the subject not only in theory but in rela­
tion to a set of practices in late antiquity. Among the Greeks, these 
practices took the form of a precept: epimeleisthai sautou, "to take care 
of yourself," to take "care of the self," "to be concerned, to take care 
of yourself. " 
The precept of the "care of the self" [soud de SOl] was, for the Greeks, 
one of the main principles of cities, one of the main rules for social 
and personal conduct and for the art of life. For us now, this notion is 
rather obscure and faded. When one is asked "What is the most impor­
tant moral principle in ancient philosophy?" the immediate answer is 
not "Take care of oneself" but the Delphic principle, gnothi seauton 
(" Know yourself"). 
Without doubt, our philosophical tradition has overemphasized the 
latter and forgotten the former. The Delphic principle was not an ab­
stract one concerning life; it was technical advice, a rule to be observed 
for the consultation of the oracle. "Know yourself" meant "Do not sup­
pose yourself to be a god." Other commentators suggest that it meant 
"Be aware of what you really ask when you come to consult the oracle." 
In Greek and Roman texts, the injunction of having to know one­
self was always associated with the other principle of the care of the 
self, and it was that need to care for oneself that brought the Delphic 
maxim into operation. It is implicit in all Greek and Roman culture 
and has been explicit since Plato's Alcibiades 1.1 In the Socratic dia­
logues, in Xenophon, Hippocrates, and in the Neoplatonist tradition 
from Albinus on, one had to be concerned with oneself. One had to 
occupy oneself with oneself before the Delphic principle was brought 
into action. There was a subordination of the second principle to the 
former. I have three or four examples of this. 
In Plato's Apology, 2ge, Socrates presents himself before his judges 
as a master of epimeleia heautou. 2 You "preoccupy yourselves without 
shame in acquiring wealth and reputation and honors," he tells them, 
but you do not concern yourselves with yourselves, that is, with "wis­
dom, truth and the perfection of the soul." He, on the other hand, 
watches over the citizens to make sure they concern themselves with 
themselves. 
Socrates says three important things with regard to his invitation to

Technologies 0/ the Self 227 
others to occupy themselves with themselves: (1) His mission was con­
ferred on him by the gods, and he won't abandon it except with his 
last breath. (2) For this task he demands no reward; he is disinter­
ested; he performs it out of benevolence. (3) His mission is useful for 
the city-more useful than the Athenians' military victory at Olympia­
because, in teaching people to occupy themselves with themselves, he 
teaches them to occupy themselves with the city. 
Eight centuries later, one finds the same notion and the same phrase 
in Gregory of Nyssa's treatise, On Virginity, but with an entirely dif­
ferent meaning. Gregory did not mean the movement by which one 
takes care of oneself and the city; he meant the movement by which 
one renounces the world and marriage as well as detaches oneself from 
the flesh and, with virginity of heart and body, recovers the immortal­
ity of which one has been deprived. In commenting on the parable of 
the drachma (Luke 15.8-10), Gregory exhorts man to light his lamp 
and turn the house over and search, until gleaming in the shadow he 
sees the drachma within. In order to recover the efficacy that God has 
printed on the human soul and the body has tarnished, man must take 
care of himself and search every corner of his soul. '\ 
We see that Christian asceticism and ancient philosophy are placed 
under the same sign: that of the care of the self. The obligation to know 
oneself is one of the central elements of Christian asceticism. Between 
these two extremes-Socrates and Gregory of Nyssa-taking care of 
oneself constituted not only a principle but also a constant practice. 
I have two more examples. The first Epicurean text to serve as a 
manual of morals was the Letter to Menoeceus. 1 Epicurus writes that 
it is never too early, never too late, to occupy oneself with one's soul. 
One should philosophize when one is young and also when one is old. 
It is a task to be carried on throughout life. Precepts governing every­
day life are organized around the care of the self in order to help every 
member of the group with the common task of salvation. 
Another example comes from an Alexandrian text, On the Contem­
plative Life, by Philo of Alexandria. He describes an obscure, enigmatic 
group on the periphery of Hellenistic and Hebraic culture called the 
Therapeutae, marked by its religiosity. It is an austere community, 
devoted to reading, to healing meditation, to individual and collective 
prayer, and to meeting for a spiritual banquet (agape, "feast"). These 
practices stem from the principal task, the care of the self.5 
This is the point of departure for a possible analysis of the care of

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
the self in ancient culture. I would like to analyze the relation between 
the care of the self and knowledge of the self, the relation found in 
Greco-Roman and Christian traditions between the preoccupation an 
individual has with himself and the too-well-known principle "Know 
yourself." Just as there are different forms of care, there are different 
forms of self. 
Summary 
There are several reasons why "Know yourself" has obscured "Take 
care of yourself." First, there has been a profound transformation in the 
moral principles of Western society. We find it difficult to base rigor­
ous morality and austere principles on the precept that we should give 
more care to ourselves than to anything else in the world. We are more 
inclined to see taking care of ourselves as an immorality, as a means 
of escape from all possible rules. We inherit the tradition of Christian 
morality which makes self-renunciation the condition for salvation. To 
know oneself was, paradoxically, a means of self-renunciation. 
We also inherit a secular tradition that sees in external law the basis 
for morality. How then can respect for the self be the basis for moral­
ity? We are the inheritors of a social morality that seeks the rules for 
acceptable behavior in relations with others. Since the sixteenth cen­
tury, criticism of established morality has been undertaken in the name 
of the importance of recognizing and knowing the self. Therefore, it is 
difficult to see the care of the self as compatible with morality. "Know 
thyself" has obscured "Take care of yourself" because our morality, a 
morality of asceticism, insists that the self is that which one can reject. 
The second reason is that, in theoretical philosophy from Descartes 
to Husserl, knowledge of the self (the thinking subject) takes on an 
ever-increasing importance as the first step in the theory of knowledge. 
To summarize: There has been an inversion in the hierarchy of the 
two principles of antiquity, "Take care of yourself" and "Know your­
self." In Greco-Roman culture, knowledge of oneself appeared as the 
consequence of the care of the self. In the modern world, knowledge 
of oneself constitutes the fundamental principle. 
II 
The first philosophical elaboration of the concern with taking care of 
oneself that I wish to consider is found in Plato's Alcibiades /. The date

Technologies of the Self 
of its writing is uncertain, and it may be a spurious Platonic dialogue. 
It is not my intention to study dates but to point out the principal fea­
tures of the care of the self which is the center of the dialogue. 
The Neoplatonists in the third or fourth century A.D. show the sig­
nificance given to this dialogue and the importance it assumed in the 
classical tradition. They wanted to transform Plato's dialogues into a 
pedagogical tool, to make them the matrix for encyclopedic knowledge. 
They considered Alcibiades to be the first dialogue of Plato-the first 
to be read, the first to be studied. It was the arkhe. In the second cen­
tury, Albinus said that every gifted young man who wanted to stand 
apart from politics and practice virtue should study the Alcibiades. 6 It 
provided the point of departure and a program for all Platonic philos­
ophy. "Taking care of oneself" is its first principle. I would like to ana­
lyze the care of self in the Alcibiades I in terms of three aspects. 
"1. How is this question introduced into the dialogue? What are the 
reasons Alcibiades and Socrates are brought to the notion of the care 
of the self? 
Alcibiades is about to begin his public and political life. He wishes 
to speak before the people and be all-powerful in the city. He is not 
satisfied with his traditional status, with the privileges of his birth and 
heritage. He wishes to gain personal power over all others both inside 
and outside the city. At this point of intersection and transformation, 
Socrates intervenes and declares his love for Alcibiades. Alcibiades can 
no longer be the beloved; he must become a lover. He must become 
active in the political and the love game. Thus, there is a dialectic 
between political and erotic discourse. Alcibiades makes his transition 
in specific ways in both politics and love. 
An ambivalence is evident in Alcibiades' political and erotic vocab­
ulary. During his adolescence, Alcibiades was desirable and had many 
admirers, but now that his beard is growing, his suitors are disappear­
ing. Earlier, he had rejected them all in the bloom of his beauty because 
he wanted to be dominant, not dominated. He refused to let himself 
be dominated in youth, but now he wants to dominate others. This is 
the moment Socrates appears, and he succeeds where the others have 
failed: he will make Alcibiades submit, but in a different sense. They 
make a pact-Alcibiades will submit to his lover, Socrates, not in a 
physical but in a spiritual sense. The intersection of political ambition 
and philosophical love is "the care of the self." 
2. In such a relationship, why should Alcibiades be concerned with

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
himself, and why is Socrates preoccupied with that concern of Alcibi­
ades? Socrates asks Alcibiades about his personal capacities and the 
nature of his ambition. Does he know the meaning of the rule of law, 
of justice or concord? Alcibiades clearly knows nothing. Socrates calls 
upon him to compare his education with that ofthe Persian and Spartan 
kings, his rivals. Spartan and Persian princes have teachers in wisdom, 
justice, temperance, and courage. By comparison, Alcibiades' educa­
tion is like that of an old, ignorant slave: he doesn't know these things, 
so he can't apply himself to knowledge. But, says Socrates, it is not too 
late. To help him gain the upper hand-to acquire tekhne-Alcibiades 
must apply himself, he must take care of himself. But Alcibiades does 
not know to what he must apply himself. What is this knowledge he 
seeks? He is embarrassed and confused. Socrates calls upon him not 
to lose heart. 
In 127d of the Alcibiades we find the first appearance of the phrase 
epimeleisthai sautou. Concern for self always refers to an active politi­
cal and erotic state. Epimeleisthai expresses something much more seri­
ous than the simple fact of paying attention. It involves various things: 
taking pains with one's holdings and one's health. It is always a real 
activity and not just an attitude. It is used in reference to the activity 
of a farmer tending his fields, his cattle, and his house, or to the job 
of the king in taking care of his city and citizens, or to the worship of 
ancestors or gods, or as a medical term to signify the fact of caring. It 
is highly significant that the concern for self in Alcibiades I is directly 
related to a defective pedagogy, one that concerns political ambition 
and a specific moment of life. 
3. The rest of the text is devoted to an analysis of this notion of 
epimeleisthai, "taking pains with oneself." It is divided into two ques­
tions: What is this self of which one has to take care, and of what does 
that care consist? 
First, what is the self (12gb)? Selfis a reflexive pronoun, and it has 
two meanings. Auto means "the same," but it also conveys the notion of 
identity. The latter meaning shifts the question from "What is this self?" 
to "Departing from what ground shall I find my identity?" Alcibiades 
tries to find the self in a dialectical movement. When you take care of 
the body, you do not take care of the self. The self is not clothing, tools, 
or possessions; it is to be found in the principle that uses these tools, 
a principle not of the body but of the soul. You have to worry about your 
soul-that is the principal activity of caring for yourself. The care of the

Technologies of the Self 
self is the care of the activity and not the care of the soul-as-substance. 
The second question is: How must we take care of this principle 
of activity, the soul? Of what does this care consist? One must know 
of what the soul consists. The soul cannot know itself except by looking 
at itself in a similar element, a mirror. Thus, it must contemplate the 
divine element. In this divine contemplation, the soul will be able to 
discover rules to serve as a basis for just behavior and political action. 
The effort of the soul to know itself is the principle on which just polit­
ical action can be founded, and Alcibiades will be a good politician 
insofar as he contemplates his soul in the divine element. 
Often the discussion gravitates around and is phrased in terms of the 
Delphic principle "Know yourself." To take care of oneself consists of 
knowing oneself. Knowing oneself becomes the object of the quest of 
concern for self. Being occupied with oneself and political activities are 
linked. The dialogue ends when Alcibiades knows he must take care 
of himself by examining his soul. 
This text, one of Plato's first, illuminates the historical background 
of the precept "taking care of oneself" and sets out four main problems 
that endure throughout antiquity, although the solutions offered often 
differ from those in Plato's Alcibiades. 
First, there is the problem of the relation between the care of the 
self and political activity. In the later Hellenistic and imperial periods, 
the question is presented in an alternative way: When is it better to 
turn away from political activity to concern oneself with oneself? 
Second, there is the problem of the relationship between the care 
of the self and pedagogy. For Socrates, occupying oneself with oneself 
is the duty of a young man, but later in the Hellenistic period it is seen 
as the permanent duty of one's whole life. 
Third, there is the problem of the relationship between the care of 
the self and the knowledge of oneself. Plato gave priority to the Delphic 
maxim "Know yourself." The privileged position of "Know yourself" 
is characteristic of all Platonists. Later, in the Hellenistic and Greco­
Roman periods, this is reversed: the accent was not on the knowledge 
of self but on the concern with oneself. The latter was given an auton­
omy and even a preeminence as a philosophical issue. 
Fourth, there is the problem of the relationship between the care of 
self and philosophical love, or the relation to a master. 
In the Hellenistic and imperial periods, the Socratic notion of "the 
care of the self" became a common, universal philosophical theme.

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
"Care of the self" was accepted by Epicurus and his followers, by the 
Cynics, and by such Stoics as Seneca, Rufus, and Galen. The Pythag­
oreans gave attention to the notion of an ordered life in common. This 
theme of the care of the self was not abstract advice but a widespread 
activity, a network of obligations and services to the soul. Following 
Epicurus himself, the Epicureans believed that it is never too late to 
occupy oneself with oneself. The Stoics say you must attend to the self, 
"retire into the self and stay there." Lucian parodied the notion'? It 
was an extremely widespread activity, and it brought about competi­
tion between the rhetoricians and those who turned toward themselves, 
particularly over the question of the role of the master. 
There were charlatans, of course, but certain individuals took it seri­
ously. It was generally acknowledged that it was good to be reflective, 
at least briefly. Pliny advises a friend to set aside a few moments a day, 
or several weeks or months, for a retreat into himself. This was an 
active leisure-to study, to read, to prepare for misfortune or death. It 
was a meditation and a preparation. 
Writing was also important in the culture of the care of the self. One 
of the tasks that defines the care of the self is that of taking notes on one­
self to be reread, writing treatises and letters to friends to help them, 
and keeping notebooks in order to reactivate for oneself the truths one 
needed. Seneca's letters are an example of this self-exercise. 
In traditional political life, oral culture was largely dominant, and 
therefore rhetoric was important. Yet the development of the adminis­
trative structures and the bureaucracy of the imperial period increased 
the amount and role of writing in the political sphere. In Plato's writ­
ings, dialogue gave way to the literary pseudodialogue. By the Hel­
lenistic age, though, writing prevailed, and real dialectic passed to 
correspondence. Taking care of oneself became linked to constant writ­
ing activity. The self is something to write about, a theme or object 
(subject) of writing activity. That is not a modern trait born of the Ref­
ormation or of Romanticism; it is one of the most ancient Western tra­
ditions. It was well established and deeply rooted when Augustine 
started his Confessions. 8 
The new care of the self involved a new experience of self. The new 
form of the experience of the self is to be seen in the first and second 
centuries, when introspection becomes more and more detailed. A rela­
tion developed between writing and vigilance. Attention was paid to 
nuances of life, mood, and reading, and the experience of self was

Technologies cif the Self 233 
intensified and widened by virtue of this act of writing. A whole field 
of experience opened which earlier was absent. 
One can compare Cicero to the later Seneca or Marcus Aurelius. We 
see, for example, Seneca's and Marcus's meticulous concern with the 
details of daily life, with the movements of the spirit, with self-analysis. 
Everything in the imperial period is present in Marcus Aurelius's let­
ter of 144-45 A.D. to Fronto: 
Hail, my sweetest 0/ masters. 
We are well. I slept somewhat late owing to my slight cold, which seems 
now to have subsided. So from five A.M. till nine I spent the time partly in 
reading some of Cato's Agriculture and partly in writing not quite such 
wretched stuff, by heavens, as yesterday. Then, after paying my respects to 
my father, I relieved my throat, I will not say by gargling-though the word 
gargarisso is, I believe, found in Novius and elsewhere-but by swallowing 
honey water as far as the gullet and ejecting it again. After easing my throat 
I went off to my father and attended him at a sacrifice. Then we went to 
luncheon. What do you think I ate? A wee bit of bread, though I saw oth­
ers devouring beans, onions, and herrings full of roe. We then worked hard 
at grape-gathering, and had a good sweat, and were merry and, as the poet 
says, "still left some clusters hanging high as gleanings of the vintage." After 
six o'clock we came home. 
I did but little work and that to no purpose. Then I had a long chat with 
my little mother as she sat on the bed. My talk was this: "What do you think 
my Fronto is now doing?" Then she: "And what do you think my Gratia is 
doing?" Then I: "And what do you think our little sparrow, the wee Gratia, 
is doing?" Whilst we were chattering in this way and disputing which of 
us two loved the one or other of you two the better, the gong sounded, an 
intimation that my father had gone to his bath. So we had supper after we 
had bathed in the oil-press room; I do not mean bathed in the oil-press 
room, but when we had bathed, had supper there, and we enjoyed hearing 
the yokels chaffing one another. After coming back, before I turn over and 
snore, I get my task done and give my dearest of masters an account of the 
day's doings, and if I could miss him more, I would not grudge wasting 
away a little more. Farewell, my Fronto, wherever you are, most honey­
sweet, my love, my delight. How is it between you and me? I love you and 
you are away.9 
This letter presents a description of everyday life. All the details of tak­
ing care of oneself are here, all the unimportant things he has done.

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
Cicero tells only important things, but in Aurelius's letter these details 
are important because they are you-what you thought, what you felt. 
The relation between the body and the soul is interesting too. For 
the Stoics, the body was not so important, but Marcus Aurelius speaks 
of himself, his health, what he has eaten, his sore throat. That is quite 
characteristic of the ambiguity about the body in this cultivation of the 
self. Theoretically, the cultivation of the self is soul-oriented, but all 
the concerns of the body take on a considerable importance. In Pliny 
and Seneca, hypochondria is an essential trait. They retreat to a house 
in the countryside. They have intellectual activities but rural activities as 
well. They eat and participate in the activities of peasants. The impor­
tance of the rural retreat in this letter is that nature helps put one in 
contact with oneself. 
There is also a love relationship between Aurelius and Fronto, one 
between a twenty-four-year-old and a forty-year-old man. Ars erotica 
is a theme of discussion. Homosexual love was important in this period 
and carried over into Christian monasticism. 
Finally, in the last lines, there is an allusion to the examination of 
conscience at the end of the day. Aurelius goes to bed and looks in the 
notebook to see what he was going to do and how it corresponds to 
what he did. The letter is the transcription of that examination of con­
science. It stresses what the individual did, not what he thought. That 
is the difference between practice in the Hellenistic and imperial peri­
ods and later monastic practice. In Seneca, too, there are only deeds, 
not thoughts; but it does prefigure Christian confession. 
This genre of epistles shows a side apart from the philosophy of the 
era. The examination of conscience begins with this letter-writing. 
Diary-writing comes later. It dates from the Christian era and focuses 
on the notion of the struggle of the soul. 
III 
In my discussion of Plato's Alcibiades, I have isolated three major 
themes: (1) the relation between care of the self and care for the polit­
icallife; (2) the relation between the care of the self and defective edu­
cation; and (3) the relation between the care of the self and knowing 
oneself. Whereas we saw in the Alcibiades the close relation between 
"Take care of yourself" and "Know yourself," taking care of yourself 
eventually was absorbed in knowing yourself.

Technologies if the Self 
We can see these three themes in Plato, also in the Hellenistic period, 
and four to five centuries later in Seneca, Plutarch, Epictetus, and the 
like. If the problems are the same, the solutions and themes are quite 
different and, in some cases, the opposite of the Platonic meanings. 
First, to be concerned with self in the Hellenistic and Roman peri­
ods is not exclusively a preparation for political life. Care of the self 
has become a universal principle. One must leave politics to take bet­
ter care of the self. 
Second, the concern with oneself is not just obligatory for young 
people concerned with their education; it is a way of living for every­
body throughout their lives. 
Third, even if self-knowledge plays an important role in the care of 
the self, it involves other relationships as well. 
I want to discuss briefly the first two points: the universality of the 
care of the self independent of political life, and the care of the self 
throughout one's life. 
1. A medical model was substituted for Plato's pedagogical model. 
The care of the self isn't another kind of pedagogy; it has to become 
permanent medical care. Permanent medical care is one of the central 
features of the care of the self. One must become the doctor of oneself. 
2. Since we have to take care throughout life, the objective is no 
longer to get prepared for adult life, or for another life, but to get pre­
pared for a certain complete achievement of life. This achievement is 
complete at the moment just prior to death. This notion of a happy 
proximity to death-of old age as completion-is an inversion of the 
traditional Greek values on youth. 
3. Lastly, we have the various practices to which cultivation of self 
has given rise and the relation of self-knowledge to these. 
In Alcibiades I, the soul had a mirror relation to itself, which relates 
to the concept of memory and justifies dialogue as a method of dis­
covering truth in the soul. Yet from the time of Plato to the Hellenistic 
age, the relationship between care of the self and knowledge of the self 
changed. We may note two perspectives. 
In the philosophical movements of Stoicism in the imperial period, 
there is a different conception of truth and memory, and another 
method of examining the self. First, we see the disappearance of dia­
logue and the increasing importance of a new pedagogical relation­
ship-a new pedagogical game where the master-teacher speaks and 
does not ask questions, and the disciple does not answer but must lis-

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
ten and keep silent. A cultivation of silence becomes more and more 
important. In Pythagorean cultivation, disciples kept silent for five years 
as a pedagogical rule. They did not ask questions or speak up during 
the lesson, but they developed the art of listening. This is the posi­
tive condition for acquiring truth. The tradition is picked up during 
the imperial period, where we see the beginning of the cultivation of 
silence and the art of listening rather than the cultivation of dialogue 
as in Plato. 
To learn the art of listening, we have to read Plutarch's treatise on 
the art of listening to lectures, Peri tou akouein. 10 At the beginning of 
this treatise, Plutarch says that, following schooling, we must learn to 
listen to logos throughout our adult life. The art of listening is crucial 
so that you can tell what is true and what is dissimulation, what is rhe­
torical truth and what is falsehood in the discourse of the rhetoricians. 
Listening is linked to the fact that the disciple is not under the control 
of the masters but must listen to logos. One keeps silent at the lecture; 
one thinks about it afterward. This is the art of listening to the voice 
of the master and the voice of reason in the self. 
The advice may seem banal, but I think it is important. In his trea­
tise On the Contemplative Life, Philo of Alexandria describes banquets 
of silence, not debauched banquets with wine, boys, revelry, and dia­
logue. There is instead a teacher who gives a monologue on the inter­
pretation of the Bible and a very precise indication of the way people 
must listen.ll For example, they must always assume the same posture 
when listening. The morphology of this notion is an interesting theme 
in monasticism and pedagogy henceforth. 
In Plato, the themes of contemplation of self and care of self are 
related dialectically through dialogue. Now in the imperial period, we 
have the theories of, on one side, the obligation of listening to the truth 
and, on the other side, of looking and listening to the self for the truth 
within. The difference between the one era and the other is one of the 
great signs of the disappearance of the dialectical structure. 
What was an examination of conscience in this culture, and how 
does one look at oneself? For the Pythagoreans, the examination of con­
science had to do with purification. Since sleep was related to death 
as a kind of encounter with the gods, one had to purify oneself before 
going to sleep. Remembering the dead was an exercise for the mem­
ory. But in the Hellenistic and the early imperial periods, you see this 
practice acquiring new values and signification. There are several rel-

Technologies of the Self 
evant texts: Seneca's De Ira and De Tranquillitae,12 and the beginning 
of Marcus Aurelius's fourth book of Meditations. I) 
Seneca's De Ira (Book Three) contains some traces of the old tradi­
tion.14 He describes an examination of conscience. The same thing was 
recommended by the Epicureans, and the practice was rooted in the 
Pythagorean tradition. The goal was the purification of the conscience 
using a mnemonic device. Do good things, have a good examination 
of the self, and a good sleep follows together with good dreams, which 
is contact with the gods. 
Seneca seems to use juridical language, and it seems that the self is 
both the judge and the accused. Seneca is the judge and prosecutes the 
self so that the examination is a kind of trial. Yet if you look closer, it is 
rather different from a court: Seneca uses terms related not to juridical 
but to administrative practices, as when a comptroller looks at the books 
or when a building inspector examines a building. Self-examination is 
taking stock. Faults are simply good intentions left undone. The rule is 
a means of doing something correctly, not judging what has happened 
in the past. Later, Christian confession will look for bad intentions. 
It is this administrative view of his own life much more than the 
juridical model that is important. Seneca is not a judge who has to pun­
ish but a stock-taking administrator. He is a permanent administrator 
of himself, not a judge of his past. He sees that everything has been 
done correctly following the rule but not the law. It is not real faults 
for which he reproaches himself but, rather, his lack of success. His 
errors are of strategy, not of moral character. He wants to make adjust­
ments between what he wanted to do and what he had done, and to 
reactivate the rules of conduct, not excavate his guilt. In Christian con­
fession, the penitent is obliged to memorize laws but does so in order 
to discover his sins. 
For Seneca, the problem is not that of discovering truth in the sub­
ject but of remembering truth, recovering a truth that has been forgot­
ten. Second, the subject does not forget himself, his nature, origin, or 
his supernatural affinity, but the rules of conduct, what he ought to have 
done. Third, the recollection of errors committed in the day measures 
the distinction between what has been done and what should have been 
done. Fourth, the subject is not the operating ground for the process 
of deciphering but the point where rules of conduct come together in 
memory. The subject constitutes the intersection between acts that have 
to be regulated and rules for what ought to be done. This is quite dif-

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
ferent from the Platonic conception and from the Christian conception 
of conscience. 
The Stoics spiritualized the notion of anakhoresis, the retreat of an 
army, the hiding of an escaped slave from his master, or the retreat 
into the country away from the towns, as in Marcus Aurelius's country 
retreat. A retreat into the country becomes a spiritual retreat into one­
self. It is a general attitude and also a precise act every day; you retire 
into the self to discover-but not to discover faults and deep feelings, 
only to remember rules of action, the main laws of behavior. It is a 
mnemotechnical formula. 
IV 
I have spoken of three Stoic technologies of the self: letters to friends 
and disclosure of self; examination of self and conscience, including a 
review of what was done, of what should have been done, and com­
parison of the two. Now I want to consider the third Stoic technique, 
askesis, not a disclosure of the secret self but a remembering. 
For Plato, one must discover the truth that is within one. For the 
Stoics, truth is not in oneself but in the fogoi, the teachings of the mas­
ters. One memorizes what one has heard, converting the statement one 
hears into rules of conduct. The subjectivation of truth is the aim of 
these techniques. During the imperial period, one could not assimilate 
ethical principles without a theoretical framework such as science, as 
for example in Lucretius's De Rerum natura. 15 There are structural 
questions underlying the practice of the examination of the self every 
night. I want to underscore the fact that in Stoicism it is not the deci­
phering of the self, not the means to disclose secrecy, which is impor­
tant; it is the memory of what one has done and what one has had to do. 
In Christianity, asceticism always refers to a certain renunciation of 
the self and of reality because most of the time the self is a part of that 
reality that must be renounced in order to gain access to another level 
of reality. This move to attain the renunciation of the self distinguishes 
Christian asceticism. 
In the philosophical tradition inaugurated by Stoicism, askesis means 
not renunciation but the progressive consideration of self, or mastery 
over oneself, obtained not through the renunciation of reality but 
through the acquisition and assimilation of truth. It has as its final 
aim not preparation for another reality but access to the reality of this

Technologies if the Self 239 
world. The Greek word for this is paraskeuazo ("to get prepared"). It 
is a set of practices by whicp one can acquire, assimilate, and trans­
fonn truth into a pennanent principle of action. Aletheia becomes ethos. 
It is a process of the intensification of subjectivity. 
What are the principal features of askesis? They include exercises 
in which the subject puts himself in a situation in which he can verify 
whether he can confront events and use the discourses with which he 
is anned. It is a question of testing the preparation. Is this truth assim­
ilated enough to become ethics so that we can behave as we must when 
an event presents itself? 
The Greeks characterized the two poles of those exercises by the 
terms melete and gymnasia. Melete means "meditation," according to 
the Latin translation, meditatio. It has the same root as epimeleisthai. 
It is a rather vague term, a technical term borrowed from rhetoric. 
Melete is the work one undertakes in order to prepare a discourse or 
an improvisation by thinking over useful terms and arguments. It is a 
matter of anticipating the real situation through dialogue in one's 
thoughts. The philosophical meditation is this kind of meditation: it 
is composed of memorizing responses and reactivating those memo­
ries by placing oneself in a situation where one can imagine how one 
would react. One judges the reasoning one should use in an imaginary 
exercise ("Let us suppose ... ") in order to test an action or event (for 
example, "How would I react?"). Imagining the articulation of possible 
events to test how one would react-that is meditation. 
The most famous exercise of meditation is the praemeditatio mal­
orum as practiced by the Stoics. It is an ethical, imaginary experience. 
In appearance, it is a rather dark and pessimistic vision of the future. 
You can compare it to what Husserl says about eidetic reduction. 
The Stoics developed three eidetic reductions of future misfortune. 
First, it is not a question of imagining the future as it is likely to turn 
out but to imagine the worst that can happen, even if there is little 
chance that it will turn out that way-the worst as certainty, as actual­
izing what could happen, not as calculation of probability. Second, one 
should not envisage things as possibly taking place in the distant future 
but as already actual and in the process of taking place. For example, 
imagining not that one might be exiled but rather that one is already 
exiled, subjected to torture, and dying. Third, one does this not in order 
to experience inarticulate sufferings but in order to convince oneself 
that they are not real ills. The reduction of all that is possible, of all

Ethics.' Subjectivity and Truth 
III(' II II !"aLion and of all the misfortunes, reveals not something bad but 
whaL we must accept. It consists of having at the same time the future 
and the present event. The Epicureans were hostile to it because they 
thought it was useless: they thought it was better to recollect and mem­
orize past pleasures in order to derive pleasure from present events. 
At the opposite pole is gymnasia ("to train oneself"). While meditatio 
is an imaginary experience that trains thought, gymnasia is training in 
a real situation, even if it has been artificially induced. There is a long 
tradition behind this: sexual abstinence, physical privation, and other 
rituals of purification. 
Those practices of abstinence have other meanings than purification 
or witnessing demonic force, as in Pythagoras and Socrates. In the cul­
ture of the Stoics, their function is to establish and test the indepen­
dence of the individual with regard to the external world. For example, 
in Plutarch's On the Daemon if Socrates, one gives oneself over to very 
hard sporting activities. Or one tempts oneself by placing oneself in 
front of many tantalizing dishes and then renouncing them; then one 
calls his slaves and gives them the dishes, and takes the meal prepared 
for the slaves. 16 Another example is Seneca's Letter 18 to Lucilius: he 
prepares for a great feast day by acts of mortification of the flesh in 
order to convince himself that poverty is not an evil, and that he can 
endure itY 
Between these poles of training in thought and training in reality, 
melete and gymnasia, there are a whole series of intermediate pos­
sibilities. Epictetus provides the best example of the middle ground 
between these poles. He wants to watch perpetually over representa­
tions, a technique that will find its apogee in Freud. There are two 
metaphors important from his point of view: the night watchman, who 
will not admit anyone into town if that person cannot prove who he is 
(we must be "watchmen" over the flux of thought), 18 and the money­
changer, who verifies the authenticity of currency, looks at it, weighs 
and assures himself of its worth. We have to be moneychangers of our 
own representations, of our thoughts, vigilantly testing them, verify­
ing them, their metal, weight, effigy.19 
The same metaphor of the moneychanger is found in the Stoics 
and in early Christian literature, but with different meanings. When 
Epictetus says you must be a moneychanger, he means as soon as an 
idea comes to mind you have to think of the rules you must apply to 
evaluate it. For Cassian, being a moneychanger and looking at your

Technologies of the Self 
thoughts means something very different: it means you must try to 
decipher if, at the root of the movement that brings you the represen­
tations, there is or is not concupiscence or desire-if your innocent 
thought has evil origins; if you have something underlying which is the 
great Seducer, which is perhaps hidden, the money of your thought. 20 
In Epictetus there are two exercises-sophistical and ethical. The 
first are exercises borrowed from school, question-and-answer games. 
This must be an ethical game; that is, it must teach a morallesson. 21 
The second are ambulatory exercises. In the morning you go for a walk, 
and you test your reactions to that walk. The purpose of both exercises 
is control of representations, not the deciphering of truth. They are 
reminders about conforming to the rules in the face of adversity. A pre­
Freudian machine of censorship is described word for word in the tests 
of Epictetus and Cassian. For Epictetus, the control of representations 
means not deciphering but recalling principles of acting, and thus see­
ing, through self-examination, if they govern one's life. It is a kind of 
permanent self-examination. One must be one's own censor. The medi­
tation on death is the culmination of all these exercises. 
In addition to letters, examination, and askesis, we must now evoke 
a fourth technique in the examination of the self, the interpretation of 
dreams. It was to have an important destiny in the nineteenth century, 
but it occupied a relatively marginal position in the ancient world. 
Philosophers had an ambivalent attitude toward the interpretation of 
dreams. Most Stoics are critical and skeptical about such interpretation; 
but there is still the popular and general practice of it. There were 
experts who were able to interpret dreams, including Pythagoras and 
some of the Stoics, and some experts who wrote books to teach people 
to interpret their own dreams. There were huge amounts of literature 
on how to do it, but the only surviving dream manual is The Interpre­
tation of Dreams by Artemidorus (second century A.D.).22 Dream inter­
pretation was important because, in antiquity, the meaning of a dream 
was an announcement of a future event. 
I should mention two other documents dealing with the importance 
of dream interpretation for everyday life. The first is by Synesius of 
Cyrene in the fourth century A.D.23 He was well known and cultivated. 
Even though he was not a Christian, he asked to be a bishop. His 
remarks on dreams are interesting, for public divination was forbid­
den in order to spare the emperor bad news. Therefore, one had to 
interpret one's own dreams; one had to be a self-interpreter. To do it,

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
one had to remember not only one's own dreams but the events before 
and after. One had to record what happened every day, both the life 
of the day and the life of the night. 
Aelius Aristides' Sacred Discourses,24 written in the second century, 
records his dreams and explains how to interpret them. He believed 
that in the interpretation of dreams we receive advice from the gods 
about remedies for illness. With this work, we are at the crossing point 
of two kinds of discourses. It is not the writing of the self's daily activ­
ities that is the matrix of the Sacred Discourses but the ritual inscrip­
tion of praises to the gods that have healed you. 
v 
I wish to examine the scheme of one of the main techniques of the self 
in early Christianity and what it was as a truth game. To do so, I must 
look at the transition from pagan to Christian culture, in which it is 
possible to see clear-cut continuities and discontinuities. 
Christianity belongs to the salvation religions. It is one of those 
religions which is supposed to lead the individual from one reality to 
another, from death to life, from time to eternity. In order to achieve 
that, Christianity imposed a set of conditions and rules of behavior for 
a certain transformation of the self. 
Christianity is not only a salvation religion, it is a confessional reli­
gion; it imposes very strict obligations of truth, dogma, and canon, 
more so than do the pagan religions. Truth obligations to believe this 
or that were and are still very numerous. The duty to accept a set of 
obligations, to hold certain books as permanent truth, to accept author­
itarian decisions in matters of truth, not only to believe certain things 
but to show that one believes, and to accept institutional authority are 
all characteristic of Christianity. 
Christianity requires another form of truth obligation different from 
faith. Each person has the duty to know who he is, that is, to try to 
know what is happening inside him, to acknowledge faults, to recog­
nize temptations, to locate desires; and everyone is obliged to disclose 
these things either to God or to others in the community and, hence, 
to bear public or private witness against oneself. The truth obligations 
of faith and the self are linked together. This link permits a purifica­
tion of the soul impossible without self-knowledge. 
It is not the same in the Catholic as in the Reform tradition. But the

Technologies if the Self 
main features of both are an ensemble of truth obligations dealing with 
faith, books, dogma, and one dealing with truth, heart, and soul. Access 
to truth cannot be conceived of without purity of the soul. Purity of the 
soul is the consequence of self-knowledge and a condition for under­
standing the text: quis fadt veritatem (to make truth in oneself, to get 
access to the light), in Augustine. 
I would like to analyze the ways by which, in order to get access to 
the light, the Church conceived of illumination: the disclosure of the 
self. The sacrament of penance and the confession of sins are rather 
late innovations. Christians of the first centuries had different forms 
for discovering and deciphering truth about themselves. One of the 
two main forms of these discourses can be characterized by the word 
exomologesis, or "recognition of fact." Even the Latin fathers used this 
Greek term with no exact translation. For Christians, it meant to rec­
ognize publicly the truth of their faith or to recognize publicly that they 
were Christians. 
The word also had a penitential meaning. When a sinner seeks pen­
ance, he must visit the bishop and ask for it. In early Christianity, pen­
itence was not an act or a ritual but a status imposed on somebody who 
had committed very serious sins. 
Exomologesis was a ritual of recognizing oneself as a sinner and pen­
itent. It had several characteristics. First, you were a penitent for four 
to ten years, and this status affected your life. There was fasting, and 
there were rules about clothing and prohibitions about sex; the indi­
vidual was marked so he could not live the same life as others. Even 
after his reconciliation, he suffered from a number of prohibitions; for 
example, he could not marry or become a priest. 
Within this status you find the obligation of exomologesis. The sin­
ner seeks his penance. He visits the bishop and asks the bishop to 
impose on him the status of a penitent. He must explain why he wants 
the status, and he must explain his faults. This was not a confession; it 
was a condition of the status. Later, in the medieval period, exomolo­
gesis became a ritual that took place at the end of the period of pen­
ance, just before reconciliation. This ceremony placed him among the 
other Christians. Of this recognition ceremony, Tertullian says that 
wearing a hair shirt and ashes, wretchedly dressed, the sinner stands 
humbled before the church. Then he prostrates himself and kisses the 
brethren's knees. 25 Exomologesis is not a verbal behavior but the dra­
matic recognition of one's status as a penitent. Much later, in the Epistles

244 Ethics.' Subjectivity and Truth 
of Jerome, there is a description of the penitence of Fabiola, a Roman 
lady.26 During these days, Fabiola was in the ranks of penitents. People 
wept with her, lending drama to her public chastisement. 
Recognition also designates the entire process that the penitent expe­
riences in this status over the years. He is the aggregate of manifested 
penitential behavior, of self-punishment as well as of self-revelation. 
The acts by which he punishes himself are indistinguishable from the 
acts by which he reveals himself: self-punishment and the voluntary 
expression of the self are bound together. This link is evident in many 
writings; Cyprian, for example, talks of exhibitions of shame and mod­
esty. Penance is not nominal but theatrical.27 
To prove suffering, to show shame, to make visible humility and 
exhibit modesty-these are the main features of punishment. Peni­
tence in early Christianity is a way of life acted out at all times by 
accepting the obligation to disclose oneself. It must be visibly repre­
sented and accompanied by others who recognize the ritual. This 
approach endured until the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. 
Tertullian uses the term publicatio sui to characterize exomologesis. 
Publicatio sui is related to Seneca's daily self-examination, which was, 
however, completely private. For Seneca, exomologesis or publicatio sui 
does not imply verbal analysis of deeds or thoughts; it is only a soma,tic 
and symbolic expression. What was private for the Stoics was public 
for the Christians. 
What were its functions? First, this publication was a way to rub out 
sin and to restore the purity acquired by baptism. Second, it was also to 
show a sinner as he is. That is the paradox at the heart of exomologesis: 
it rubs out the sin and yet reveals the sinner. The greater part of the 
act of penitence was not in telling the truth of sin but in showing the 
true sinful being of the sinner; it was not a way for the sinner to explain 
his sins but a way to present himself as a sinner. 
Why should showing forth efface the sins? Expose is the heart of 
exomologesis. In the Christianity of the first centuries, Christian authors 
had recourse to three models to explain the relation between the par­
adox of rubbing out sins and disclosing oneself. 
The first is the medical model: one must show one's wounds in 
order to be cured. Another model, which was less frequent, was the 
tribunal model of judgment: one always appeases one's judge by con­
fessing faults. The sinner plays devil's advocate, as will the devil on the 
Day of Judgment.

Technologies of the Self 245 
The most important model used to explain exomologesis was the 
model of death, of torture, or of martyrdom. The theories and prac­
tices of penance were elaborated around the problem of the man who 
prefers to die rather than to compromise or abandon the faith; the way 
the martyr faces death is the model for the penitent. For the relapsed 
to be reintegrated into the Church, he must expose himself voluntarily 
to ritual martyrdom. Penance is the affect of change, of rupture with 
self, past, and world. It is a way to show that you are able to renounce 
life and self, to show that you can face and accept death. Penitence of 
sin does not have as its target the establishing of an identity but, instead, 
serves to mark the refusal of the self, the breaking away from self: ego 
non sum, ego. This formula is at the heart of publicatio sui. It repre­
sents a break with one's past identity. These ostentatious gestures have 
the function of showing the truth of the state of being of the sinner. 
Self-revelation is at the same time self-destruction. 
The difference between the Stoic and Christian traditions is that in 
the Stoic tradition examination of self, judgment, and discipline show 
the way to self-knowledge by superimposing truth about self through 
memory, that is, by memorizing the rules. In exomologesis, the penitent 
superimposes truth about self by violent rupture and dissociation. It is 
important to emphasize that this exomologesis is not verbal. It is sym­
bolic, ritual, and theatrical. 
VI 
During the fourth century, we find a very different technology for the 
disclosure of the self, exagoreusis, much less famous than exomologesis 
but more important. This one is reminiscent of the verbalizing exer­
cises in relation to a teacher-master of the pagan philosophical schools. 
We can see the transfer of several Stoic techniques of the self to Chris­
tian spiritual techniques. 
At least one example of self-examination, proposed by Chrysostom, 
was exactly the same form and the same administrative character as that 
described by Seneca in De Ira. In the morning, we must take account 
of our expenses, and in the evening we must ask ourselves to render 
account of our conduct of ourselves, to examine what is to our advan­
tage and what is prejudicial against us, with prayers instead of indis­
creet words. 28 That is exactly the Senecan style of self-examination. 
It is also important to note that this self-examination is rare in Chris­
tian literature.

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
The well-developed and elaborated practice of the self-examination 
in monastic Christianity is different from the Senecan self-examination 
and very different from Chrysostom and from exomologesis. This new 
kind of practice must be understood from the viewpoint of two prin­
ciples of Christian spirituality: obedience and contemplation. 
In Seneca, the relationship of the disciple with the master was im­
portant, but it was instrumental and professional. It was founded on 
the capacity of the master to lead the disciple to a happy and autono­
mous life through good advice. The relationship would end when the 
disciple gained access to that life. 
For a long series of reasons, obedience has a very different charac­
ter in monastic life. It differs from the Greco-Roman type of relation 
to the master in the sense that obedience is not based just upon a need 
for self-improvement but must bear on all aspects of a monk's life. 
There is no element in the life of the monk which may escape from 
this fundamental and permanent relation of total obedience to the 
master. Cas sian repeats an old principle from the oriental tradition: 
"Everything the monk does without permission of his master consti­
tutes a theft. "29 Here, obedience is complete control of behavior by the 
master, not a final autonomous state. It is a sacrifice of the self, of the 
subject's own will. This is the new technology of the self. 
The monk must have the permission of his director to do anything, 
even die. Everything he does without permission is stealing; there is 
not a single moment when the monk can be autonomous. Even when 
he becomes a director himself, he must retain the spirit of obedience. 
He must keep the spirit of obedience as a permanent sacrifice of the 
complete control of behavior by the master. The self must constitute 
itself through obedience. 
The second feature of monastic life is that contemplation is consid­
ered the supreme good. It is the obligation of the monk to turn his 
thoughts continuously to that point which is God and to make sure that 
his heart is pure enough to see God. The goal is permanent contem­
plation of God. 
This new technology of the self, which developed from obedience 
and contemplation in the monastery, presents some peculiar charac­
teristics. Cassian gives a rather clear exposition of this technology of 
the self, a principle of self-examination which he borrowed from the 
Syrian and Egyptian monastic traditions. 
This technology of self-examination of oriental origins, dominated

Technologies of the Self 247 
by obedience and contemplation, is much more concerned with thought 
than with action. Seneca had placed his stress on action. With Cassian, 
the object is not past actions of the day-it is the present thoughts. 
Since the monk must continuously turn his thoughts toward God, he 
must scrutinize the actual course of this thought. This scrutiny thus has 
as its object the permanent discrimination between thoughts which lead 
toward God and those which don't. This continual concern with the 
present is different from the Senecan memorization of deeds and their 
correspondence with rules. It is what the Greeks referred to with a 
pejorative word: logismoi, "cogitations, reasoning, calculating thought." 
There is an etymology of logismoi in Cassian, but I do not know if it is 
sound: co-agitationes. The spirit is polukinetos, "perpetually moving."3o 
In Cassian, perpetual mobility of spirit is the spirit's weakness. It dis­
tracts one from contemplation of GOd.31 
The scrutiny of conscience consists of trying to immobilize conscious­
ness, to eliminate movements of the spirit which divert one from God. 
That means we must examine any thought that presents itself to con­
sciousness to see the relation between act and thought, truth and real­
ity, to see if there is anything in this thought which will move our spirit, 
provoke our desire, turn our spirit away from God. The scrutiny is 
based on the idea of a secret concupiscence. 
There are three major types of self-examination: (1) self-examination 
with respect to thoughts in correspondence to reality (Cartesian); (2) 
self-examination with respect to the way our thoughts relate to rules 
(Sene can) ; (3) the examination of self with respect to the relation 
between the hidden thought and an inner impurity. At this moment 
begins the Christian hermeneutics of the self with its deciphering of 
inner thoughts. It implies that there is something hidden in ourselves 
and that we are always in a self-illusion that hides the secret. 
In order to make this kind of scrutiny, Cassian says we must care 
for ourselves, to attest to our thoughts directly. He gives three analo­
gies. First is the analogy of the mill. 32 Thoughts are like grains, and 
consciousness is the mill store: it is our role as the miller to sort out 
among the grains those which are bad and those which can be admitted 
to the mill store to give the good flour and good bread of our salvation. 
Second, Cassian makes military analogies. 33 He uses an analogy of 
the officer who orders the good soldiers to march to the right, the bad 
to the left. We must act like officers who divide soldiers into two files, 
the good and the bad.

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
Third, he uses the analogy of a moneychanger. 34 Conscience is the 
moneychanger of the self. It must examine coins, their effigy, their 
metal, where they came from. It must weigh them to see if they have 
been ill used. As there is the image of the emperor on money, so must 
the image of God be on our thoughts. We must verify the quality of 
the thought: This effigy of God, is it real? What is its degree of purity? 
Is it mixed with desire or concupiscence? Thus, we find the same image 
as in Seneca, but with a different meaning. 
Since we have as our role to be a permanent moneychanger of our­
selves, how is it possible to make this discrimination and recognize if 
a thought is of good quality? How can this "discrimination" actively be 
done? There is only one way: to tell all thoughts to our director, to be 
obedient to our master in all things, to engage in the permanent verba­
lization of all our thoughts. In Cassian, self-examination is subordinated 
to obedience and the permanent verbalization of thoughts. Neither is 
true of Stoicism. By telling himself not only his thoughts but also the 
smallest movements of consciousness, his intentions, the monk stands 
in a hermeneutic relation not only to the master but to himself. This 
verbalization is the touchstone or the money of thought. 
Why is confession able to assume this hermeneutic role? How can 
we be the hermeneuts of ourselves in speaking and transcribing all of 
our thoughts? Confession permits the master to know because of his 
greater experience and wisdom and therefore to give better advice. 
Even if the master, in his role as a discriminating power, does not say 
anything, the fact that the thought has been expressed will have an 
effect of discrimination. 
Cassian gives an example of the monk who stole bread. At first he 
cannot tell. The difference between good and evil thoughts is that evil 
thoughts cannot be expressed without difficulty, for evil is hidden and 
unstated. Because evil thoughts cannot be expressed without difficulty 
and shame, the cosmological difference between light and dark, be­
tween verbalization and sin, secrecy and silence, between God and the 
Devil, may not emerge. Then the monk prostrates himself and con­
fesses. Only when he confesses verbally does the Devil go out of him. 
The verbal expression is the crucial moment. 35 Confession is a mark 
of truth. This idea of the permanent verbal is only an ideal: it is never 
completely possible. But the price of the permanent verbal was to make 
everything that could not be expressed into a sin. 
In conclusion, in the Christianity of the first centuries, there are two

Technologies of the Self 249 
main forms of disclosing self, of showing the truth about oneself. The 
first is exomologesis, or a dramatic expression of the situation of the 
penitent as sinner which makes manifest his status as sinner. The sec­
ond is what was called in the spiritual literature exagoreusis. This is 
an analytical and continual verbalization of thoughts carried on in the 
relation of complete obedience to someone else; this relation is mod­
eled on the renunciation of one's own will and of one's own self. 
There is a great difference between exomologesis and exagoreusis; 
yet we have to underscore the fact that there is one important element 
in common: you cannot disclose without renouncing. In exomologesis, 
the sinner must "kill" himself through ascetic macerations. Whether 
through martyrdom or through obedience to a master, disclosure of self 
is the renunciation of one's own self. In exagoreusis, on the other hand, 
you show that, in permanently verbalizing your thoughts and perma­
nently obeying the master, you are renouncing your will and yourself. 
This practice continues from the beginning of Christianity to the sev­
enteenth century. The inauguration of penance in the thirteenth cen­
tury is an important step in its rise. 
This theme of self-renunciation is very important. Throughout Chris­
tianity there is a correlation between disclosure of the self, dramatic or 
verbalized, and the renunciation of self. My hypothesis, from looking at 
these two techniques, is that it is the second one, verbalization, that be­
comes the more important. From the eighteenth century to the present, 
the techniques of verbalization have been reinserted in a different con­
text by the so-called human sciences in order to use them without renun­
ciation of the self but to constitute, positively, a new self. To use these 
techniques without renouncing oneself constitutes a decisive break. 
NOTES 
1 Plato, Alcibiade, trans. M. Croiset (Paris: Belles Lettres, 1925) [Plato, Alcibiades, trans. W R. M. 
Lamb, in Plato (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard, 1967), vol. 12]. 
2 Plato, Apologie de Socrate, trans. M. Croiset (Paris: Belles Lettres, 1925), p. 157 [Socrates' 
Difimse (Apology), trans. H. Tredennick, in Plato: The Collected Dialogues, eds. E. Hamilton 
and H. Cairns (Princeton: Princeton University, 1961), p. 16]. 
3 Gregory of Nyssa, Traite de la virginite, trans. M. Aubineau (Paris: Cerf, 1966), ch. 13, §3, 
PP.411-17 [Treatise on Virginity, trans. V. W. Callahan, in Saint Gregory qt Nyssa: Ascetical 
Works (Washington, D.C.: Catholic University of America Press, 1966), p. 46-48]. 
4 Epicurus, Lellre a Menecee, in Leltres et Maximes, trans. M. Conche (Villiers-sur-Mer: Megare, 
1977), pp. 215-27 [Leiter to Menoeceus, in The Philosophy of Epicurus, trans. and ed. G. K. 
Strodach (Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern University, 1963), pp. 122-35].

Ethics,' Subjectivity and Truth 
5 Philo of Alexandria, La Vie contemplative, trans. P. Miquel (Paris: Cerf, 1963), §36, p. 105 [The 
Contemplative Life, in Philo of Alexandria, trans. D. Winston (New York: Paulist Press, 1981), 
PP·42-43]. 
6 Albinus, Prologos, §5 (cited in A. S. Festugiere, Etudes de philosophie grecque [Paris: Vrin, 
1971], p. 536). 
7 Lucian, Hermotine Works, trans. K. Kiburn (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard, 1959), vol. 4, p. 65. 
8 Augustine composes his Confessions between 397 and 401. In Oeuvres completes, trans. 
G. Bouissou and E. Trehorel (Paris: DescIee de Brouwer, 1962), vols. 13-14 [Saint Augustine, 
Corifessions, trans. R. S. Pine-Coffin (London: Penguin, 1961)]. 
9 Marcus Aurelius, Lettres a Fronton, in Pensees, trans. A. Cassan (Paris: Charpentier et Fasquelle, 
n.d.), let. 29, pp. 391-93 [Letter to Franto, in The Correspondence cifMarcus Cornelius Fronto, 
ed. and trans. C. R. Haines (New York: G. Putnam's Sons, 1919), pp. 181-83]. 
10 Plutarch, Comment ecouter, in Oeuvres Completes, trans. R. Klaerr, A. Philippon, and J. Sirinelli 
(Paris: Belles Lettres, 1989), vol. I, 2d part, ch. 3, pp. 39-40 [Concerning Hearing, in The 
Complete Works of Plutarch, ed. W. Lloyd Bevan (New York: Thomas Y. Crowell, 1909), vol. 2, 
P·393]. 
II Philo of Alexandria, La Vie contemplative, p. 77 [The Contemplative Life, p. 47]. 
12 Seneca, De Ira (De la co/ere), trans. A. Bourgery, in Dialogues (Paris: Belles Lettres, 1922) 
[On Anger, trans. J. W. Basore, in Seneca: Moral Essays (New York: G. Putnam's Sons, 1928)]; 
De la tranquillite de l'ame, trans. R. Waltz, in Dialogues, vol. 4, bk. 6, §§1-8, pp. 84-86 [De 
Tranquillitate Animi, in Seneca: Four Dialogues, ed. and trans. C. D. N. Costa (Warminster, 
Eng.: Aris and Phillips Ltd., 1994), pp. 54-56]. 
13 Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, Pensees, trans. A. Trannoy (Paris: Belles Lettres, 1925), bk. 4, §3, 
pp. 27-29 [To Himself, in The Communings with HimseifcifMarcus Aurelius Antoninus, Emperor 
of Rome, trans. C. R. Haines (New York: G. Putnam's Sons, 1930), bk. 4, §3, pp. 67-71]. 
14 Seneca, De Ira (De la colere), bk. 3, §36, pp. 102-103 [On Anger, pp. 339-41]. 
15 Lucretius, De la nature des choses, trans. A. Ernout, 5th ed. (Paris: Belles Lettres, 1984-85) [On 
the Nature of Things, ed. and trans. A. M. Esolen (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins, 1995)]. 
16 Plutarch, Le Demon de Socrate, trans. J. Hani, in Oeuvres Completes, vol. 8 (1980), §585a, 
P.95 [A Discourse Concerning the Demon of Socrates, in The Complete Works of Plutarch, 
vol. I, pp. 643-44]. 
17 Seneca, Lettres a Lucilius, trans. H. Noblot (Paris: Belles Lettres, 1945), let. 18, §§1-8, pp. 71-76 
[Ad Lucilium Epistulae Morales, trans. R. M. Gummere (New York: G. Putnam's Sons, 1917), 
vol. 1, let. 18, §§1-8, pp. 116-21]. 
18 Epictetus, Entretiens, trans. J. Souilhe (Paris: Belles Lettres, 1963), bk. 3, ch. 12, §15, p. 45 [The 
Discourses cif Epictetus, trans. and ed. G. Lond (New York: A. L. Burt, n.d.), bk. 3, ch. 12, 
PP·252-54]. 
19 Epictetus, Entretiens, pp. 76-77 [The Discourses cifEpictetus, bk. 3, ch. 22, pp. 283-85]. 
20 John Cassian, Premiere conference de l'abbe Moise, in Coriferences, trans. Dom E. Pichery (Paris: 
Cerf, 1955), vol. I, ch. 20, pp. 101-105 ["The Goal or Objective of the Monk," in Coriferences, 
trans. C. Luibheid (New York: Paulist Press, 1985), pp. 54-57]. 
21 Epictetus, Entretiens, pp. 32-33 [The Discourses cif Epictetus, bk. 3, ch. 8, pp. 243-44]. 
22 Artemidorus, La Clif des songes: Onirocriticon, trans. A. J. Festugiere (Paris: Vrin, 1975) [The 
Interpretation of Dreams, trans. R. J. White (Park Ridge, N.J.: Noyes, 1975)].

Technologies cif the Self 
23 Synesius of Cyrene, Sur les reves, in Oeuvres, trans. H. Druon (Paris: Hachette, 1878), pp. 346-76 
[Concerning Dreams, in The Essays and Hymns of Synesius of Cyrene, trans. and ed. A. Fitz­
gerald (Oxford: Oxford Universi!y, 1930), vol. 2, pp. 326-59]. 
24 Aelius Aristides, Discours sacres, trans. A. J. Festugiere (Paris: Macula, 1986) [see C. A. Behr, 
Aelius Aristides and the Sacred Tales (Amsterdam: A. M. Hakkert, 1968)]. 
25 Tertullian, Le Penitence, trans. C. Munier (Paris: Cerf, 1984), ch. 9, p. 181 [On Penitence, in 
Tertullian: Treatises on Penance, trans. \"1. P. Le Saint (Westminster, Md.: Newman, 1959), 
pp.28-33]. 
26 Saint Jerome Correspondance, trans. J. Labourt (Paris: Belles Lettres, 1954), vol. 4, let. 78, 
PP·42-44· 
27 Cyprian of Carthage, De ceux qui ontfail/i, in Textes, trans. D. Gorce (Namur: Soleil levant, 
1958), pp. 89-92 [The Lapsed, in Saint Cyprian: Treatises, trans. and ed. R. J. Deferrari (New 
York: Fathers of the Church, Inc., 1961), pp. 81-86]. 
28 John Chrysostom, Hometie: "Qu'il est dangereux pour l'orateur et l'auditeur de parler pour 
plaire, qu'i! est de la plus grande utilite comme de la plus rigoreuse justice d'accuser ses 
peches" [Just as it is dangerous for the speaker and auditor to speak in order to please, so it is 
of the greatest utility and the most rigorous justice to denounce his sins], in Oeuvres Completes, 
trans. M. Jeannin (Nancy: Thomas et Pieron, 1864), vol. 3, p. 401. 
29 Cassian, Institutions cenobitiques, trans. J. A. Guy (Paris: Cerf, 1965), bk. 4, chs. 10-12, pp. 133-
37; chs. 23-32, pp. 153-71. 
jO Cassian, Premiere Corifirences de rabbi Serenus, "De la mobilite de Fame et des esprits du mal," 
in Coriferences, trans. Dom E. Pichery (Paris: Cerf, 1955), p. 248. 
31 Cassian, Premiere Conference de rabbi Nesterus, in Coriferences, vol. 2 (1958), pp. 199-201. 
32 Cas sian, Premiere Conference de rabbi Moise, in Conferences, p. 99 ["The Goal or Objective of 
the Monk," in Conferences, p. 52]. 
33 Cassian, Premiere Conference de l'abbe Serenus, in Co'!ferences, pp. 249-52. 
34 Cassian, Premiere Conference de rabbi Moise, in Conferences, pp. 101-107 ["The Goal or Objec­
tive of the Monk," in Co'!ferences, pp. 54-57]. 
35 Cassian, Deuxieme Coriference de l'abbi Moise, in Co'!ferences, pp. 121-23 ["On Discernment," 
in Conftrences, p. 52].



ON THE GENEALOGY OF ETHICS: 
AN OVERVIEW OF WORK IN PROGRESS* 
HISTORY OF THE PROJECT 
Q. The first volume of The History of Sexuality was published in 1976, 
and none has appeared since. Do you still think that understanding sex­
uality is central for understanding who we are? 
M.F. I must confess that I am much more interested in problems 
about techniques of the self and things like that than sex ... sex is boring. 
Q. It sounds like the Greeks were not too interested either. 
M.F. No, they were not much interested in sex. It was not a great 
issue. Compare, for instance, what they say about the place of food and 
diet. I think it is very, very interesting to see the move, the very slow 
move, from the privileging of food, which was overwhelming in Greece, 
to interest in sex. Food was still much more important during the early 
Christian days than sex. For instance, in the rules for monks, the prob­
lem was food, food, food. Then you can see a very slow shift during 
the Middle Ages, when they were in a kind of equilibrium ... and after 
the seventeenth century it was sex. 
Q. Yet Volume Two of The History 0/ Sexuality, L'Usage des plaisirs 
[The Uses 0/ Pleasure]' is concerned almost exclusively with, not to put 
too fine a point on it, sex. 
*The following is the result of a series of working sessions with Michel Foucault con­
ducted by Paul Rabinow and Hubert Dreyfus at Berkeley in April 1983. Although we 
have retained the interview form, the material was jointly reedited. Foucault generously 
allowed the interviewers to publish these preliminary formulations, which were the 
product of oral interviews and free conversations in English and therefore lack the pre­
cision and supporting scholarship found in Foucault's written texts.

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
M.F. Yes. One of the numerous reasons I had so much trouble with 
that book was that I first wrote a book about sex, which I put aside. 
Then I wrote a book about the self and the techniques of the self; sex 
disappeared, and for the third time I was obliged to rewrite a book in 
which I tried to keep the equilibrium between one and the other. 
You see, what I wanted to do in Volume Two of The History if Sex­
uality was to show that you have nearly the same restrictive, the same 
prohibitive code in the fourth century B.C. and in the moralists and doc­
tors at the beginning of the empire. But I think that the way they inte­
grate those prohibitions in relation to oneself is completely different. 
I don't think one can find any normalization in, for instance, the Stoic 
ethics. The reason is, I think, that the principal aim, the principal tar­
get of this kind of ethics, was an aesthetic one. First, this kind of eth­
ics was only a problem of personal choice. Second, it was reserved for 
a few people in the population; it was not a question of giving a pat­
tern of behavior for everybody. It was a personal choice for a small elite. 
The reason for making this choice was the will to live a beautiful life, 
and to leave to others memories of a beautiful existence. I don't think 
that we can say that this kind of ethics was an attempt to normalize 
the population. 
The continuity of the themes of this ethics is something very strik­
ing, but I think that behind, below this continuity, there were some 
changes, which I have tried to acknowledge. 
Q. So the equilibrium in your work has shifted from sex to tech­
niques of the self? 
M.F. I wondered what the technology of the self before Christianity 
was, or where the Christian technology of the self came from, and what 
kind of sexual ethics was characteristic of the ancient culture. And then 
I was obliged after I finished Les Aveux de la chair ["Confessions of 
the Flesh," as yet unpublished], the book about Christianity, to reex­
amine what I said in the introduction to L'Usage des plaisirs about the 
supposed pagan ethics, because what I had said about pagan ethics 
were only cliches borrowed from secondary texts. And then I discov­
ered, first, that this pagan ethics was not at all liberal, tolerant, and so 
on, as it was supposed to be; second, that most of the themes of Chris­
tian austerity were very clearly present nearly from the beginning, but 
that also in pagan culture the main problem was not the rules for aus­
.terity but much more the techniques of the self. 
Reading Seneca, Plutarch, and all those people, I discovered that

On the Genealogy of Ethics 255 
there were a very great number of problems or themes about the self, 
the ethics of the self, the technology of the self, and I had the idea of 
writing a book composed of a set of separate studies, papers about such 
and such aspects of ancient, pagan technologies of the self. 
Q. What is the title? 
M.F. Le Souci de soi [The Care of the Selfl So in the series about 
sexuality: the first one is L'Vsage des plaisirs, and in this book there 
is a chapter about the technology of the self, since I think it's not pos­
sible to understand clearly what Greek sexual ethics was without relat­
ing it to this technology of the self. Then, a second volume in the same 
sex series, Les Aveux de la chair, deals with Christian technologies of 
the self. And then, Le Souci de soi, a book separate from the sex series, 
is composed of different papers about the self-for instance, a commen­
tary on Plato's Alcibiades in which you find the first elaboration of the 
notion of epimeleia heautou, "care of the self," about the role of read­
ing and writing in constituting the self, maybe the problem of the med­
ical experience of the self, and so on .... 
Q. And what will come next? Will there be more on the Christians 
when you finish these three? 
M.F. Well, I am going to take care of myself! ... I have more than a 
draft of a book about sexual ethics in the sixteenth century, in which 
also the problem of the techniques of the self, self-examination, the 
cure of souls, is very important, both in the Protestant and Catholic 
churches. 
What strikes me is that in Greek ethics people were concerned with 
their moral conduct, their ethics, their relations to themselves and to 
others much more than with religious problems. For instance, what 
happens to us after death? What are the gods? Do they intervene or 
not?-these are very, very unimportant problems for them, and they are 
not directly related to ethics, to conduct. The second thing is that eth­
ics was not related to any social-or at least to any legal-institutional 
system. For instance, the laws against sexual misbehavior were very few 
and not very compelling. The third thing is that what they were wor­
ried about, their theme was to constitute a kind of ethics which was 
an aesthetics of existence. 
Well, I wonder if our problem nowadays is not, in a way, similar to 
this one, since most of us no longer believe that ethics is founded in 
religion, nor do we want a legal system to intervene in our moral, per­
sonal, private life. Recent liberation movements suffer from the fact that

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
they cannot find any principle on which to base the elaboration of a 
new ethics. They need an ethics, but they cannot find any other ethics 
than an ethics founded on so-called scientific knowledge of what the 
self is, what desire is, what the unconscious is, and so on. I am struck 
by this similarity of problems. 
Q. Do you think that the Greeks offer an attractive and plausible 
alternative? 
M.F. No! I am not looking for an alternative; you can't find the solu­
tion of a problem in the solution of another problem raised at another 
moment by other people. You see, what I want to do is not the history 
of solutions-and that's the reason why I don't accept the word alter­
native. I would like to do the genealogy of problems, of prob!ematiques. 
My point is not that everything is bad, but that everything is danger­
ous, which is not exactly the same as bad. If everything is dangerous, 
then we always have something to do. So my position leads not to apa­
thy but to a hyper-and pessimistic activism. 
I think that the ethico-political choice we have to make every day is 
to determine which is the main danger. Take as an example Robert 
Castel's analysis of the history of the antipsychiatry movement [La 
Gestion des risques]. I agree completely with what Castel says, but 
that does not mean, as some people suppose, that the mental hospi­
tals were better than antipsychiatry; that does not mean that we were 
not right to criticize those mental hospitals. I think it was good to do 
that, because they were the danger. And now it's quite clear that the 
danger has changed. For instance, in Italy they have closed all the men­
tal hospitals, and there are more free clinics, and so on-and they have 
new problems. 
Q. Isn't it logical, given these concerns, that you should be writing 
a genealogy ofbio-power? 
M.F. I have no time for that now, but it could be done. In fact, I have 
to do it. 
WHY THE ANCIENT WORLD WAS NOT A GOLDEN 
AGE, BUT WHAT WE CAN LEARN FROM IT ANYWAY 
Q. So Greek life may not have been altogether perfect; still, it seems 
an attractive alternative to endless Christian self-analysis. 
M.F. The Greek ethics were linked to a purely virile society with 
slaves, in which the women were underdogs whose pleasure had no

On the Genealogy if Ethics 257 
importance, whose sexual life had only to be oriented toward, deter­
mined by, their status as wives, and so on. 
Q. So the women were d,ominated, but surely homosexual love was 
better than now? 
M.F. It might look that way. Since there is an important and large 
literature about loving boys in Greek culture, some historians say, "Well, 
that's the proof that they loved boys." But I say that proves that loving 
boys was a problem. Because if there were no problem, they would 
speak of this kind of love in the same terms as love between men and 
women. The problem was that they couldn't accept that a young boy 
who was supposed to become a free citizen could be dominated and 
used as an object for someone's pleasure. A woman, a slave, could be 
passive: such was their nature, their status. All this reflection, philos­
ophizing about the love of boys-with always the same conclusion: 
please, don't treat a boy as a woman-is proof that they could not inte­
grate this real practice in the framework of their social selves. 
You can see through a reading of Plutarch how they couldn't even 
imagine reciprocity of pleasure between a boy and a man. If Plutarch 
finds problems in loving boys, it is not at all in the sense that loving 
boys was antinatural or something like that. He says, "It's not possible 
that there could be any reciprocity in the physical relations between a 
boy and a man." 
Q. There seems to be an aspect of Greek culture that we are told 
about in Aristotle, that you don't talk about, but that seems very im­
portant-friendship. In classical literature, friendship is the locus of 
mutual recognition. It's not traditionally seen as the highest virtue, but 
both in Aristotle and in Cicero, you could read it as really being the 
highest virtue because it's selfless and enduring, it's not easily bought, 
it doesn't deny the utility and pleasure of the world, but yet it seeks 
something more. 
M.F. But don't forget L'Usage des plaisirs is a book about sexual eth­
ics; it's not a book about love, or about friendship, or about reciproc­
ity. And it's very significant that when Plato tries to integrate love for 
boys and friendship, he is obliged to put aside sexual relations. Friend­
ship is reciprocal, and sexual relations are not reciprocal: in sexual rela­
tions, you can penetrate or you are penetrated. I agree completely with 
what you say about friendship, but I think it confirms what I say about 
Greek sexual ethics: if you have friendship, it is difficult to have sex­
ual relations. If you look at Plato, reciprocity is very important in a

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
friendship, but you can't find it on the physical level; one of the rea­
sons why they needed a philosophical elaboration in order to justify this 
kind of love was that they could not accept a physical reciprocity. You 
find in Xenophon, in the Banquet, Socrates saying that between a man 
and a boy it is obvious that the boy is only the spectator of the man's 
pleasure. What they say about this beautiful love of boys implies that 
the pleasure of the boy was not to be taken into account; moreover, that 
it was dishonorable for the boy to feel any kind of physical pleasure in 
a relation with a man. 
What I want to ask is: Are we able to have an ethics of acts and their 
pleasures which would be able to take into account the pleasure of the 
other? Is the pleasure of the other something that can be integrated in 
our pleasure, without reference either to law, to marriage, to I don't 
know what? 
Q. It looks like nonreciprocity was a problem for the Greeks all right, 
but it seems to be the kind of problem that one could straighten out. 
Why does sex have to be virile? Why couldn't women's pleasure and 
boys' pleasure be taken account of without any big change to the gen­
eral framework? Or is it that it's not just a little problem, because if 
you try to bring in the pleasure of the other, the whole hierarchical, 
ethical system would break down? 
M.F. That's right. The Greek ethics of pleasure is linked to a virile 
society, to dissymmetry, exclusion of the other, an obsession with pen­
etration, and a kind of threat of being dispossessed of your own energy, 
and so on. All that is quite disgusting! 
Q. OK, granted that sexual relations were both nonreciprocal and a 
cause of worry for the Greeks, at least pleasure itself seems unprob­
lematic for them. 
M.F. Well, in L'Usage des plaisirs I try to show, for instance, that 
there is a growing tension between pleasure and health. When you take 
the physicians and all the concern with diet, you see first that the main 
themes are very similar during several centuries. But the idea that sex 
has its dangers is much stronger in the second century A.D. than in 
the fourth century B.C. I think that you can show that, for Hippocrates, 
the sexual act was already dangerous, so you had to be very careful with 
it and not have sex all the time, only in certain seasons and so on. But 
in the first and second centuries it seems that, for a physician, the sex­
ual act is much closer to pathos. And I think the main shift is this one: 
that in the fourth century B.C., the sexual act was an activity, and for

On the Genealogy 0/ Ethics 
the Christians it is a passivity. You have a very interesting analysis by 
Augustine which is, I think, quite typical concerning the problem of 
erection. The erection was, for the Greek of the fourth century, the sign 
of activity, the main activity. But since, for Augustine and the Chris­
tians, the erection is not something voluntary, it is a sign of a passiv­
ity-it is a punishment for the first sin. 
Q. So the Greeks were more concerned with health than with 
pleasure? 
M.F. Yes, about what the Greeks had to eat in order to be in good 
health, we have thousands of pages. And there are comparatively few 
things about what to do when you have sex with someone. Concerning 
food, it was the relation between the climate, the seasons, the humid­
ity or dryness of the air and the dryness of the food, and so on. There 
are very few things about the way they had to cook it; much more about 
these qualities. It's not a cooking art; it's a matter of choosing. 
Q. So, despite the German Hellenists, classical Greece was not a 
golden age. Yet surely we can learn something from it? 
M.F. I think there is no exemplary value in a period that is not our 
period ... it is not anything to get back to. But we do have an example of 
an ethical experience which implied a very strong connection between 
pleasure and desire. If we compare that to our experience now, where 
everybody-the philosopher or the psychoanalyst-explains that what 
is important is desire, and pleasure is nothing at all, we can wonder 
whether this disconnection wasn't a historical event, one that was not 
at all necessary, not linked to human nature, or to any anthropologi­
cal necessity. 
Q. But you already illustrated that in The History of Sexuality by 
contrasting our science of sexuality with the oriental ars erotica. 
M.F. One of the numerous points where I was wrong in that book 
was what I said about this ars erotica. I should have opposed our sci­
ence of sex to a contrasting practice in our own culture. The Greeks 
and Romans did not have any ars erotica to be compared with the 
Chinese ars erotica (or at least it was not something very important in 
their culture). They had a tekhne"tou biou in which the economy of 
pleasure played a very large role. In this "art of life," the notion of exer­
cising a perfect mastery over oneself soon became the main issue. And 
the Christian hermeneutics of the self constituted a new elaboration 
of this tekhne. 
Q. But, after all you have told us about nonreciprocity and obses-

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
sion with health, what can we learn from this third possibility? 
M.F. What I want to show is that the general Greek problem was 
not the tekhne of the self, it was the tekhne of life, the tekhne tou biou, 
how to live. It's quite clear from Socrates to Seneca or Pliny, for instance, 
that they didn't worry about the afterlife, what happened after death, 
or whether God exists or not. That was not really a great problem for 
them; the problem was: Which tekhnedo I have to use in order to live 
well as I ought to live? And I think that one of the main evolutions in 
ancient culture has been that this tekhne tou biou became more and 
more a tekhne of the self. A Greek citizen of the fifth or fourth century 
would have felt that his tekhne for life was to take care of the city, of 
his companions. But for Seneca, for instance, the problem is to take 
care of himself. 
With Plato's Alcibiades, it's very clear: you have to take care of your­
self because you have to rule the city. But taking care of yourself for 
its own sake starts with the Epicureans-it becomes something very 
general with Seneca, Pliny, and so on: everybody has to take care of 
himself. Greek ethics is centered on a problem of personal choice, of 
the aesthetics of existence. 
The idea of the bios as a material for an aesthetic piece of art is 
something that fascinates me. The idea also that ethics can be a very 
strong structure of existence, without any relation with the juridical per 
se, with an authoritarian system, with a disciplinary structure. All that 
is very interesting. 
Q. How, then, did the Greeks deal with deviance? 
M.F. The great difference in sexual ethics for the Greeks was not 
between people who prefer women or boys or have sex in this way or 
another, but was a question of quantity and of activity and passivity. 
Are you a slave of your own desires or their master? 
Q. What about someone who had sex so much he damaged his health? 
M.F. That's hubris, that's excess. The problem is not one of deviancy 
but of excess or moderation. 
Q. What did they do with these people? 
M.F. They were considered ugly; they had a bad reputation. 
Q. They didn't try to cure or reform such people? 
M.F. There were exercises in order to make one master of oneself. 
For Epictetus, you had to be able to look at a beautiful girl or a beauti­
ful boy without having any desire for her or him. You have to master 
yourself completely.

On the Genealogy of Ethics 
Sexual austerity in Greek society was a trend or movement, a phil­
osophical movement coming from very cultivated people in order to 
give to their life much more intensity, much more beauty. In a way, 
it's the same in the twentieth century when people, in order to get a 
more beautiful life, tried to get rid of all the sexual repression of their 
society, of their childhood. Gide in Greece would have been an aus­
tere philosopher. 
Q. In the name of a beautiful life they were austere, and now in the 
name of psychological science we seek self-fulfillment. 
M.F. Exactly. My idea is that it's not at all necessary to relate ethical 
problems to scientific knowledge. Among the cultural inventions of 
mankind there is a treasury of devices, techniques, ideas, procedures, 
and so on, that cannot exactly be reactivated but at least constitute, or 
help to constitute, a certain point of view which can be very useful as 
a tool for analyzing what's going on now-and to change it. 
We don't have to choose between our world and the Greek world. 
But since we can see very well that some of the main principles of our 
ethics have been related at a certain moment to an aesthetics of exis­
tence, I think that this kind of historical analysis can be useful. For cen­
turies we have been convinced that between our ethics, our personal 
ethics, our everyday life, and the great political and social and economic 
structures, there were analytical relations, and that we couldn't change 
anything, for instance, in our sex life or our family life, without ruining 
our economy, our democracy, and so on. I think we have to get rid of 
this idea of an analytical or necessary link between ethics and other 
social or economic or political structures. 
Q. So what kind of ethics can we build now, when we know that 
between ethics and other structures there are only historical coagula­
tions and not a necessary relation? 
M.F. What strikes me is the fact that, in our society, art has become 
something that is related only to objects and not to individuals or to 
life. That art is something which is specialized or done by experts who 
are artists. But couldn't everyone's life become a work of art? Why 
should the lamp or the house be an art object but not our life? 
Q. Of course, that kind of project is very common in places like 
Berkeley where people think that everything from the way they eat 
breakfast, to the way they have sex, to the way they spend their day, 
should itself be perfected. 
M.F. But I am afraid in most of those cases, most of the people think

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
if they do what they do, if they live as they live, the reason is that they 
know the truth about desire, life, nature, body, and so on. 
Q. But if one is to create oneself without recourse to knowledge or 
universal rules, how does your view differ from Sartrean existentialism? 
M.F. I think that from the theoretical point of view, Sartre avoids the 
idea of the self as something that is given to us, but through the moral 
notion of authenticity, he turns back to the idea that we have to be 
ourselves-to be truly our true self. I think that the only acceptable 
practical consequence of what Sartre has said is to link his theoretical 
insight to the practice of creativity-and not that of authenticity. From 
the idea that the self is not given to us, I think that there is only one 
practical consequence: we have to create ourselves as a work of art. In 
his analyses of Baudelaire, Flaubert, and so on, it is interesting to see 
that Sartre refers the work of creation to a certain relation to oneself­
the author to himself-which has the form of authenticity or inauthen­
ticity. I would like to say exactly the contrary: we should not have to 
refer the creative activity of somebody to the kind of relation he has to 
himself, but should relate the kind of relation one has to oneself to a 
creative activity. 
Q. That sounds like Nietzsche's observation in The Gay Science that 
one should create one's life by giving style to it through long practice 
and daily work [no. 290]. 
M.F. Yes. My view is much closer to Nietzsche's than to Sartre's. 
THE STRUCTURE OF 
GENEALOGICAL INTERPRETATION 
Q. How do the next two books after The History of Sexuality, Volume 
One, L'Usage des plaisirs and Les Aveux de la chair, fit into the struc­
ture of your genealogy project? 
M.F. Three domains of genealogy are possible. First, a historical 
ontology of ourselves in relation to truth through which we constitute 
ourselves as subjects of knowledge; second, a historical ontology of 
ourselves in relation to a field of power through which we constitute 
ourselves as subjects acting on others; third, a historical ontology in 
relation to ethics through which we constitute ourselves as moral agents. 
So, three axes are possible for genealogy. All three were present, 
albeit in a somewhat confused fashion, in Madness and Civilization. 
The truth axis was studied in The Birth of the Clinic and The Order of

On the Genealogy of Ethics 
Things. The power axis was studied in Discipline and Punish, and the 
ethical axis in The History of Sexuality. 
The general framework of the book about sex is a history of morals. 
I think, in general, we have 10 distinguish, where the history of mor­
als is concerned, acts and moral code. The acts [conduites] are the real 
behavior of people in relation to the moral code [prescriptions] im­
posed on them. I think we have to distinguish between the code that 
determines which acts are permitted or forbidden and the code that 
determines the positive or negative value of the different possible 
behaviors-you're not allowed to have sex with anyone but your wife, 
that's an element of the code. And there is another side to the moral 
prescriptions, which most of the time is not isolated as such but is, I 
think, very important: the kind of relationship you ought to have with 
yourself, rapport a soi, which I call ethics, and which determines how 
the individual is supposed to constitute himself as a moral subject of 
his own actions. 
This relationship to oneself has four major aspects. The first aspect 
answers the question: Which is the aspect or the part of myself or my 
behavior which is concerned with moral conduct? For instance, you can 
say, in general, that in our society the main field of morality, the part 
of ourselves which is most relevant for morality, is our feelings. (You 
can have a girl in the street or anywhere, if you have very good feel­
ings toward your wife.) Well, it's quite clear that from the Kantian 
point of view, intention is much more important than feelings. And 
from the Christian point of view, it is desire-well, we could discuss 
that, because in the Middle Ages it was not the same as the seven­
teenth century .... 
Q. But, roughly, for the Christians it was desire, for Kant it was 
intentions, and for us now it's feelings? 
M.F. Well, you can say something like that. It's not always the same 
part of ourselves, or of our behavior, which is relevant for ethical judg­
ment. That's the aspect I call the ethical substance [substance ethique]. 
Q. The ethical substance is like the material that's going to be worked 
over by ethics? 
M.F. Yes, that's it. And, for instance, when I describe the aphrodisia 
in L'Usage des plaisirs, it is to show that the part of sexual behavior 
which is relevant in Greek ethics is something different from concu­
piscence, from flesh. For the Greeks, the ethical substance was acts 
linked to pleasure and desire in their unity. And it is very different from

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
flesh, Christian flesh. Sexuality is a third kind of ethical substance. 
Q. What is the difference ethically between flesh and sexuality? 
M.F. I cannot answer because all that can only be analyzed through 
a precise inquiry. Before I studied Greek or Greco-Roman ethics, I 
couldn't answer the question: What exactly is the ethical substance of 
Greco-Roman ethics? Now I think that I know, through the analysis of 
what they mean by aphrodisia, what the Greek ethical substance was. 
For the Greeks, when a philosopher was in love with a boy, but did 
not touch him, his behavior was valued. The problem was: Does he 
touch the boy or not? That's the ethical substance: the act linked with 
pleasure and desire. For Augustine, it's very clear that when he remem­
bers his relationship to his young friend when he was eighteen years 
old, what bothers him is what exactly was the kind of desire he had 
for him. So you see that the ethical substance has changed. 
The second aspect is what I call the mode of subjectivation [mode 
d'assujettissement], that is, the way in which people are invited or 
incited to recognize their moral obligations. Is it, for instance, divine 
law that has been revealed in a text? Is it natural law, a cosmological 
order, in each case the same for every living being? Is it a rational rule? 
Is it the attempt to give your existence the most beautiful form possible? 
Q. When you say "rational," do you mean scientific? 
M.F. No, Kantian, universal. You can see, for instance, in the Stoics, 
how they move slowly from an idea of an aesthetics of existence to the 
idea that we must do such and such things because we are rational 
beings-as members of the human community, we must do them. For 
example, you find in Isocrates a very interesting discourse, which is 
supposed to be held with Nicocles, who was the ruler of Cyprus. There 
he explains why he has always been faithful to his wife: "Because I am 
the king, and because as somebody who commands others, who rules 
others, I have to show that I am able to rule myself." And you can see 
that this rule of faithfulness has nothing to do with the universal and 
Stoic formulation: "I have to be faithful to my wife because I am a 
human and rational being." In the former case, it is because I am 
the king! And you can see that the way the same rule is accepted by 
Nicocles and by a Stoic is quite different. And that's what I call the 
mode d'assujettissement, the second aspect of ethics. 
Q. When the king says, "because I am the king," is that a form of 
the beautiful life ? 
M.F. Both aesthetic and political, which were directly linked. Be-

On the Genealogy if Ethics 
cause if I want people to accept me as a king, I must have a kind of 
glory which will survive me, and this glory cannot be dissociated from 
aesthetic value. So political power, glory, immortality, and beauty are 
all linked at a certain moment. That's the mode d'assujettissement, the 
second aspect of ethics. 
The third one is: What are the means by which we can change our­
selves in order to become ethical subjects? 
Q. How we work on this ethical substance? 
M.F. Yes. What are we to do, either to moderate our acts, or to deci­
pher what we are, or to eradicate our desires, or to use our sexual 
desire in order to obtain certain aims such as having children, and so 
on-all this elaboration of ourselves in order to behave ethically? In 
order to be faithful to your wife, you can do different things to the self. 
That's the third aspect, which I call the self-forming activity [pratique 
de sal] or l'ascetisme-asceticism in a very broad sense. 
The fourth aspect is: Which is the kind of being to which we aspire 
when we behave in a moral way? For instance, shall we become pure, 
or immortal, or free, or masters of ourselves, and so on? So that's what 
I call the telos [tileologie]. In what we call morals, there is the effec­
tive behavior of people, there are the codes, and there is this kind of 
relationship to oneself with the above four aspects. 
Q. Which are all independent? 
M.F. There are both relationships between them and a certain kind 
of independence. For instance, you can very well understand why, if 
the goal is an absolute purity of being, then the type of techniques of 
self-forming activity, the techniques of asceticism you are to use, are 
not exactly the same as when you try to be master of your own behav­
ior. In the first place, you are inclined to a kind of deciphering tech­
nique, or purification technique. 
Now, if we apply this general framework to pagan or early Christian 
ethics, what would we say? First, if we take the code-what is forbid­
den and what is not-you see that, at least in the philosophical code 
of behavior, you find three main prohibitions or prescriptions. One 
about the body-that is, you have to be very careful with your sexual 
behavior since it is very costly, so do it as infrequently as possible. The 
second is: When you are married, please don't have sex with anybody 
else but your wife. And with boys-please don't touch boys. And you 
find this in Plato, in Isocrates, in Hippocrates, in late Stoics, and so on­
and you find it also in Christianity, and even in our own society. So I

266 Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
think you can say that the codes in themselves didn't change a great 
deal. Some of those interdictions changed; some of the prohibitions are 
much stricter and much more rigorous in Christianity than in the Greek 
period. But the themes are the same. So I think that the great changes 
that occurred between Greek society, Greek ethics, Greek morality, and 
how the Christians viewed themselves are not in the code but in what 
I call the "ethics," which is the relation to oneself. In L'Usage des plai­
sirs, I analyze those four aspects of the relation to oneself, through the 
three austerity themes of the code: health, wives or women, and boys. 
Q. Would it be fair to say that you're not doing the genealogy of mor­
als because you think the moral codes are relatively stable, but that 
what you're doing is a genealogy of ethics? 
M.F. Yes, I'm writing a genealogy of ethics. The genealogy of the 
subject as a subject of ethical actions, or the genealogy of desire as an 
ethical problem. So, if we take ethics in classical Greek philosophy or 
medicine, what is the ethical substance? It is the aphrodisia, which are 
at the same time acts, desire, and pleasure. What is the mode d'assujet­
tissement? It is that we have to build our existence as a beautiful exis­
tence; it is an aesthetic mode. You see, what I tried to show is that 
nobody is obliged in classical ethics to behave in such a way as to be 
truthful to their wives, to not touch boys, and so on. But if they want to 
have a beautiful existence, if they want to have a good reputation, if they 
want to be able to rule others, they have to do this. So they accept those 
obligations in a conscious way for the beauty or glory of existence. The 
choice, the aesthetic choice or the political choice, for which they decide 
to accept this kind of existence-that's the mode d'assujettissement. It's 
a choice, it's a personal choice. 
In late Stoicism, when they start saying, "Well, you are obliged to 
do that because you are a human being," something changes. It's not 
a problem of choice; you have to do it because you are a rational being. 
The mode d'assujettissement is changing. 
In Christianity, what is very interesting is that the sexual rules for 
behavior were, of course, justified through religion. The institutions 
by which they were imposed were religious institutions. But the form 
of the obligation was a legal form. There was a kind of the internal 
juridification of religious law inside Christianity. For instance, all the 
casuistic practice was typically a juridical practice. 
Q. After the Enlightenment, though, when the religious drops out, 
is the juridical what's left?

On the Genealogy if Ethics 
M.F. Yes, after the eighteenth century, the religious framework of 
those rules disappears in part, and then between a medical or scien­
tific approach and a juridical framework there was competition, with 
no resolution. 
Q. Could you sum this up? 
M.F. Well, the substance ethique for the Greeks was the aphrodisia; 
the mode d'assujettissement was a politico-aesthetic choice; the form 
d'asd:se was the tekhne that was used-and there we find, for ex­
ample, the tekhne about the body, or economics as the rules by which 
you define your role as husband, or the erotic as a kind of asceticism 
toward oneself in loving boys, and so on-and the te!eologie was the 
mastery of oneself. So that's the situation I describe in the two first 
parts of L'Usage des plaisirs. 
Then there is a shift within this ethics. The reason for the shift is the 
change of the role of men within society, both in their homes toward 
their wives and also in the political field, since the city disappears. So, 
for those reasons, the way they can recognize themselves as subjects of 
political, economic behavior changes. We can say roughly that along with 
these sociological changes something is changing also in classical eth­
ics-that is, in the elaboration of the relationship to oneself. But I think 
that the change doesn't affect the ethical substance: it is still aphrodisia. 
There are some changes in the mode d'assujettissement, for instance, 
when the Stoics recognize themselves as universal beings. And there are 
also very important changes in the asceticism, the kind of techniques 
you use in order to recognize, to constitute yourself as a subject of eth­
ics. And also a change in the goal. I think that the difference is that in 
the classical perspective, to be master of oneself meant, first, taking into 
account only oneself and not the other, because to be master of oneself 
meant that you were able to rule others. So the mastery of oneself was 
directly related to a dissymmetrical relation to others. You should be 
master of yourself in a sense of activity, dissymmetry, and nonreciprocity. 
Later on, due to the changes in marriage, society, and so on, mas­
tery of oneself is something that is not primarily related to power over 
others: you have to be master of yourself not only in order to rule oth­
ers, as it was in the case of Alcibiades or Nicocles, but you have to be 
master of yourself because you are a rational being. And in this mas­
tery of yourself, you are related to other people, who are also masters 
of themselves. And this new kind of relation to the other is much less 
nonreciprocal than before.

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
So those are the changes, and I try to show those changes in the 
three last chapters, the fourth part of L'Usage des plaisirs. I take the 
same themes-the body, wives or women, and boys-and I show that 
these same three austerity themes are linked to a partially new ethics. 
I say "partially" because some of the parts ofthis ethics do not change: 
for instance, the aphrodisia. On the other hand, others do: for instance, 
the techniques. According to Xenophon, the way to become a good hus­
band is to know exactly what your role is inside your home or outside, 
what kind of authority you have to exercise on your wife, what are your 
expectations of your wife's behavior, and so on. All this calculation gives 
you the rules for behavior, and defines the way you have to be toward 
yourself. But for Epictetus, or for Seneca, for instance, in order to be 
really master of yourself, you don't have to know what your role in 
society or in your home is, but you do have to do some exercises like 
depriving yourself of eating for two or three days, in order to be sure 
that you can control yourself. If one day you are in prison, you won't 
suffer from being deprived of food, and so on. And you have to do that 
for all the pleasures-that's a kind of asceticism you can't find in Plato 
or Socrates or Aristotle. 
There is no complete and identical relation between the techniques 
and the tele. You can find the same techniques in different tele, but 
there are privileged relations, some privileged techniques related to 
each telos. 
In the Christian book-I mean the book about Christianity!-I try 
to show that all this ethics has changed. Because the telos has changed: 
the telos is immortality, purity, and so on. The asceticism has changed, 
because now self-examination takes the form of self-deciphering. The 
mode d'assujettissement is now divine law. And I think that even the 
ethical substance has changed, because it is not aphrodisia, but desire, 
concupiscence, flesh, and so on. 
Q. It seems, then, that we have a grid of intelligibility for desire as 
an ethical problem? 
M.F. Yes, we now have this scheme. If, by sexual behavior, we under­
stand the three poles-acts, pleasure, and desire-we have the Greek 
"formula," which ·is the same at the first and at the second stage. In 
this Greek formula what is underscored is "acts," with pleasure and 
desire as subsidiary: acte-plaisir-[desir]. I have put desire in brack­
ets because I think that in the Stoic ethics you start a kind of elision of 
desire; desire begins to be condemned.

On the Genealogy of Ethics 
The Chinese "formula" would be Rlaisir-desir-[acte]. Acts are put 
aside because you have to restrain acts in order to get the maximum 
duration and intensity of pl.easure. 
The Christian "formula" puts an accent on desire and tries to erad­
icate it. Acts have to become something neutral; you have to act only 
to produce children or to fulfill your conjugal duty. And pleasure is both 
practically and theoretically excluded: [desir}-acte-[plaisir]. Desire 
is practically excluded-you have to eradicate your desire-but theo­
retically very important. 
And I could say that the modern "formula" is desire, which is theo­
retically underlined and practically accepted, since you have to liber­
ate your own desire. Acts are not very important, and pleasure-nobody 
knows what it is! 
FROM THE CLASSICAL 
SELF TO THE MODERN SUBJECT 
Q. What is the care of the self which you have decided to treat sepa­
rately in Le Soud de soi? 
M.F. What interests me in the Hellenistic culture, in the Greco­
Roman culture, starting from about the third century B.C. and continu­
ing until the second or third century after Christ, is a precept for which 
the Greeks had a specific word, epimeleia heautou, which means tak­
ing care of one's self. It does not mean simply being interested in one­
self, nor does it mean having a certain tendency to self-attachment or 
self-fascination. Epimeleia heautou is a very powerful word in Greek 
which means "working on" or "being concerned with" something. For 
example, Xenophon used epimeleia heautou to describe agricultural 
management. The responsibility of a monarch for his fellow citizens 
was also epimeleia heautou. That which a doctor does in the course of 
caring for a patient is epimeleia heautou. It is therefore a very power­
ful word; it describes a sort of work, an activity; it implies attention, 
knowledge, technique. 
Q. But isn't the application of knowledge and technology to the self 
a modern invention? 
M.F. Knowledge played a different role in the classical care ofthe self. 
There are very interesting things to analyze about relations between sci­
entific knowledge and the epimeleia heautou. The one who cared for 
himself had to choose among all the things that you can know through

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
scientific knowledge only those kinds of things which were relative to 
him and important to life. 
Q. So theoretical understanding, scientific understanding, was sec­
ondary to, and guided by, ethical and aesthetic concerns? 
M.F. Their problem and their discussion concerned what limited 
sorts of knowledge were useful for epimeleia. For instance, for the Epi­
cureans, the general knowledge of what is the world, of what is the 
necessity of the world, the relation between world, necessity, and the 
gods-all that was very important for the care of the self. Because it 
was first a matter of meditation: if you were able exactly to understand 
the necessity of the world, then you could master passions in a much 
better way, and so on. So, for the Epicureans, there was a kind of ade­
quation between all possible knowledge and the care of the self. The 
reason that one had to become familiar with physics or cosmology was 
that one had to take care of the self. For the Stoics, the true self is 
defined only by what I can be master of. 
Q. So knowledge is subordinat~d to the practical end of mastery? 
M.F. Epictetus is very clear on that. He gives as an exercise to walk 
every morning in the streets looking, watching. And if you meet a con­
sular figure you say, "Is the consul something I can master?" No, so I 
have nothing to do. If I meet a beautiful girl or beautiful boy, is their 
beauty, their desirability, something that depends on me, and so on? 
For the Christians, things are quite different; for Christians, the possi­
bility that Satan can get inside your soul and give you thoughts you can­
not recognize as satanic, but might interpret as coming from God, leads 
to uncertainty about what is going on inside your soul. You are unable 
to know what the real root of your desire is, at least without herme­
neutic work. 
Q. So, to what extent did the Christians develop new techniques of 
self-mastery? 
M.F. What interests me about the classical concept of care of the self 
is that we see here the birth and development of a certain number of 
ascetic themes ordinarily attributed to Christianity. Christianity is 
usually given credit for replacing the generally tolerant Greco-Roman 
lifestyle with an austere lifestyle marked by a series of renunciations, 
interdictions, or prohibitions. Now, we can see that in this activity of 
the self on itself, the ancients developed a whole series of austerity 
practices that the Christians later directly borrowed from them. So we 
see that this activity became linked to a certain sexual austerity that was

On the Genealogy of Ethics 271 
subsumed directly into the Christian ethic. We are not talking about a 
moral rupture between tolerant antiquity and austere Christianity. 
Q. In the name of what does one choose to impose this lifestyle 
upon oneself? 
M.F. In antiquity, this work on the self with its attendant austerity 
is not imposed on the individual by means of civil law or religious obli­
gation, but is a choice about existence made by the individual. People 
decide for themselves whether or not to care for themselves. 
I don't think it is to attain eternal life after death, because they were 
not particularly concerned with that. Rather, they acted so as to give 
to their life certain values (reproduce certain examples, leave behind 
them an exalted reputation, give the maximum possible brilliance to 
their lives). It was a question of making one's life into an object for a 
sort of knowledge, for a tekhne-for an art. 
We have hardly any remnant of the idea in our society that the prin­
cipal work of art which one must take care of, the main area to which 
one must apply aesthetic values, is oneself, one's life, one's existence. 
We find this in the Renaissance, but in a slightly academic form, and yet 
again in nineteenth-century dandyism, but those were only episodes. 
Q. But isn't the Greek concern with the self just an early version of 
our self-absorption, which many consider a central problem in our 
society? 
M.F. You have a certain number of themes-and I don't say that you 
have to reutilize them in this way-which indicate to you that in a cul­
ture to which we owe a certain number of our most important constant 
moral elements, there was a practice of the self, a conception of the 
self, very different from our present culture of the self. In the Cali­
fornian cult of the self, one is supposed to discover one's true self, to 
separate it from that which might obscure or alienate it, to decipher 
its truth thanks to psychological or psychoanalytic science, which is sup­
posed to be able to tell you what your true self is. Therefore, not only 
do I not identiry this ancient culture of the self with what you might call 
the Californian cult of the self, I think they are diametrically opposed. 
What happened in between is precisely an overtuning of the classi­
cal culture of the self. This took place when Christianity substituted 
the idea of a self that one had to renounce, because clinging to the self 
was opposed to God's will, for the idea of a self that had to be created 
as a work of art. 
Q. We know that one of the studies for Le Soud de soi concerns the

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
role of writing in the formation of the self. How is the question of the 
relation of writing and the self posed by Plato? 
M.F. First, to bring out a certain number of historical facts that are 
often glossed over when posing this problem of writing, we must look 
into the famous question of the hupomnemata. Current interpreters see 
in the critique of the hupomnemata in the Phaedrus a critique of writ­
ing as a material support for memory. Now, in fact, hupomnemata has 
a very precise meaning: it is a copybook, a notebook. Precisely this type 
of notebook was coming into vogue in Plato's time for personal and 
administrative use. This new technology was as disrupting as the intro­
duction of the computer into private life today. It seems to me the ques­
tion of writing and the self must be posed in terms of the technical and 
material framework in which it arose. 
Second, there are problems of interpretation concerning the famous 
critique of writing as opposed to the culture of memory in the Phaedrus. 
If you read the Phaedrus, you will see that this passage is secondary 
with respect to another one, which is fundamental and in line with the 
theme that runs throughout the end of the text. It does not matter 
whether a text is written or oral-the problem is whether or not the 
discourse in question gives access to truth. Thus, the written/oral ques­
tion is altogether secondary with respect to the question of truth. 
Third, what seems remarkable to me is that these new instruments 
were immediately used for the constitution of a permanent relation­
ship to oneself-one must manage oneself as a governor manages the 
governed, as a head of an enterprise manages his enterprise, a head 
of household manages his household. This new idea that virtue con­
sists essentially in perfectly governing oneself, that is, in exercising 
upon oneself as exact a mastery as that of a sovereign against whom 
there would no longer be revolts, is something very important that we 
will find, for centuries-practically until Christianity. So, if you will, 
the point at which the question of the hupomnemata and the culture 
of the self come together in a remarkable fashion is the point at which 
the culture of the self takes as its goal the perfect government of the 
self-a sort of permanent political relationship between self and self. 
The ancients carried on this politics of themselves with these notebooks 
just as governments and those who manage enterprises administered 
by keeping registers. This is how writing seems to me to be linked to 
the problem of the culture of the self. 
Q. Can you tell us more about the hupomnemata?

On the Genealogy of Ethics 273 
M.F. In the technical sense, the hupomnemata could be account 
books, public registers, individual notebooks serving as memoranda. 
Their use as books of life, guides for conduct, seems to have become a 
current thing among a whole cultivated public. Into them one entered 
quotations, fragments of works, examples, and actions to which one 
had been witness or of which one had read the account, reflections or 
reasonings one had heard or had come to mind. They constituted a 
material memory of things read, heard, or thought, thus offering these 
as an accumulated treasure for rereading and later meditation. They 
also formed a raw material for the writing of more systematic treatises 
in which were given arguments and means by which to struggle against 
some defect (such as anger, envy, gossip, flattery) or to overcome some 
difficult circumstance (a mourning, an exile, downfall, disgrace). 
Q. But how does writing connect up with ethics and the self? 
M.F. No technique, no professional skill can be acquired without 
exercise; neither can one learn the art of living, the tekhne tou biou, 
without an askesis which must be taken as a training of oneself by one­
self: this was one of the traditional principles to which the Pythag­
oreans, the Socratics, the Cynics had for a long time attributed great 
importance. Among all the forms this training took (which included 
abstinences, memorizations, examinations of conscience, meditations, 
silence, and listening to others), it seems that writing-the fact of writ­
ing for oneself and for others-came quite late to playa sizable role. 
Q. What specific role did the notebooks play when they finally be­
came influential in late antiquity? 
M.F. As personal as they were, the hupomnemata must nevertheless 
not be taken for intimate diaries or for those accounts of spiritual expe­
rience (temptations, struggles, falls, and victories) which can be found 
in later Christian literature. They do not constitute an "account of one­
self"; their objective is not to bring the arcana conscientiae to light, the 
confession of which-be it oral or written-has a purifying value. The 
movement that they seek to effect is the inverse of this last one: the 
point is not to pursue the indescribable, not to reveal the hidden, not 
to say the nonsaid, but, on the contrary, to collect the already-said, to 
reassemble that which one could hear or read, and this to an end which 
is nothing less than the constitution of oneself. 
The hupomnemata are to be resituated in the context of a very sen­
sitive tension of that period. Within a culture very affected by tradi­
tionality, by the recognized value of the already-said, by the recurrence

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
of discourse, by the "citational" practice under the seal of age and 
authority, an ethic was developing that was very explicitly oriented to 
the care of oneself, toward definite objectives such as retiring into 
oneself, reaching oneself, living with oneself, being sufficient to one­
self, profiting by and enjoying oneself. Such is the objective of the 
hupomnemata: to make of the recollection of the fragmentary logos 
transmitted by teaching, listening, or reading a means to establish as 
adequate and as perfect a relationship of oneself to oneself as possible. 
Q. Before we tum to the role of these notebooks in early Christianity, 
could you tell us something about how Greco-Roman austerity differs 
from Christian austerity? 
M.F. One thing that has been very important is that in Stoic ethics 
the question of purity was nearly nonexistent or, rather, marginal. It was 
important in Pythagorean circles and also in the Neoplatonic schools 
and became more and more important through their influence and also 
through religious influences. At a certain moment, the problem of an 
aesthetics of existence is covered over by the problem of purity, which 
is something else, and requires another kind of technique. In Chris­
tian asceticism, the question of purity becomes more and more impor­
tant; the reason why you have to take control of yourself is to keep 
yourself pure. The problem of virginity, this model of feminine integ­
rity, becomes much more important in Christianity. The theme of vir­
ginity has nearly nothing to do with sexual ethics in Greco-Roman 
asceticism; there the problem is a problem of self-domination. It was 
a virile model of self-domination, and a woman who was temperate 
was as virile to herself as a man. The paradigm of sexual self-restraint 
becomes a feminine paradigm through the theme of purity and virgin­
ity, based on the model of physical integrity. Physical integrity rather 
than self-regulation became important. So the problem of ethics as an 
aesthetics of existence is covered over by the problem of purification. 
This new Christian self had to be constantly examined because in 
this self were lodged concupiscence and desires of the flesh. From that 
moment on, the self was no longer something to be made but something 
to be renounced and deciphered. Consequently, between paganism and 
Christianity, the opposition is not between tolerance and austerity but 
between a form of austerity linked to an aesthetics of existence and 
other forms of austerity linked to the necessity of renouncing the self 
and deciphering its truth. 
Q. So Nietzsche, then, must be wrong, in The Genealogy of Morals,

On the Genealogy if Ethics 275 
when he credits Christian.asceticism for making us the kind of crea­
tures that can make promises? 
M.F. Yes, I think he has given mistaken credit to Christianity, given 
what we know about the evolution of pagan ethics from the fourth cen­
tury B.C. to the fourth century after. 
Q. How was the role of the notebooks transformed when the tech­
nique of using them to relate oneself to oneself was taken over by the 
Christians? 
M.F. One important change is that the writing down of inner move­
ments appears, according to Athanasius's text on the life of Saint 
Anthony, as an arm in spiritual combat: while the demon is a force 
that deceives and makes one be deceived about oneself (one great half 
of the Vita Antonii is devoted to these ploys), writing constitutes a 
test and something like a touchstone: in bringing to light the move­
ments of thought, it dissipates the inner shadow where the enemy's 
plots are woven. 
Q. How could such a radical transformation take place? 
M.F. There is indeed a dramatic change between the hupomnemata 
evoked by Xenophon, where it was only a question of remembering 
the elements of a diet, and the description of the nocturnal temptations 
of Saint Anthony. An interesting place to look for a transitional set of 
techniques seems to be the description of dreams. Almost from the 
beginning, one had to have a notebook beside one's bed upon which 
to write one's dreams in order either to interpret them oneself the next 
morning or to-show them to someone who would interpret them. By 
means of this nightly description, an important step is taken toward the 
description of the self. 
Q. But surely the idea that the contemplation of the self allows the 
self to dissipate shadows and arrive at truth is already present in Plato? 
M.F. Yes, but this is an ontological and not a psychological form of 
contemplation. This ontological knowledge of the self takes shape, at 
least in certain texts and in particular in the Alcibiades, in the form of 
the contemplation of the soul by itself in terms of the famous meta­
phor of the eye. Plato asks, "How can the eye see itself?" The answer 
is apparently very simple, but in fact it is very complicated. For Plato, 
one cannot simply look at oneself in a mirror; one has to look into 
another eye, that is, one in oneself, however in oneself in the shape of 
the eye of the other. And there, in the other pupil, one will see one­
self: the pupil serves as a mirror. And, in the same manner, the soul

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
contemplating itself in another soul (or in the divine element of the 
other soul), which is like its pupil, will recognize its divine element. 
You see that this idea that one must know oneself-that is, gain 
ontological knowledge of the soul's mode of being-is independent of 
what one could call an exercise of the self upon the self. When grasp­
ing the mode of being of your soul, there is no need to ask yourself 
what you have done, what you are thinking, what the movements of 
your ideas or your representations are, to what you are attached. That's 
why you can perform this technique of contemplation using as your 
object the soul of an other. Plato never speaks of the examination of 
conscience- never! 
Q. It is a commonplace in literary studies that Montaigne was the 
first great autobiographer, yet you seem to trace writing about the self 
to much earlier sources. 
M.F. It seems to me that in the religious crisis of the sixteenth cen­
tury-the great rejection of the Catholic confessional practices-new 
modes of relationship to the self were being developed. We can see the 
reactivation of a certain number of ancient Stoic practices. The notion, 
for example, of proofs of oneself seems to me thematically close to what 
we find among the Stoics, where the experience of the self is not a 
discovering of a truth hidden inside the self but an attempt to deter­
mine what one can and cannot do with one's available freedom. Among 
both the Catholics and Protestants, the reactivation of these ancient 
techniques in the form of Christian spiritual practices is quite marked. 
Let me take as an example the walking exercise recommended by 
Epictetus. Each morning, while taking a walk in the city, one should try 
to determine with respect to each thing (a public official or an attrac­
tive woman), one's motives, whether one is impressed by or drawn to 
it, or whether one has sufficient self-mastery so as to be indifferent. 
In Christianity one has the same sort of exercises, but they serve to test 
one's dependence on God. I remember having found in a seventeenth­
century text an exercise reminiscent of Epictetus, where a young semi­
narist, when he is walking, does certain exercises that show in what 
way each thing shows his dependence vis-a.-vis God-which permit 
him to decipher the presence of divine providence. These two walks 
correspond to the extent that you have a case with Epictetus of a walk 
during which the individual assures himself of his own sovereignty 
over himself and shows that he is dependent on nothing, while in the 
Christian case the seminarist walks and before each thing he sees, says,

On the Genealogy of Ethics 277 
"Oh, how God's goodness is great! He who made this, holds all things 
in his power, and me, in particular"-thus reminding himself that he 
is nothing. 
Q. So discourse plays an important role but always serves other prac­
tices, even in the constitution of the self. 
M.F. It seems to me, that all the so-called literature of the self­
private diaries, narratives of the self, and so on-cannot be understood 
unless it is put into the general and very rich framework of these prac­
tices of the self. People have been writing about themselves for two 
thousand years, but not in the same way. I have the impression-I may 
be wrong-that there is a certain tendency to present the relationship 
between writing and the narrative of the self as a phenomenon partic­
ular to European modernity. Now, I would not deny it is modern, but 
it was also one of the first uses of writing. 
So it is not enough to say that the subject is constituted in a sym­
bolic system. It is not just in the play of symbols that the subject is 
constituted. It is constitllted in real practices-historically analyzable 
practices. There is a technology of the constitution of the self which 
cuts across symbolic systems while using them. 
Q. If self-analysis is a cultural invention, why does it seem so natu­
ral and pleasurable to us? 
M.F. It may have been an extremely painful exercise at first and 
required many cultural valorizations before ending up transformed 
into a positive activity. Techniques of the self, I believe, can be found 
in all cultures in different forms. Just as it is necessary to study and 
compare the different techniques of the production of objects and the 
direction of men by men through government, one must also question 
techniques of the self. What makes the analysis of the techniques of 
the self difficult is two things. First, the techniques of the self do not 
require the same material apparatus as the production of objects; there­
fore they are often invisible techniques. Second, they are frequently 
linked to the techniques for the direction of others. For example, if we 
take educational institutions, we realize that one is managing others 
and teaching them to manage themselves. 
Q. Let's move on to the history of the modern subject. To begin with, 
was the classical culture of the self completely lost, or was it, rather, 
incorporated and transformed by Christian techniques? 
M.F. I do not think that the culture of the self disappeared or was 
covered up. You find many elements that have simply been integrated,

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
displaced, reutilized in Christianity. From the moment that the culture 
of the self was taken up by Christianity, it was, in a way, put to work 
for the exercise of a pastoral power to the extent that the epimeleia 
heautou became, essentially, epimeleia ton allan-the care of others­
which was the pastor's job. But insofar as individual salvation is chan­
neled-to a certain extent, at least-through a pastoral institution that 
has the care of souls as its object, the classical care of the self disap­
peared, that is, was integrated and lost a large part of its autonomy. 
What is interesting is that during the Renaissance you see a whole 
series of religiOUS groups (whose existence is, moreover, already attested 
to in the Middle Ages) that resist this pastoral power and claim the 
right to make their own statutes for themselves. According to these 
groups, the individual should take care of his own salvation indepen­
dently of the ecclesiastical institution and of the ecclesiastical pastor­
ate. We can see, therefore, a reappearance, up to a certain point, not 
of the culture of the self, which had never disappeared, but a reaffir­
mation of its autonomy. 
In the Renaissance, you also see-and here I refer to Burckhardt's 
text on the famous aesthetics of existence-the hero as his own work of 
art. The idea that from one's own life one can make a work of art is an 
idea that was undoubtedly foreign to the Middle Ages, and reappears 
at the moment of the Renaissance. 
Q. So far you have been treating various degrees of appropriation of 
ancient techniques of self-mastery. In your own writing, you always 
show a big break between the Renaissance and the classical age. Was 
there an equally significant change in the way self-mastery was related 
to other social practices? 
M.F. That is very interesting, but I won't answer you immediately. Let 
us start by saying that the relationship between Montaigne, Pascal, and 
Descartes could be rethought in terms of this question. First, Pascal was 
still in a tradition in which practices of the self, the practice of asceti­
cism, were tied up with the knowledge of the world. Second, we must 
not forget that Descartes wrote "meditations"-and meditations are a 
practice of the self. But the extraordinary thing in Descartes's texts is 
that he succeeded in substituting a subject as founder of practices of 
knowledge for a subject constituted through practices of the self. 
This is very important. Even if it is true that Greek philosophy 
founded rationality, it always held that a subject could not have access 
to the truth if he did not first operate upon himself a certain work that

On the Genealogy of Ethics 279 
would make him susceptible to knowing the truth-a work of purifica­
tion, conversion of the soul by contemplation of the soul itself. You also 
have the theme of the Stoic exercise by which a subject first ensures 
his autonomy and independence-and he ensures it in a rather com­
plex relationship to the knowledge of the world, since it is this knowl­
edge which allows him to ensure his independence, and it is only once 
he has ensured it that he is able to recognize the order of the world as 
it stands. In European culture up to the sixteenth century, the problem 
remains: What is the work I must effect upon myself so as to be cap­
able and worthy of acceding to the truth? To put it another way: truth 
always has a price; no access to truth without ascesis. In Western cul­
ture up to the sixteenth century, asceticism and access to truth are 
always more or less obscurely linked. 
Descartes, I think, broke with this when he said, "To accede to truth, 
it suffices that I be any subject that can see what is evident." Evidence 
is substituted for ascesis at the point where the relationship to the self 
intersects the relationship to others and the world. The relationship to 
the self no longer needs to be ascetic to get into relation to the truth. 
It suffices that the relationship to the self reveals to me the obvious 
truth of what I see for me to apprehend the truth definitively. Thus, 
I can be immoral and know the truth. I believe this is an idea that, 
more or less explicitly, was rejected by all previous culture. Before 
Descartes, one could not be impure, immoral, and know the truth. 
With Descartes, direct evidence is enough. After Descartes, we have a 
nonascetic subject of knowledge. This change makes possible the insti­
tutionalization of modern science. 
I am obviously schematizing a very long history, which is, however, 
fundamental. After Descartes, we have a subject of knowledge which 
poses for Kant the problem of knowing the relationship between the 
subject of ethics and that of knowledge. There was much debate in the 
Enlightenment as to whether these two subjects were completely dif­
ferent or not. Kant's solution was to find a universal subject that, to the 
extent it was universal, could be the subject of knowledge, but which 
demanded, nonetheless, an ethical attitude-precisely the relationship 
to the self which Kant proposes in The Critique of Practical Reason. 
Q. You mean that once Descartes had cut scientific rationality loose 
from ethics, Kant reintroduced ethics as an applied form of procedural 
rationality? 
M.F. Right. Kant says, "I must recognize myself as universal subject,

280 Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
that is, I must constitute myself in each of my actions as a universal 
subject by conforming to universal rules." The old questions were rein­
terpreted: How can I constitute myself as a subject of ethics? Recognize 
myself as such? Are ascetic exercises needed? Or simply this Kantian 
relationship to the universal which makes me ethical by conformity to 
practical reason? Thus Kant introduces one more way in our tradition 
whereby the self is not merely given but is constituted in relationship 
to itself as subject.

THE ETHICS OF THE CONCERN OF 
THE SELF AS A PRACTICE OF FREEDOM* 
Q. First of all, I would like to ask what is the focus of your current 
thinking. Having followed the latest developments in your thought, 
particularly your lectures at the College de France in 1981-82 on the 
hermeneutics of the subject, I would like to know if your current 
philosophical approach is still determined by the poles of subjectivity 
and truth. 
M.F. In actual fact, I have always been interested in this problem, 
even if I framed it somewhat differently. I have tried to find out how 
the human subject fits into certain games of truth, whether they were 
truth games that take the form of a science or refer to a scientific 
model, or truth games such as those one may encounter in institutions 
or practices of control. This is the theme of my book The Order of 
Things, in which I attempted to see how, in scientific discourses, the 
human subject defines itself as a speaking, living, working individual. 
In my courses at the College de France, I brought out this problematic 
in its generality. 
Q. Isn't there a "break" between your former problematic and that 
of subjectivity/truth, particularly starting with the concept of the "care 
of the self"? 
M.F. Up to that point I had conceived the problem of the relation­
ship between the subject and games of truth in terms either of coer-
*This interview was conducted by H. Becker, R. Fornet-Betancourt, and A. Gomez­
Miiller on January 20, 1984. It appeared in Concordia: Revista internacional de filosophia 
6 (July-December 1984), pp. g6-u6. The translation, by P. Aranov and D. McGrawth, 
has been amended and the footnotes of the French text added.

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
cive practices-such as those of psychiatry and the prison system-or 
of theoretical or scientific games-such as the analysis of wealth, of lan­
guage, and of living beings. In my lectures at the College de France, I 
tried to grasp it in terms of what may be called a practice of the self; 
although this phenomenon has not been studied very much, I believe 
it has been fairly important in our societies ever since the Greco-Roman 
period. In the Greek and Roman civilizations, such practices of the self 
were much more important and especially more autonomous than they 
were later, after they were taken over to a certain extent by religious, 
pedagogical, medical, or psychiatric institutions. 
Q. Thus there has been a sort of shift: these games of truth no 
longer involve a coercive practice, but a practice of self-formation of 
the subject. 
M.F. That's right. It is what one could call an ascetic practice, tak­
ing asceticism in a very general sense-in other words, not in the sense 
of a morality of renunciation but as an exercise of the self on the self 
by which one attempts to develop and transform oneself, and to attain 
to a certain mode of being. Here I am taking asceticism in a more gen­
eral sense than that attributed to it by Max Weber, for example, but 
along the same lines. 
Q. A work of the self on the self that may be understood as a cer­
tain liberation, as a process of liberation? 
M.F. I would be more careful on that score. I have always been some­
what suspicious of the notion of liberation, because if it is not treated 
with precautions and within certain limits, one runs the risk of falling 
back on the idea that there exists a human nature or base that, as a con­
sequence of certain historical, economic, and social processes, has been 
concealed, alienated, or imprisoned in and by mechanisms of repres­
sion. According to this hypothesis, all that is required is to brea~ these 
repressive deadlocks and man will be reconciled with himself, redis­
cover his nature or regain contact with his origin, and reestablish a full 
and positive relationship with himself. I think this idea should not be 
accepted without scrutiny. I am not trying to say that liberation as such, 
or this or that form of liberation, does not exist: when a colonized people 
attempts to liberate itself from its colonizers, this is indeed a practice 
of liberation in the strict sense. But we know very well, and moreover 
in this specific case, that this practice of liberation is not in itself suffi­
cient to define the practices of freedom that will still be needed if this 
people, this society, and these individuals are to be able to define

The Ethics of the Concern for Self as a Practice if Freedom 283 
admissible and acceptable forms of existence or political society. This 
is why I emphasize practices of freedom over processes of liberation; 
again, the latter indeed have their place, but they do not seem to me 
to be capable by themselves of defining all the practical forms of free­
dom. This is precisely the problem I encountered with regard to sexu­
ality: does it make any sense to say, "Let's liberate our sexuality"? Isn't 
the problem rather that of defining the practices of freedom by which 
one could define what is sexual pleasure and erotic, amorous and pas­
sionate relationships with others? This ethical problem of the defini­
tion of practices of freedom, it seems to me, is much more important 
than the rather repetitive affirmation that sexuality or desire must 
be liberated. 
Q. But doesn't the exercise of practices of freedom require a certain 
degree of liberation? 
M.F. Yes, absolutely. And this is where we must introduce the con­
cept of domination. The analyses I am trying to make bear essentially 
on relations of power. By this I mean something different from states 
of domination. Power relations are extremely widespread in human 
relationships. Now, this means not that political power is everywhere, 
but that there is in human relationships a whole range of power rela­
tions that may come into play among individuals, within families, in 
pedagogical relationships, political life, and so on. The analysis of 
power relations is an extremely complex area; one sometimes encoun­
ters what may be called situations or states of domination in which the 
power relations, instead of being mobile, allowing the various partic­
ipants to adopt strategies modifying them, remain blocked, frozen. 
When an individual or social group succeeds in blocking a field of 
power relations, immobilizing them and preventing any reversibility of 
movement by economic, political, or military means, one is faced with 
what may be called a state of domination. In such a state, it is certain 
that practices of freedom do not -exist or exist only unilaterally or are 
extremely constrained and limited. Thus, I agree with you that libera­
tion is sometimes the political or historical condition for a practice of 
freedom. Taking sexuality as an example, it is clear that a number of 
liberations were required vis-a-vis male power, that liberation was 
necessary from an oppressive morality concerning heterosexuality as 
well as homosexuality. But this liberation does not give rise to the 
happy human being imbued with a sexuality to which the subject could 
achieve a complete and satisfying relationship. Liberation paves the

Ethics.' Subjectivity and Truth 
way for new power relationships, which must be controlled by prac­
tices of freedom. 
Q. Can't liberation itself be a mode or form of practice of the freedom? 
M.F. Yes, in some cases. You have situations where liberation and 
the struggle for liberation are indispensable for the practice of free­
dom. With respect to sexuality, for example-and I am not indulging 
in polemics, because I don't like polemics, I think they are usually 
futile-there is a Reichian model derived from a certain reading of 
Freud. Now, in Reich's view the problem was entirely one of liberation. 
To put it somewhat schematically, according to him there is desire, 
drive, prohibition, repression, internalization, and it is by getting rid 
of these prohibitions, in other words, by liberating oneself, that the 
problem gets resolved. I think-and I know I am vastly oversimplifying 
much more interesting and refined positions of many authors-this 
completely misses the ethical problem of the practice of freedom: How 
can one practice freedom? With regard to sexuality, it is obvious that 
it is by liberating our desire that we will learn to conduct ourselves ethi­
cally in pleasure relationships with others. 
Q. You say that freedom must be practiced ethically ... 
M.F. Yes, for what is ethics, if not the practice of freedom, the con­
scious [rijlkhie] practice offreedom? 
Q. In other words, you understand freedom as a reality that is already 
ethical in itself. 
M.F. Freedom is the ontological condition of ethics. But ethics is the 
considered form that freedom takes when it is informed by reflection. 
Q. Ethics is what is achieved in the search for or the care of the self? 
M.F. In the Greco-Roman world, the care of the self was the mode in 
which individual freedom-or civic liberty, up to a point-was reflected 
Ese rijlechie] as an ethics. If you take a whole series of texts going from 
the first Platonic dialogues up to the major texts of late Stoicism­
Epictetus, Marcus Aurelius, and so on-you will see that the theme of 
the care of the self thoroughly permeated moral reflection. It is inter­
esting to see that, in our societies on the other hand, at a time that is 
very difficult to pinpoint, the care of the self became somewhat suspect. 
Starting at a certain point, being concerned with oneself was readily 
denounced as a form of self-love, a form of selfishness or self-interest 
in contradiction with the interest to be shown in others or the self­
sacrifice required. All this happened during Christianity; however, I 
am not simply saying that Christianity is responsible for it. The ques-

The Ethics of the Concern for Self as a Practice if Freedom 285 
tion is much more complex, for, with Christianity, achieving one's sal­
vation is also a way of caring for oneself. But in Christianity, salvation 
is attained through the renunciation of self. There is a paradox in the 
care of the self in Christianity-but that is another problem. To come 
back to the question you were talking about, I believe that among the 
Greeks and Romans-especially the Greeks-concern with the self and 
care of the self were required for right conduct and the proper prac­
tice of freedom, in order to know oneself [se connaitre]-the familiar 
aspect of the gnothi seauton-as well as to form oneself, to surpass one­
self, to master the appetites that threaten to overwhelm one. Individual 
freedom was very important for the Greeks-contrary to the common­
place derived more or less from Hegel that sees it as being of no impor­
tance when placed against the imposing totality of the city. Not to be a 
slave (of another city, of the people around you, of those governing you, 
of your own passions) was an absolutely fundamental theme. The con­
cern with freedom was an essential and permanent problem for eight 
full centuries of ancient culture. What we have here is an entire ethics 
revolving around the care of the self; this is what gives ancient ethics 
its particular form. I am not saying that ethics is synonymous with the 
care of the self, but that, in antiquity, ethics as the conscious practice 
of freedom has revolved around this fundamental imperative: "Take 
care of yourself" [soucie-toi de toi-meme]. 
Q. An imperative that implies the assimilation of the logoi, truths. 
M.F. Certainly. Taking care of oneself requires knowing [connaitre] 
oneself. Care of the self is, of course, knowledge [connaissance] of the 
self-this is the Socratic-Platonic aspect-but also knowledge of a num­
ber of rules of acceptable conduct or of principles that are both truths 
and prescriptions. To take care of the self is to equip oneself with these 
truths: this is where ethics is linked to the game of truth. 
Q. You are saying that it involves making this truth that is learned, 
memorized, and progressively applied into a quasi subject that reigns 
supreme in yourself. What is the status of this quasi subject? 
M.F. In the Platonic current of thought, at least at the end of the 
Alcibiades, the problem for the subject or the individual soul is to turn 
its gaze upon itself, to recognize itself in what it is and, recognizing 
itself in what it is, to recall the truths that issue from it and that it has 
been able to contemplate; I on the other hand, in the current of think­
ing we can broadly call Stoicism, the problem is to learn through the 
teaching of a number of truths and doctrines, some of which are fun-

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
dam ental principles while others are rules of conduct. You must pro­
ceed in such a way that these principles tell you in each situation and, 
as it were, spontaneously, how to conduct yourself. It is here that one 
encounters a metaphor that comes not from the Stoics but from Plu­
tarch: "You must learn the principles in such a constant way that when­
ever your desires, appetites, and fears awake like barking dogs, the 
logos will speak like the voice of the master who silences his dogs with 
a single cry. "2 Here we have the idea of a logos functioning, as it were, 
without any intervention on your part; you have become the logos, or 
the logos has become you. 
Q. I would like to come back to the question of the relationship be­
tween freedom and ethics. When you say that ethics is the reflective 
part [ta partie rijIechie] of freedom, does that mean that freedom can 
become aware of itself as ethical practice? Is it first and always a free­
dom that is, so to speak, "moralized," or must one work on oneself to 
discover the ethical dimension of freedom? 
M. F. The Greeks problematized their freedom, and the freedom of 
the individual, as an ethical problem. But ethical in the sense in which 
the Greeks understood it: ethos was a way of being and of behavior. It 
was a mode of being for the subject, along with a certain way of act­
ing, a way visible to others. A person's ethos was evident in his cloth­
ing, app-earance, gait, in the calm with which he responded to every 
event, and so on. For the Greeks, this was the concrete form of free­
dom; this was the way they problematized their freedom. A man pos­
sessed of a splendid ethos, who could be admired and put forward as 
an example, was someone who practiced freedom in a certain way. I 
don't think that a shift is needed for freedom to be conceived as ethos; 
it is immediately problematized as ethos. But extensive work by the 
self on the self is required for this practice of freedom to take shape 
in an ethos that is good, beautiful, honorable, estimable, memorable, 
and exemplary. 
Q. Is this where you situate the analysis of power? 
M.F. I think that insofar as freedom for the Greeks signifies non­
slavery-which is quite a different definition of freedom from our 
own-the problem is already entirely political. It is political in that 
nonslavery to others is a condition: a slave has no ethics. Freedom is 
thus inherently political. And it also has a political model insofar as 
being free means not being a slave to oneself and one's appetites, 
which means that with respect to oneself one establishes a certain

The Ethics if the Concern for Self as a Practice of Freedom 287 
relationship of domination, of mastery, which was called arkhe, or 
power, command. 
Q. As you have stated, care of the self is in a certain sense care for 
others. In this sense, the care of the self is also always ethical, and eth­
ical in itself. 
M.F. What makes it ethical for the Greeks is not that it is care for 
others. The care of the self is ethical in itself; but it implies complex 
relationships with others insofar as this ethos of freedom is also a way 
of caring for others. This is why it is important for a free man who con­
ducts himself as he should to be able to govern his wife, his children, 
his household; it is also the art of governing. Ethos also implies a rela­
tionship with others, insofar as the care of the self enables one to occupy 
his rightful position in the city, the community, or interpersonal rela­
tionships, whether as a magistrate or a friend. And the care of the self 
also implies a relationship with the other insofar as proper care of the 
self requires listening to the lessons of a master. One needs a guide, a 
counselor, a friend, someone who will be truthful with you. Thus, the 
problem of relationships with others is present throughout the devel­
opment of the care of the self. 
Q. The care of the self always aims for the well-being of others; it aims 
to manage the space of power that exists in all relationships, but to 
manage it in a nonauthoritarian manner. What role could a philosopher 
play in this context, as a person who is concerned with care for others? 
M.F. Let's take Socrates as an example. He would greet people in 
the street or adolescents in the gymnasium with the question: Are you 
caring for you~self? For he has been entrusted with this mission by a 
god and he will not abandon it even when threatened with death. He 
is the man who cares about the care of others; this is the particular 
position of the philosopher. But let me simply say that in the case of 
the free man, I think the postulate of this whole morality was that a 
person who took proper care of himself would, by the same token, be 
able to conduct himself properly in relation to others and for others. 
A city in which everybody took proper care of himself would be a city 
that functioned well and found in this the ethical principle of its per­
manence. But I don't think we can say that the Greek who cares for 
himself must first care for others. To my mind, this view only came 
later. Care for others should not be put before the care of oneself. The 
care of the self is ethically prior in that the relationship with oneself is 
ontologically prior.

Ethics .. Subjectivity and Truth 
Q. Can this care of the self, which possesses a positive ethical mean­
ing, be understood as a sort of conversion of power? 
M.F. A conversion, yes. In fact, it is a way of limiting and control­
ling power. For if it is true that slavery is the great risk that Greek free­
dom resists, there is also another danger that initially appears to be the 
opposite of slavery: the abuse of power. In the abuse of power, one 
exceeds the legitimate exercise of one's power and imposes one's fan­
tasies, appetites, and desires on others. Here we have the image of the 
tyrant, or simply of the rich and powerful man who uses his wealth and 
power to abuse others, to impose an unwarranted power on them. But 
one can see-in any case, this is what the Greek philosophers say-that 
such a man is the slave of his appetites. And the good ruler is precisely 
the one who exercises his power as it ought to be exercised, that is, 
simultaneously exercising his power over himself. And it is the power 
over oneself that thus regulates one's power over others. 
Q. Doesn't the care of the self, when separated from care for oth­
ers, run the risk of becoming an absolute? And couldn't this "absoluti­
zation" of the care of the self become a way of exercising power over 
others, in the sense of dominating others? 
M.F. No, because the risk of dominating others and exercising a ty­
rannical power over them arises precisely only when one has not taken 
care of the self and has become the slave of one's desires. But if you 
take proper care of yourself, that is, if you know ontologically what you 
are, if you know what you are capable of, if you know what it means for 
you to be a citizen of a city, to be the master of a household in an oikos, 
if you know what things you should and should not fear, if you know 
what you can reasonably hope for and, on the other hand, what things 
should not matter to you, if you know, finally, that you should not be 
afraid of death-if you know all this, you cannot abuse your power over 
others. Thus, there is no danger. That idea will appear much later, when 
love of self becomes suspect and comes to be perceived as one of the 
roots of various moral offenses. In this new context, renunciation of self 
will be the prime form of care of the self. All this is evident in Gregory 
of Nyssa's Treatise on Virginity, which defines the care of the self, the 
epimeleia heautou, as the renunciation of all earthly attachments. It is 
the renunciation of all that may be love of self, of attachment to an 
earthly self.:; But I think that in Greek and Roman thought the care of 
the self cannot in itself tend toward so exaggerated a form of self-love 
as to neglect others or, worse still, to abuse one's power over them.

The Ethics of the Concern for Self as a Practice of Freedom 28 9 
Q. Thus it is a care of the self that, in thinking of itself, thinks of 
others? 
M.F. Yes, absolutely. He who takes care of himself to the point of 
knowing exactly what duties he has as master of a household and as a 
husband and father will find that he enjoys a proper relationship with 
his wife and children. 
Q. But doesn't the human condition, in terms of its finitude, playa 
very important role here? You have talked about death: if you are not 
afraid of death, then you cannot abuse your power over others. It seems 
to me that this problem of finitude is very important; the fear of death, 
of finitude, of being hurt, is at the heart of the care of the self. 
M.F. Of course. And this is where Christianity, by presenting salva­
tion as occurring beyond life, in a way upsets or at least disturbs the 
balance of the care of the self. Although, let me say it again, to seek 
one's salvation definitely means to take care of oneself. But the condi­
tion required for attaining salvation is precisely renunciation. Among 
the Greeks and Romans, however, given that one takes care of oneself 
in one's own life, and that the reputation one leaves behind is the only 
afterlife one can expect, the care of the self can be centered entirely 
on oneself, on what one does, on the place one occupies among oth­
ers. It can be centered totally on the acceptance of death-this will 
become quite evident in late Stoicism-and can even, up to a point, 
become almost a desire for death. At the same time, it can be, if not a 
care for others, at least a care of the self which will be beneficial to oth­
ers. In Seneca, for example, it is interesting to note the importance of 
the theme, let us hurry and get old, let us hasten toward the end, so 
that we may thereby come back to ourselves. This type of moment 
before death, when nothing more can happen, is different from the 
desire for death one finds among the Christians, who expect salvation 
through death. It is like a movement to rush through life to the point 
where there is no longer anything ahead but the possibility of death. 
Q. I would now like to turn to another topic. In your lectures at the 
College de France you spoke about the relationship between power and 
knowledge [savoir]. Now you are talking about the relationship be­
tween subject and truth. Are these pairs of concepts-power-knowledge 
and subject-truth-complementary in some way? 
M.F. As I said when we started, I have always been interested in the 
problem of the relationship between subject and truth. I mean, how 
does the subject fit into a certain game of truth? The first problem I

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
examined was why madness was problematized, starting at a certain 
time and following certain processes, as an illness falling under a cer­
tain model of medicine. How was the mad subject placed in this game 
of truth defined by a medical model or a knowledge? And it was while 
working on this analysis that I realized that, contrary to what was rather 
common practice at that time (around the early sixties), this phenom­
enon could not be properly accounted for simply by talking about ide­
ology. In fact, there were practices-essentially the widespread use of 
incarceration which had been developed starting at the beginning of 
the seventeenth century, and had been the condition for the insertion 
of the mad subject in this type of truth game-that sent me back to the 
problem of institutions of power much more than to the problem of 
ideology. This is what led me to pose the problem of knowledge and 
power, which for me is not the fundamental problem but an instru­
ment that makes it possible to analyze the problem of the relationship 
between subject and truth in what seems to me the most precise way. 
Q. But you have always "forbidden" people to talk to you about the 
subject in general? 
M.F. No, I have not "forbidden" them. Perhaps I did not explain 
myself adequately. What I rejected was the idea of starting out with a 
theory of the subject-as is done, for example, in phenomenology or 
existentialism-and, on the basis of this theory, asking how a given 
form of knowledge [connaissance] was possible. What I wanted to try 
to show was how the subject constituted itself, in one specific form or 
another, as a mad or a healthy subject, as a delinquent or nondelinquent 
subject, through certain practices that were also games of truth, prac­
tices of power, and so on. I had to reject a priori theories of the sub­
ject in order to analyze the relationships that may exist between the 
constitution of the subject or different forms of the subject and games 
of truth, practices of power, and so on. 
Q. That means that the subject is not a substance. 
M.F. It is not a substance. It is a form, and this form is not prima­
rily or always identical to itself. You do not have the same type of rela­
tionship to yourself when you constitute yourself as a political subject 
who goes to vote or speaks at a meeting and when you are seeking to 
fulfill your desires in a sexual relationship. Undoubtedly there are rela­
tionships and interferences between these different forms of the sub­
ject; but we are not dealing with the same type of subject. In each case, 
one plays, one establishes a different type of. relationship to oneself.

The Ethics of the Concern for Self as a Practice of Freedom 2 9 1 
And it is precisely the historical constitution of these various forms of 
the subject in relation to the games of truth which interests me. 
Q. But the mad, the ill, the delinquent subject-and perhaps even 
the sexual subject-was a subject that was the object of a theoretical 
discourse, let us say a "passive" subject, while the subject you have been 
speaking about over the past two years in your lectures at the College 
de France is an "active," a politically active subject. The care of the self 
concerns all the problems of political practice and government, and so 
on. It would seem, then, that there has been a change for you, a change 
not of perspective but of problematic. 
M.F. If it is indeed true that the constitution of the mad subject may 
be considered the consequence of a system of coercion-this is the pas­
sive subject-you know very well that the mad subject is not an unfree 
subject, and that the mentally ill person is constituted as a mad sub­
ject preCisely in relation to and over against the one who declares him 
mad. Hysteria, which was so important in the history of psychiatry and 
in the asylums of the nineteenth century, seems to me to be the very 
picture of how the subject is constituted as a mad subject. And it is cer­
tainly no accident that the major phenomena of hysteria were observed 
precisely in those situations where there was a maximum of coercion 
to force individuals to constitute themselves as mad. On the other hand, 
I would say that if I am now interested in how the subject constitutes 
itself in an active fashion through practices of the self, these practices 
are nevertheless not something invented by the individual himself. They 
are models that he finds in his culture and are proposed, suggested, 
imposed upon him by his culture, his society, and his social group. 
Q. It would seem that there is something of a deficiency in your 
problematic, namely, in the notion of resistance against power. Which 
presupposes a very active subject, very concerned with the care of itself 
and of others and, therefore, competent politically and philosophically. 
M.F. This brings us back to the problem of what I mean by power. I 
scarcely use the word power, and if I use it on occasion it is simply as 
shorthand for the expression I generally use: relations if power. But 
there are readymade models: when one speaks of power, people imme­
diately think of a political structure, a government, a dominant social 
class, the master and the slave, and so on. I am not thinking of this 
at all when I speak of relations of power. I mean that in human rela­
tionships, whether they involve verbal communication such as we are 
engaged in at this moment, or amorous, institutional, or economic rela-

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
tionships, power is always present: I mean a relationship in which one 
person tries to control the conduct of the other. So I am speaking of 
relations that exist at different levels, in different forms; these power 
relations are mobile, they can be modified, they are not fixed once and 
for all. For example, the fact that I may be older than you, and that you 
may initially have been intimidated, may be turned around during the 
course of our conversation, and I may end up being intimidated before 
someone precisely because he is younger than I am. These power rela­
tions are thus mobile, reversible, and unstable. It should also be noted 
that power relations are possible only insofar as the subjects are free. 
If one of them were completely at the other's disposal and became his 
thing, an object on which he could wreak boundless and limitless vio­
lence, there wouldn't be any relations of power. Thus, in order for power 
relations to come into play, there must be at least a certain degree of 
freedom on both sides. Even when the power relation is completely out 
of balance, when it can truly be claimed that one side has "total power" 
over the other, a power can be exercised over the other only insofar as 
the other still has the option of killing himself, of leaping out the win­
dow, or of killing the other person. This means that in power relations 
there is necessarily the possibility of resistance because if there were 
no possibility of resistance (of violent resistance, flight, deception, strat­
egies capable of reversing the situation), there would be no power rela­
tions at all. This being the general form, I refuse to reply to the question 
I am sometimes asked: "But if power is everywhere, there is no free­
dom." I answer that if there are relations of power in every social field, 
this is because there is freedom everywhere. Of course, states of dom­
ination do indeed exist. In a great many cases, power relations are fixed 
in such a way that they are perpetually asymmetrical and allow an 
extremely limited margin of freedom. To take what is undoubtedly a 
very simplified example, one cannot say that it was only men who 
wielded power in the conventional marital structure of the eighteenth 
and nineteenth centuries; women had quite a few options: they could 
deceive their husbands, pilfer money from them, refuse them sex. Yet 
they were still in (!. state of domination insofar as these options were 
ultimately only stratagems that never succeeded in reversing the situ­
ation. In such cases of domination, be they economic, social, institu­
tional, or sexual, the problem is knowing where resistance will develop. 
For example, in a working class that will resist domination, will this 
be in unions or political parties; and what form will it take-a strike,

The Ethics of the Concern for Self as a Practice 0/ Freedom 2 9 3 
a general strike, revolution, or parliamentary opposition? In such a sit­
uation of domination, all of these questions demand specific answers 
that take account of the kind.and precise form of domination in ques­
tion. But the claim that "you see power everywhere, thus there is no 
room for freedom" seems to me absolutely inadequate. The idea that 
power is a system of domination that controls everything and leaves no 
room for freedom cannot be attributed to me. 
Q. You were talking before about the free man and the philosopher 
as two different modes· of the care of the self. The care of the self of 
the philosopher would have a specificity that cannot be confused with 
that of the free man. 
M.F. I would say that these figures represent two different places in 
the care of the self, rather than two forms of care of the self. I believe 
that the form of such care remains the same, but in terms of intensity, 
in the degree of zeal for the self, and, consequently, also for others, the 
place of the philosopher is not that of just any free man. 
Q. Is there a fundamental link we can make at this point between 
philosophy and politics? 
M.F. Yes, certainly. I believe that the relationship between philosophy 
and politics is permanent and fundamental. It is certain that if one takes 
the history of the care of the self in Greek philosophy, the relationship 
with politics is obvious. And it takes a very complex form: on the one 
hand, you have, for example, Socrates as well as Plato in the Alcibiades4' 
and Xenophon in the Memorabilia 5-greeting young men, saying to 
them: "You want to become a politician, to govern a city, to care for 
others, and you haven't even taken care of yourself. If you do not care 
for yourself you will make a poor ruler." From this perspective, the care 
of the self appears a pedagogical, ethical, and also ontological condition 
for the development of a good ruler. To constitute oneself as a govern­
ing subject implies that one has constituted oneself as a subject who 
cares for oneself. Yet, on the other hand, we have Socrates saying in the 
Apology that he approaches everyone because everyone has to take care 
of himself;6 but he also adds, "In doing so, I am performing the highest 
service for the city, and instead of punishing me, you should reward 
me even more than you reward a winner in the Olympic Games."7 
Thus we see a very strong connection between philosophy and politics, 
which was to develop further when the philosopher would care not only 
for the soul of the citizen but for that of the prince. The philosopher 
becomes the prince's counselor, teacher, and spiritual adviser.

294 Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
Q. Could the problematic of the care of the self be at the heart of a 
new way of thinking about politics, of a form of politics different from 
what we know today? 
M.F. I admit that I have not got very far in this direction, and I would 
very much like to come back to more contemporary questions to try to 
see what can be made of all this in the context of the current political 
problematic. But I have the impression that in the political thought of 
the nineteenth century-and perhaps one should go back even farther, 
to Rousseau and Hobbes-the political subject was conceived of essen­
tially as a subject of law, whether natural or positive. On the other 
hand, it seems to me that contemporary political thought allows very 
little room for the question of the ethical subject. I don't like to reply 
to questions I haven't studied. However, I would very much like to 
come back to the questions I examined through ancient culture. 
Q. What is the relationship between the path of philosophy, which 
leads to knowledge of the self, an~ the path of spirituality? 
M.F. By spirituality I mean-but I'm not sure this definition can hold 
for very long-the subject's attainment of a certain mode of being and 
the transformations that the subject must carry out on itself to attain 
this mode of being. I believe that spirituality and philosophy were iden­
tical or nearly identical in ancient spirituality. In any case, philosophy's 
most important preoccupation centered around the self, with knowl­
edge [connai5sance] of the world coming after and serving, most often, 
to support the care of the self.· Reading Descartes, it is remarkable to 
find in the Meditations this same spiritual concern with the attainment 
of a mode of being where doubt was no longer possible, and where one 
could finally know [connai't].B But by thus defining the mode of being 
to which philosophy gives access, one realizes that this mode of being 
is defined entirely in terms of knowledge, and that philosophy in turn 
is defined in terms of the development of the knowing [connaissant] 
subject, or of what qualifies the subject as such. From this perspective, 
it seems to me that philosophy superimposes the functions ofspiritu­
ality upon the ideal of a grounding for scientificity. 
Q. Should the concept of the care of the self in the classical sense 
be updated to confront this modern thought? 
M.F. Absolutely, but I would certainly not do so just to say, "We have 
unfortunately forgotten about the care of the self; so here, here it is, 
the key to everything." Nothing is more foreign to me than the idea 
that, at a certain moment, philosophy went astray and forgot something,

The Ethics of the Concern for Self as a Practice if Freedom '295 
that somewhere in its history there is a principle, a foundation that 
must be rediscovered. I feel that all such forms of analysis, whether 
they take a radical form and claim that philosophy has from the outset 
been a forgetting, or whether they take a much more historical view­
point and say, "Such and such a philosopher forgot something"­
neither of these approaches is particularly interesting or useful. Which 
does not mean that contact with such and such a philosopher may not 
produce something, but it must be emphasized that it would be some­
thing new. 
Q. This leads me to ask: Why should one have access to the truth 
today, to truth in the political sense, in other words, in the sense of a 
political strategy directed against the various "blockages" of power in 
the system of relations? 
M.F. This is indeed a problem. After all, why truth? Why are we con­
cerned with truth, and more so than with the care of the self? And why 
must the care of the self occur only through the concern for truth? I 
think we are touching on a fundamental question here, what I would 
call the question for the West: How did it come about that all of West­
ern culture began to revolve around this obligation of truth which has 
taken a lot of different forms? Things being as they are, nothing so far 
has shown that it is possible to define a strategy outside of this con­
cern. It is within the field of the obligation to truth that it is possible 
to move about in one way or another, sometimes against effects of 
domination which may be linked to structures of truth or institutions 
entrusted with truth. To greatly simplify matters, there are numerous 
examples: there has been a whole so-called ecological movement-a 
very ancient one, by the way, that did not just start in the twentieth 
century-that was often in opposition, as it were, to a science or, at 
least, to a technology underwritten by claims to truth. But this same 
ecology articulated its own discourse of truth: criticism was authorized 
in the name of a knowledge [connaissance] of nature, the balance of 
life processes, and so on. Thus, one escaped from a domination of truth 
not by playing a game that was totally different from the game of truth 
but by playing the same game differently, or playing another game, 
another hand, with other trump cards. I believe that the same holds 
true in the order of politics; here one can criticize on the basis, for 
example, of the consequences of the state of domination caused by 
an unjustified political situation, but one can only do so by playing a 
certain game of truth, by showing its consequences, by pointing out

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
that there are other reasonable options, by teaching people what they 
don't know about their own situation, their working conditions, and 
their exploitation. 
Q. With regard to the question of games of truth and games of power, 
don't you think that there can be found in history evidence of a partic­
ular kind of these games of truth, one that has a particular status in 
relation to all other possible games of truth and power, and is marked 
by its essential openness, its opposition to all blockages of power­
power here meaning domination/subjugation? 
M.F. Yes, absolutely. But when I talk about power relations and games 
of truth, I am absolutely not saying that games of truth are just con­
cealed power relations-that would be a horrible exaggeration. My 
problem, as I have already said, is in understanding how truth games 
are set up and how they are connected with power relations. One can 
show, for example, that the medicalization of madness, in other words, 
the organization of medical knowledge [savoir] around individuals 
designated as mad, was connected with a whole series of social and 
economic processes at a given time, but also with institutions and prac­
tices of power. This fact in no way impugns the scientific validity or 
the therapeutic effectiveness of psychiatry: it does not endorse psychi­
atry, but neither does it invalidate it. It is also true that mathematics, 
for example, is linked, albeit in a completely different manner than psy­
chiatry, to power structures, if only in the way it is taught, the way in 
which consensus among mathematicians is organized, functions in a 
closed circuit, has its values, determines what is good (true) or bad 
(false) in mathematics. This in no way means that mathematics is only 
a game of power, but that the game of truth of mathematics is linked 
in a certain way-without thereby being invalidated in any way-to 
games and institutions of power. It is clear that in some cases these 
connections are such that one could write the entire history of mathe­
matics without taking them into account, although this problematic is 
always interesting and even historians of mathematics are now begin­
ning to study the history of their institutions. Finally, it is clear that the 
connection that may exist between power relations and games of truth 
in mathematics is totally different from what it is in psychiatry; in any 
case, one simply cannot say that games of truth are nothing but games 
of power. 
Q. This question takes us back to the problem of the subject because, 
with games of truth, it is a question of knowing who is speaking the

The Ethics 0/ the Concern for Self as a Practice of Freedom '2 9 7 
truth, how he speaks it, and why he speaks it. For, in games of truth, 
one can play at speaking the truth: there is a game, one plays at truth 
or truth is a game. 
M.F. The word "game" can lead you astray: when I say "game," I 
mean a set of rules by which truth is produced. It is not a game in the 
sense of an amusement; it is a set of procedures that lead to a certain 
result, which, on the basis of its principles and rules of procedure, may 
be considered valid or invalid, winning or losing. 
Q. There remains the problem of "who": Is it a group, a body? 
M.F. It may be a group or an individual. Indeed, there is a problem 
here. With regard to these multiple games of truth, one can see that 
ever since the age of the Greeks our society has been marked by the 
lack of a precise and imperative definition of the games of truth which 
are permitted to the exclusion of ali others. In a given game of truth, 
it is always possible to discover something different and to more or less 
modify this or that rule, and sometimes even the entire game of truth. 
This has undoubtedly given the West possibilities for development not 
found in other societies. Who speaks the truth? Free individuals who 
establish a certain consensus, and who find themselves within a cer­
tain network of practices of power and constraining institutions. 
Q. So truth is not a construction? 
M.F. That depends. There are games of truth in which truth is a con­
struction and others in which it is not. One can have, for example, a 
game of truth that consists of describing things in such and such a way: 
a person giving an anthropological description of a society supplies not 
a construction but a description, which itself has a certain number of 
historically changing rules, so that one can say that it is to a certain 
extent a construction with respect to another description. This does not 
mean that there's just a void, that everything is a figment of the imag­
ination. On the basis of what can be said, for example, about this trans­
formation of games of truth, some people conclude that I have said that 
nothing exists-I have been seen as saying that madness does not exist, 
whereas the problem is absolutely the converse: it was a question of 
knowing how madness, under the various definitions that have been 
given, was at a particular time integrated into an institutional field that 
constituted it as a mental illness occupying a specific place alongside 
other illnesses. 
Q. At the heart of the problem of truth there is ultimately a prob­
lem of communication, of the transparency of the words of a discourse.

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
The person who has the capacity to formulate truths also has a power, 
the power of being able to speak the truth and to express it in the way 
he wants. 
M.F. Yes, and yet this does not mean that what the person says is 
not true, which is what most people believe. When you tell people that 
there may be a relationship between truth and power, they say: "So it 
isn't truth after all!" 
Q. This is tied up with the problem of communication because, in a 
society where communication has reached a high level of transparency, 
games of truth are perhaps more independent of structures of power. 
M.F. This is indeed an important problem; I imagine you are think­
ing a little about Habermas when you say that. I am quite interested 
in his work, although I know he completely disagrees with my views. 
While I, for my part, tend to be a little more in agreement with what 
he says, I have always had a problem insofar as he gives communica­
tive relations this place which is so important and, above all, a func­
tion that I would call "utopian." The idea that there could exist a state 
of communication that would allow games of truth to circulate freely, 
without any constraints or coercive effects, seems utopian to me. This 
is precisely a failure to see that power relations are not something that 
is bad in itself, that we have to break free of. I do not think that a soci­
ety can exist without power relations, if by that one means the strate­
gies by which individuals try to direct and control the conduct of others. 
The problem, then, is not to try to dissolve them in the utopia of com­
pletely transparent communication but to acquire the rules of law, the 
management techniques, and also the morality, the ethos, the practice 
of the self, that will allow us to play these games of power with as little 
domination as possible. 
Q. You are very far from Sartre, who told us power is evil. 
M.F. Yes, and that idea, which is very far from my way of thinking, 
has often been attributed to me. Power is not evil. Power is games of 
strategy. We all know that power is not evil! For example, let us take 
sexual or amorous relationships: to wield power over the other in a sort 
of open-ended strategic game where the situation may be reversed is 
not evil; it's a part of love, of passion and sexual pleasure. And let us 
take, as another example, something that has often been rightly criti­
cized-the pedagogical institution. I see nothing wrong in the practice 
of a person who, knowing more than others in a specific game of truth, 
tells those others what to do, teaches them, and transmits knowledge

The Ethics if the Concern for Self as a Practice qf Freedom 299 
and techniques to them. The problem in such practices where power­
which is not in itself a bad'thing-must inevitably come into play is 
knowing how to avoid the kind of domination effects where a kid is 
subjected to the arbitrary and unnecessary authority of a teacher, or a 
student put under the thumb of a professor who abuses his authority. 
I believe that this problem must be framed in terms of rules of law, 
rational techniques of government and ethos, practices of the self and 
of freedom, 
Q. Are we to take what you have just said as the fundamental cri­
teria of what you have called a new ethics? It is a question of playing 
with as little domination as possible ... 
M.F. I believe that this is, in fact, the hinge point of ethical concerns 
and the political struggle for respect of rights, of critical thought against 
abusive techniques of government and research in ethics that seeks to 
ground individual freedom. 
Q. When Sartre speaks of power as the supreme evil, he seems to 
be alluding to the reality of power as domination. On this point you 
are probably in agreement with Sartre. 
M.F. Yes, I believe that all these concepts have been ill defined, so 
that one hardly knows what one is talking about. I am not even sure if 
I made myself clear, or used the right words, when I first became inter­
ested in the problem of power. Now I have a clearer sense of the prob­
lem. It seems to me that we must distinguish between power relations 
understood as strategic games between liberties-in which some try to 
control the conduct of others, who in turn try to avoid allowing their 
conduct to be controlled or try to control the conduct of the others­
and the states of domination that people ordinarily call "power." And 
between the two, between games of power and states of domination, 
you have technologies of government-understood, of course, in a very 
broad sense that includes not only the way institutions are governed 
but also the way one governs one's wife and children. The analysis of 
these techniques is necessary because it is very often through such tech­
niques that states of domination are established and maintained. There 
are three levels to my analysis of power: strategic relations, techniques 
of government, and states of domination. 
Q. In your lectures on the hermeneutics of the subject there is a pas­
sage in which you say that the first and only useful point of resistance 
to political power is in the relationship of the self to the self. 
M.F. I do not believe that the only possible pointof resistance to

300 Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
political power-understood, of course, as a state of domination-lies 
in the relationship of the self to the self. I am saying that "governmen­
tality" implies the relationship of the self to itself, and I intend this con­
cept of "governmentality" to cover the whole range of practices that 
constitute, define, organize, and instrumentalize the strategies that 
individuals in their freedom can use in dealing with each other. Those 
who try to control, determine, and limit the freedom of others are 
themselves free individuals who have at their disposal certain instru­
ments they can use to govern others. Thus, the basis for all this is free­
dom, the relationship of the self to itself and the relationship to the 
other. Whereas, if you try to analyze power not on the basis of free­
dom, strategies, and governmentality, but on the basis of the political 
institution, you can only conceive of the subject as a subject of law. One 
then has a subject who has or does not have rights, who has had these 
rights either granted or removed by the institution of political society; 
and all this brings us back to a legal concept of the subject. On the other 
hand, I believe that the concept of governmentality makes it possible 
to bring out the freedom of the subject and its relationship to others­
which constitutes the very stuff [matiere] of ethics. 
Q. Do you think that philosophy has anything to say about why there 
is this tendency to try to control the conduct of others? 
M.F. The way the conduct of ot~ers is controlled takes very different 
forms and arouses desires and appetites that vary greatly in intensity 
depending on the society. I don't know anything about anthropology, 
but I can well imagine societies in which the control of the conduct of 
others is so well regulated in advance that, in a sense, the game is 
already over. On the other hand, in a society like our own, games can 
be very numerous, and the desire to control the conduct of others is 
all the greater-as we see in family relationships, for example, or 
emotional or sexual relationships. However, the freer people are with 
respect to each other, the more they want to control each other's 'con­
duct. The more open the game, the more appealing and fascinating 
it becomes. 
Q. Do you think the role of philosophy is to warn of the dangers 
of power? 
M.F. This has always been an important function of philosophy. In 
its critical aspect-and I mean critical in a broad sense-philosophy 
is that which calls into question domination at every level and in every 
form in which it exists, whether political, economic, sexual, institu-

The Ethics if the Concern for Self as a Practice of Freedom 301 
tional, or what have you. To a certain extent, this critical function of 
philosophy derives from the Socratic injunction "Take care of yourself," 
in other words, "Make freedom your foundation, through the mastery 
of yourself." 
NOTES 
Plato, Alcibiade, trans. M. Croiset (Paris: Belles Lettres, 1925), pp. 109-110 [Alcibiades, trans. 
W. R. M. Lamb, in Plato (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University, 1967), vol. 12, pp. 210-13]. 
2 Plutarch, De la tranquillite de ['arne, trans. J. Dumortier and J. Defradas, in Oeuvres Morales 
(Paris: Belles Lettres, 1975), vol. 3, pt. I, 465c, p. 99 [Tranquillity if Mind, in The Complete 
Works of Plutarch: Essays and Miscellanies, ed. W. L. Bevan (New York: Thomas Y. Crowell, 
1909), vol. 2, pp. 28)-84]. The citation is an inexact paraphrase . 
., Gregory of Nyssa, Traite de la virginite, trans. M. Aubineau (Paris: Cerf, 1966), ch. 13, 303c-305c, 
pp. 411-17 [Treatise on Virginity, in Saint Gregory of Nyssa: Ascetical Works, trans. V. W. Cal­
lahan (Washington, D.C.: Catholic Universities of America Press, 1966), pp. 46-48]. 
4 Plato, Alcibiade, 124b, p. 92; 127d-e, p. 99 [Alcibiades, pp. 173-75; p. 189]. 
5 Xenophon, Mimorables, trans. E. Chambry (Paris: Garnier, 1935), bk. 3, ch. 7, §9, p. 412 [Mem­
orabilia, trans. A. L. Bonnette (Ithaca: Cornell University, 1994), bk. 3, ch. 7, §9, p. 91]. 
6 Plato, Apologie de Socrate, trans. M. Croiset (Paris: Belles Lettres, 1925), 30b, p. 157 [Socrates' 
Dqense (Apology), trans. H. Tredennick, in Plato: The Collected Dialogues, eds. E. Hamilton 
and H. Cairns (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1961), 30b, p. 16]. 
7 Plato, Apologie de Socrate, 36c-d, p. 166 [Socrates' Dqense (Apology), 36c-d, pp. 21-22]. 
8 R. Descartes, Miditations sur la philosophie premiere, in Oeuvres (Paris: Gallimard, 1952), 
PP.253-334 [Meditations on First Philosophy, trans. and cd. J. Cottingham (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1996)].



WHAT IS ENLIGHTENMENT?* 
I 
Today when a periodical asks its readers a question, it does so in order 
to collect opinions on some subject about which everyone has an opin­
ion already; there is not much likelihood of learning anything new. 
In the eighteenth ce~tury, editors preferred to question the public 
on programs that did not yet have solutions. I do not know whether 
or not that practice was more effective; it was unquestionably more 
entertaining. 
In any event, in line with this custom, in November 1784 a German 
periodical, Berlinische Monatschrifi, published a response to the ques­
tion: Was ist Aujkliirung? And the respondent was Kant. 
A minor text, perhaps. But it seems to me that it marks the discreet 
entrance into the history of thought of a question that modern philos­
ophy has not been capable of answering but has never managed to get 
rid of either. And one that has been repeated in various forms for two 
centuries now. From Hegel through Nietzsche or Max Weber to Hork­
heimer or Habermas, hardly any philosophy has failed to confront this 
same question, directly or indirectly. What, then, is this event that is 
called the Aujkliirung and that has determined, at least in part, what 
we are, what we think, and what we do today? Let us imagine that 
the Berlinische Monatschrift still exists and that it is asking its ~eaders 
the question: What is modern philosophy? Perhaps we could respond 
with an echo: modern philosophy is the philosophy that is attempt-
*This translation, by Catherine Porter, has been amended.

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
ing to answer the question raised so imprudently two centuries ago: 
Was ist Aufkliirung? 
Let us linger a few moments over Kant's text. It merits attention for 
several reasons. 
1. To this same question, Moses Mendelssohn had also replied in 
the same journal, just two months earlier. But Kant had not seen Men­
delssohn's text when he wrote his. To be sure, the encounter of the 
German philosophical movement with the new development of Jew­
ish culture does not date from this precise moment. Mendelssohn had 
been at that crossroads for thirty years or so, in company with Lessing. 
But up to this point it had been a matter of making a place for Jewish 
culture within German thought-which Lessing had tried to do in Die 
Juden-or else of identifying problems common to Jewish thought 
and to German philosophy; this is what Mendelssohn had done in his 
Phiidon; oder, iiber die Unsterblichkeit der Seele. With the two texts 
published in the Berlinische Monatschrift, the German Aufkliirung and 
the Jewish Haskala recognize that they belong to the same history; they 
are seeking to identify the common processes from which they stem. 
And it is perhaps a way of announcing the acceptance of a common 
destiny-we now know to what drama that was to lead. 
2. But there is more. In itself and within the Christian tradition, 
Kant's text poses a new problem. 
It was certainly not the first time that philosophical thought had 
sought to reflect on its own present. But, speaking schematically, we 
may say that this reflection had until then taken three main forms . 
• The present may be represented as belonging to a certain era of 
the world, distinct from the others through some inherent charac­
teristics, or separated from the others by some dramatic event. 
Thus, in Plato's The Statesman the interlocutors recognize that 
they belong to one of those revolutions of the world in which the 
world is turning backward, with all the negative consequences that 
may ensue . 
• The present may be interrogated in an attempt to decipher in it the 
heralding signs of a forthcoming event. Here we have the princi­
ple of a kind of historical hermeneutics of which Augustine might 
provide an example.

What is Enlightenment? 
• The present may also be analyzed as a point of transition toward 
the dawning of a new world. That is what Vico describes in the last 
chapter of La Scienza nuova; what he sees "today" is "a complete 
humanity ... spread abroad through all nations, for a few great mon­
archs rule over this world of peoples"; it is also "Europe ... radiant 
with such humanity that it abounds in all the good things that make 
for the happiness of human life." I 
Now, the way Kant poses the question of Aujkliirung is entirely dif­
ferent: it is neither a world era to which one belongs, nor an event 
whose signs are perceived, nor the dawning of an accomplishment. 
Kant defines Aujkliirung in an almost entirely negative way, as an 
A llsgang, an "exit," a "way out." In his other texts on history, Kant 
occasionally raises questions of origin or defines the internal teleology 
of a historical process. In the text on Aujkliirung, he deals with the 
question of contemporary reality alone. He is not seeking to understand 
the present on the basis of a totality or of a future achievement. He is 
looking for a difference: What difference does today introduce with 
respect to yesterday? 
3. I shall not go into detail here concerning this text, which is not 
always very clear despite its brevity. I should simply like to point out 
three or four features that seem to me important if we are to under­
stand how Kant raised the philosophical question of the present day 
[du present]. 
Kant indicates right away that the "way out" which characterizes 
Enlightenment is a process that releases us from the status of "imma­
turity." And by "immaturity," he means a certain state of our will which 
makes us accept someone else's authority to lead us in areas where the 
use of reason is called for. Kant gives three examples: we are in a state 
of "immaturity" when a book takes the place of our understanding, 
when a spiritual director takes the place of our conscience, when a doc­
tor decides for us what our diet is to be. (Let us note in passing that 
the register of these three critiques is easy to recognize, even though the 
text does not make it explicit.) In any case, Enlightenment is defined 
by a modification of the preexisting relation linking will, authority, and 
the use of reason. 
We must also note that this way out is presented by Kant in a rather 
ambiguous manner. He characterizes it as a phenomenon, an ongoing 
process; but he also presents it as a task and an obligation. From the

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
very first paragraph, he notes that man himself is responsible for his 
immature status. Thus, it has to be supposed that he will be able to 
escape from it only by a change that he himself will bring about in him­
self. Significantly, Kant says that this Enlightenment has a Wahlspruch: 
now, a Wahlspruch is a heraldic device, that is, a distinctive feature by 
which one can be recognized, and it is also a motto, an instruction that 
one gives oneself and proposes to others. What, then, is this instruc­
tion? Aude sapere: "dare to know," "have the courage, the audacity, to 
know." Thus, Enlightenment must be considered both as a process in 
which men participate collectively and as an act of courage to be accom­
plished personally. Men are at once elements and agents of a single 
process. They may be actors in the process to the extent that they par­
ticipate in it; and the process occurs to the extent that men decide to 
be its voluntary actors. 
A third difficulty appears here in Kant's text, in his use of the word 
"mankind," Menschheit. The importance of this word in the Kantian 
conception of history is well known. Are we to understand that the 
entire human race is caught up in the process of Enlightenment? In 
that case, we must imagine Enlightenment as a historical change that 
affects the political and social existence of all people on the face of the 
earth. Or are we to understand that it involves a change affecting what 
constitutes the humanity of human beings? But the question then arises 
of knowing what this change is. Here again, Kant's answer is not with­
out a certain ambiguity. In any case, beneath its appearance of simplic­
ity, it is rather complex. 
Kant defines two essential conditions under which mankind can 
escape from its immaturity. And these two conditions are at once spir­
itual and institutional, ethical and political. 
The first of these conditions is that the realm of obedience and the 
realm of the use of reason be clearly distinguished. Briefly character­
izing the immature status, Kant invokes the familiar expression: "Don't 
think, just follow orders"; such is, according to him, the form in which 
military discipline, political power, and religious authority are usually 
exercised. Humanity will reach maturity when it is no longer required 
to obey, but when men are told: "Obey, and you will be able to reason 
as much as you like." We must note that the German word used here 
is riisonieren; this word, which is also used in the Critiques, refers not 
to just any use of reason but to a use of reason in which reason has no 
other end but itself: riisonieren is to reason for reasoning's sake. And

What is Enlightenment? 
Kant gives examples, these too being perfectly trivial in appearance: 
paying one's taxes while being able to argue as much as one likes about 
the system of taxation, would be characteristic of the mature state; or 
again, taking responsibility for parish service, if one is a pastor, while 
reasoning freely about religious dogmas. 
We might think that there is nothing very different here from what 
has been meant, since the sixteenth century, by freedom of conscience: 
the right to think as one pleases so long as one obeys as one must. Yet 
it is here that Kant brings into play another distinction, and in a rather 
surprising way. The distinction he introduces is between the private 
and public uses of reason. Yet he adds at once that reason must be free 
in its public use and must be submissive in its private use. Which is, 
term for term, the opposite of what is ordinarily called freedom of 
conscience. 
But we must be somewhat more precise. What constitutes, for Kant, 
this private use of reason? In what area is it exercised? Man, Kant says, 
makes a private use of reason when he is "a cog in a machine," that 
is, when he has a role to play in society and jobs to do: to be a soldier, 
to have taxes to pay, to be in charge of a parish, to be a civil servant, 
all this makes the human being a particular segment of society; he finds 
himself thereby placed in a circumscribed position, where he has to 
apply particular rules and pursue particular ends. Kant asks not that 
people practice a blind and foolish obedience but that they adapt the 
use they make of their reason to these determined circumstances; and 
reason must then be subjected to the particular ends in view. Thus, 
there cannot be, here, any free use of reason . 
.on the other hand, when one is reasoning only in order to use one's 
reason, when one is reasoning as a reasonable being (and not as a 
cog in a machine), when one is reasoning as a member of reasonable 
humanity, then the use of reason must be free and public. Enlighten­
ment is thus not merely the process by which individuals would see 
their own personal freedom of thought guaranteed. There is Enlight­
enment when the universal, the free, and the public uses of reason are 
superimposed on one another. 
Now this leads us to a fourth question that must be put to Kant's text. 
We can readily see how the universal use of reason (apart from any pri­
vate end) is the business of the subject himself as an individual; we can 
readily see, too, how the freedom of this use may be assured in a purely 
negative manner through the absence of any challenge to it; but how

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
is a public use of that reason to be assured? Enlightenment, as we see, 
must not be conceived simply as a general process affecting all human­
ity; it must not be conceived only as an obligation prescribed to indi­
viduals: it now appears as a political problem. The question, in any 
event, is that of knowing how the use of reason can take the public form 
that it requires, how the audacity to know can be exercised in broad 
daylight, while individuals are obeying as scrupulously as possible. And 
Kant, in conclusion, proposes to Frederick II, in scarcely veiled terms, 
a sort of contract-what might be called the contract of rational des­
potism with free reason: the public and free use of autonomous rea­
son will be the best guarantee of obedience, on condition, however, that 
the political principle which must be obeyed itself be in conformity with 
universal reason. 
Let us leave Kant's text here. I do not by any means propose to con­
sider it as capable of constituting an adequate description of Enlighten­
ment; and no historian, I think, could be satisfied with it for an analysis 
of the social, political, and cultural transformations that occurred at the 
end of the eighteenth century. 
Nevertheless, notwithstanding its circumstantial nature, and with­
out intending to give it an exaggerated place in Kant's work, I believe 
that it is necessary to stress the connection that exists between this brief 
article and the three Critiques. Kant, in fact, describes Enlightenment 
as the moment when humanity is going to put its own reason to use, 
without subjecting itself to any authority; now, it is precisely at this 
moment that the critique a is necessary, since its role is that of defin­
ing the conditions under which the use of reason is legitimate in order 
to determine what can be known [connaitre], what must be done, and 
what may be hoped. Illegitimate uses of reason are what give rise to 
dogmatism and heteronomy, along with illusion; on the other hand, it 
is when the legitimate use of reason has been clearly defined in its 
principles that its autonomy can be assured. The critique is, in a sense, 
the handbook of reason that has grown up in Enlightenment; and, 
conversely, the Enlightenment is the age of the critique. 
It is also necessary, I think, to underline the relation between this 
text of Kant's and the other texts he devoted to history. These latter, 
for the most part, seek to define the internal teleology of time and the 
point toward which history of humanity is moving. Now, the analysis 
of Enlightenment, defining this history as humanity's passage to its

What is Enlightenment? 
adult status, situates contemporary reality with respect to the overall 
movement and its basic directions. But at the same time, it shows how, 
at this very moment, each individual is responsible in a certain way for 
that overall process. 
The hypothesis I should like to propose is that this little text is located, 
in a sense, at the crossroads of critical reflection and reflection on his­
tory. It is a reflection by Kant on the contemporary status of his own 
enterprise. No doubt, it is not the first time that a philosopher has given 
his reasons for undertaking his work at a particular moment. But it 
seems to me that it is the first time that a philosopher has connected 
in this way, closely and from the inside, the significance of his work 
with respect to knowledge [connaissance], a reflection on history and 
a particular analysis of the specific moment at which he is writing and 
because of which he is writing. It is in the reflection on "today" as dif­
ference in history and as motive for a particular philosophical task that 
the novelty of this text appears to me to lie. 
And, by looking at it in this way, it seems to me we may recognize 
a point of departure: the outline of what one might call the attitude 
of modernity. 
II 
I know that modernity is often spoken of as an epoch, or at least as a 
set of features characteristic of an epoch; situated on a calendar, it 
would be preceded by a more or less naive or archaic premodernity, 
and followed by an enigmatic and troubling "postmodernity." And then 
we find ourselves asking whether modernity constitutes the sequel to 
the Enlightenment and its development, or whether we are to see it 
as a rupture or a deviation with respect to the basic principles of the 
eighteenth century. 
Thinking back on Kant's text, I wonder whether we may not envis­
age modernity as an attitude rather than as a period of history. And by 
"attitude," I mean a mode of relating to contemporary reality; a vol­
untary choice made by certain people; in the end, a way of thinking 
and feeling; a way, too, of acting and behaving that at one and the same 
time marks a relation of belonging and presents itself as a task. No 
doubt, a bit like what the Greeks called an ethos. And consequently, 
rather than seeking to distinguish the "modern era" from the "pre­
modern" or "postmodern," I think it would be more useful to try to

310 Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
find out how the attitude of modernity, ever since its formation, has 
found itself struggling with attitudes of "countermodernity." 
To characterize briefly this attitude of modernity, I shall take an 
almost-indispensable example, namely, Baudelaire; for his conscious­
ness of modernity is widely recognized as one of the most acute in the 
nineteenth century. 
1. Modernity is often characterized in terms of consciousness of the 
discontinuity of time: a break with tradition, a feeling of novelty, a 
vertigo in the face of the passing moment. And this is indeed what 
Baudelaire seems to be saying when he defines modernity as "the 
ephemeral, the fleeting, the contingent."2 But, for him, being modern 
does not lie in recognizing and accepting this perpetual movement; on 
the contrary, it lies in adopting a certain attitude with respect to this 
movement; and this deliberate, difficult attitude consists in recapturing 
something eternal that is not beyond the present instant, nor behind 
it, but within it. Modernity is distinct from fashion, which does no 
more than call into question the course of time; modernity is the atti­
tude that makes it possible to grasp the "heroic" aspect of the present 
moment. Modernity is not a phenomenon of sensitivity to the fleeting 
present; it is the will to "heroize" the present. 
I shall restrict myself to what Baudelaire says about the painting 
of his contemporaries. Baudelaire makes fun of those painters who, 
finding nineteenth-century dress excessively ugly, want to depict noth­
ing but ancient togas. But modernity in painting does not consist, for 
Baudelaire, in introducing black clothing onto the canvas. The modern 
painter is the one who can show the dark frock-coat as "the necessary 
costume of our time," the one who knows how to make manifest, in 
the fashion of the day, the essential, permanent, obsessive relation that 
our age entertains with death. "The dress-coat and frock-coat not only 
possess their political beauty, which is an expression of universal equal­
ity, but also their poetic beauty, which is an expression of the public 
soul-an immense cortege of undertaker's mutes (mutes in love, polit­
ical mutes, bom:geois mutes ... ). We are each of us celebrating some 
funeral."3 To designate this attitude of modernity, Baudelaire some­
times employs a litotes that is highly Significant because it is presented 
in the form of a precept: "You have no right to despise the present." 
2. This heroization is ironic, needless to say. The attitude of mod­
ernity does not treat the passing moment as sacred in order to try to 
maintain or perpetuate it. It certainly does not involve harvesting it as

What is Enlightenment? 
a fleeting and interesting curiosity. That would be what Baudelaire 
would call the spectator'S"posture. The jlaneur, the idle, strolling spec­
tator, is satisfied to keep his eyes open, to pay attention and to build 
up a storehouse of memories. In opposition to the jlaneur, Baudelaire 
describes the man of modernity: "Away he goes, hurrying, searching .... 
Be very sure that this man ... this solitary, gifted with an active imagi­
nation, ceaselessly journeying across the great human desert-has an 
aim loftier than that of a mere jlaneur, an aim more general, some­
thing other than the fugitive pleasure of circumstance. He is looking for 
that quality which you must allow me to call 'modernity.' ... He makes 
it his business to extract from fashion whatever element it may con­
tain of poetry, within history." As an example of modernity, Baudelaire 
cites the artist Constantin Guys. In appearance a spectator, a collector 
of curiosities, he remains "the last to linger wherever there can be a 
glow of light, an echo of poetry, a quiver of life or a chord of music; 
wherever a passion can pose before him, wherever natural man and 
conventional man display themselves in a strange beauty, wherever the 
sun lights up the swift joys of the depraved animal."4 
But let us make no mistake. Constantin Guys is not ajlaneur; what 
makes him the modern painter par excellence in Baudelaire's eyes is 
that, just when the whole world is falling asleep, he begins to work, 
and he transfigures that world. His transfiguration entails not an annul­
ling of reality but a difficult interplay between the truth of what is real 
and the exercise of freedom; "natural" things become "more than nat­
ural," "beaut~ful" things become "more than beautiful," and individ­
ual objects appear "endowed with an impulsive life like the soul of 
[their] creator."5 For the attitude of modernity, the high value of the 
present is indissociable from a desperate eagerness to imagine it, to 
imagine it otherwise than it is, and to transform it not by destroying it 
but by grasping it in what it is. Baudelairean modernity is an exercise 
in which extreme attention to what is real is confronted with the prac­
tice of a liberty that simultaneously respects this reality and violates it. 
3. However, modernity for Baudelaire is not simply a form of rela­
tionship to the present; it is also a mode of relationship that must be 
established with oneself. The deliberate attitude of modernity is tied 
to an indispensable asceticism. To be modern is not to accept oneself 
as one is in the flux of the passing moments; it is to take oneself as 
object of a complex and difficult elaboration: what Baudelaire, in the 
vocabulary of his day, calls dandysme. Here I shall not recall in detail

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
the well-known passages on "vulgar, earthy, vile nature"; on man's 
indispensable revolt against himself; on the "doctrine of elegance" 
which imposes "upon its ambitious and humble disciples" a discipline 
more despotic than the most terrible religions; the pages, finally, on 
the asceticism of the dandy who makes of his body, his behavior, his 
feelings and passions, his very existence, a work of art. Modern man, 
for Baudelaire, is not the man who goes off to discover himself, his 
secrets and his hidden truth; he is the man who tries to invent him­
self. This modernity does not "liberate man in his own being"; it com­
pels him to face the task of producing himself. 
4. Let me add just one final word. This ironic heroization of the 
present, this transfiguring play of freedom with reality, this ascetic elab­
oration of the self-Baudelaire does not imagine that these have any 
place in society itself or in the body politic. They can only be produced 
in another, a different place, which Baudelaire calls art. 
I do not pretend to be summarizing in these few lines either the com­
plex historical event that was the Enlightenment, at the end of the 
eighteenth century, or the attitude of modernity in the various guises 
it may have taken on during the last two centuries. 
I have been seeking, on the. one hand, to emphasize the extent to 
which a type of philosophical interrogation-one that simultaneously 
problematizes man's relation to the present, man's historical mode of 
being, and the constitution of the self as an autonomous subject-is 
rooted in the Enlightenment. On the other hand, I have been seeking 
to stress that the thread which may connect us with the Enlightenment 
is not faithfulness to doctrinal elements but, rather, the permanent reac­
tivation of an attitude-that is, of a philosophical ethos that could be 
described as a permanent critique of our historical era .. I should like 
to characterize this ethos very briefly. 
Negatively 
1. This ethos implies, first, the refusal of what I like to call the "black­
mail" of the Enlightenment. I think that the Enlightenment, as a set 
of political, economic, social, institutional, and cultural events on which 
we still depend in large part, constitutes a privileged domain for anal­
ysis. I also think that, as an enterprise for linking the progress of truth 
and the history of liberty in a bond of direct relation, it formulated a

What is Enlightenment? 
philosophical question that remains for us to consider. I think, finally, 
as I have tried to show with reference to Kant's text, that it defined a 
certain manner of philosophizing. 
Yet that does not mean that one has to be "for" or "against" the 
Enlightenment. It even means precisely that one must refuse everything 
that might present itself in the form of a simplistic and authoritarian 
alternative: you either accept the Enlightenment and remain within the 
tradition of its rationalism (this is considered a positive term by some 
and used by others, on the contrary, as a reproach), or else you criti­
cize the Enlightenment and then try to escape from its principles of 
rationality (which may be seen once again as good or bad). And we do 
not break free of this blackmail by introducing "dialectical" nuances 
while seeking to determine what good and bad elements there may 
have been in the Enlightenment. 
We must try to proceed with the analysis of ourselves as beings who 
are historically determined, to a certain extent, by the Enlightenment. 
Such an analysis implies a series of historical inquiries that are as pre­
cise as possible; and these inquiries will not be oriented retrospectively 
toward the "essential kernel of rationality" that can be found in the 
Enlightenment, which would have to be preserved in any event; they 
will be oriented toward the "contemporary limits of the necessary," that 
is, toward what is not or is no longer indispensable for the constitu­
tion of ourselves as autonomous subjects. 
2. This permanent critique of ourselves must avoid the always too 
facile confusions between humanism and Enlightenment. 
We must never forget that the Enlightenment is an event, or a set of 
events and complex historical processes, that is located at a certain 
point in the development of European societies. As such, it includes 
elements of social transformation, types of political institution, forms 
of knowledge, projects of rationalization of knowledge and practices, 
technological mutations that are very difficult to sum up in a word, even 
if many of these phenomena remain important today. The one I have 
pOinted out, which seems to me to have been at the basis of an entire 
form of philosophical reflection, concerns only the mode of reflective 
relation to the present. 
Humanism is something entirely different. It is a theme or, rather, 
a set of themes that have reappeared on several occasions, over time, 
in European societies; these themes, always tied to value judgments, 
have obviously varied greatly in their content as well as in the values

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
they have preserved. Furthermore, they have served as a critical prin­
ciple of differentiation. In the seventeenth century, there was a human­
ism that presented itself as a critique of Christianity or of religion in 
general; there was a Christian humanism opposed to an ascetic and 
much more theocentric humanism. In the nineteenth century, there was 
a suspicious humanism, hostile and critical toward science, and another 
that, to the contrary, placed its hope in that same science. Marxism 
has been a humanism; so have existentialism and personalism; there 
was a time when people supported the humanistic values represented 
by National Socialism, and when the Stalinists themselves said they 
were humanists. 
From this, we must not conclude that everything which has ever been 
linked with humanism is to be rejected, but that the humanistic the­
matic is in itself too supple, too diverse, too inconsistent to serve as an 
axis for reflection. And it is a fact that, at least since the seventeenth 
century, what is called "humanism" has always been obliged to lean 
on certain conceptions of man borrowed from religion, science, or pol­
itics. Humanism serves to color and to justify the conceptions of man 
to which it is, after all, obliged to take recourse. 
Now, in this connection, I believe that this thematic, which so often 
recurs, and always depends on humanism, can be opposed by the prin­
ciple of a critique and a permanent creation of ourselves in our auton­
omy: that is, a principle at the heart of the historical consciousness that 
the Enlightenment has of itself. From this standpoint, I am inclined to 
see Enlightenment and humanism in a state of tension rather than 
identity. 
In any case, it seems to me dangerous to confuse them; and further, 
it seems historically inaccurate. If the question of man, of the human 
species, of the humanist, was important throughout the eighteenth cen­
tury, this is very rarely, I believe, because the Enlightenment consid­
ered itself a humanism. It is worthwhile, too, to note that throughout 
the nineteenth century, the historiography of sixteenth-century human­
ism, which was so important for people like Saint-Beuve or Burckhardt, 
was always distinct from, and sometimes explicitly opposed to, the 
Enlightenment and the eighteenth century. The nineteenth century had 
a tendency to oppose the two, at least as much as to confuse them. 
In any case, I think that, just as we must free ourselves from the 
intellectual blackmail of "being for or against the Enlightenment," we 
must escape from the historical and moral confusionism that mixes the

What is Enlightenment? 
theme of humanism with the question of the Enlightenment. An anal­
ysis of their complex relations in the course of the last two centuries 
would be a worthwhile project, an important one if we are to bring 
some measure of clarity to the consciousness that we have of ourselves 
and of our past. 
Positively 
Yet while taking these precautions into account, we must obviously give 
a more positive content to what may be a philosophical ethos consisting 
in a critique of what we are saying, thinking, and doing, through a his­
torical ontology of ourselves. 
1. This philosophical ethos may be characterized as a limit-attitude. 
We are not talking about a gesture of rejection. We have to move beyond 
the outside-inside alternative; we have to be at the frontiers. Criticism 
indeed consists of analyzing and reflecting upon limits. But if the Kant­
ian question was that of knowing [savoir] what limits knowledge [con­
naissance] must renounce exceeding, it seems to me that the critical 
question today must be turned back into a positive one: In what is given 
to us as universal, necessary, obligatory, what place is occupied by what­
ever is singular, contingent, and the product of arbitrary constraints? 
The point, in brief, is to transform the critique conducted in the form 
of necessary limitation into a practical critique that takes the form of a 
possible crossing-over Lfranchissement]. 
This entails an obvious consequence: that criticism is no longer going 
to be practiced in the search for formal structures with universal value 
but, rather, as a historical investigation into the events that have led 
us to constitute ourselves and to recognize ourselves as subjects of 
what we are doing, thinking, saying. In that sense, this criticism is not 
transcendental, and its goal is not that of making a metaphysics pos­
sible: it is genealogical in its design and archaeological in its method. 
Archaeological-and not transcendental-in the sense that it will not 
seek to identify the universal structures of all knowledge [connaissance] 
or of all possible moral action, but will seek to treat the instances of 
discourse that articulate what we think, say, and do as so many histor­
ical events. And this critique will be genealogical in the sense that it 
will not deduce from the form of what we are what it is impossible 
for us to do and to know; but it will separate out, from the contin­
gency that has made us what we are, the possibility of no longer being,

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
doing, or thinking what we are, do, or think. It is not seeking to make 
possible a metaphysics that has finally become a science; it is seeking 
to give new impetus, as far and wide as possible, to the undefined work 
of freedom. 
2. Yet if we are not to settle for the affirmation or the empty dream 
of freedom, it seems to me that this historico-critical attitude must also 
be an experimental one. I mean that this work done at the limits of our­
selves must, on the one hand, open up a realm of historical inquiry and, 
on the other, put itself to the test of reality, of contemporary reality, 
both to grasp the points where change is possible and desirable, and 
to determine the precise form this change should take. This means that 
the historical ontology of ourselves must turn away from all projects that 
claim to be global or radical. In fact, we know from experience that the 
claim to escape from the system of contemporary reality so as to pro­
duce the overall programs of another society, of another way of think­
ing, another culture, another vision of the world, has led only to the 
return of the most dangerous traditions. 
I prefer the very specific transformations that have proved to be pos­
sible in the last twenty years in a certain number of areas which con­
cern our ways of being and thinking, relations to authority, relations 
between the sexes, the way in which we perceive insanity or illness; I 
prefer even these partial transformations, which have been made in the 
correlation of historical analysis and the practical attitude, to the pro­
grams for a new man that the worst political systems have repeated 
throughout the twentieth century. 
I shall thus characterize the philosophical ethos appropriate to the 
critical ontology of ourselves as a historico-practical test of the limits 
we may go beyond, and thus as work carried out by ourselves upon our­
selves as free beings. 
3. Still, the following objection would no doubt be entirely legit­
imate: If we limit ourselves to this type of always partial and local 
inquiry or test, do we not run the risk of letting ourselves be deter­
mined by more general structures of which we may well not be con­
scious and over which we may have no control? 
To this, two responses. It is true that we have to give up hope of ever 
acceding to a point of view that could give us access to any complete 
and definitive knowledge [connaissancel of what may constitute our 
historical limits. And, from this point of view, the theoretical and prac­
tical experience we have of our limits, and of the possibility of moving

What is Enlightenment? 
beyond them, is always..limited and determined; thus, we are always 
in the position of beginning again. 
But that does not mean that no work can be done except in disor­
der and contingency. The work in question has its generality, its sys­
tematicity, its homogeneity, and its stakes. 
ITS STAKES. These are indicated by what might be called "the par­
adox of the relations of capacity and power." We know that the great 
promise or the great hope of the eighteenth century, or a part of the 
eighteenth century, lay in the simultaneous and proportional growth of 
individuals with respect to one another. And, moreover, we can see that 
throughout the entire history of Western societies (it is perhaps here 
that the root of their singular historical destiny is located-such a pecul­
iar destiny, so different from the others in its trajectory and so univer­
salizing, so dominant with respect to the others), the acquisition of 
capabilities and the struggle for freedom have constituted permanent 
elements. Now, the relations between the growth of capabilities and 
the growth of autonomy are not as simple as the eighteenth century 
may have believed. And we have been able to see what forms of power 
relation were conveyed by various technologies (whether we are speak­
ing of productions with economic aims, or institutions whose goal is 
social regulation, or of techniques of communication): disciplines, both 
collective and individual, procedures of normalization exercised in the 
name of the power of the state, demands of society or of population 
zones, are examples. What is at stake, then, is this: how can the growth 
of capabilities [capacites] be disconnected from the intensification of 
power relations? 
HOMOGENEITY. This leads to the study of what could be called 
"practical systems." Here we are taking as a homogeneous domain of 
reference not the representations that men give of themselves, not the 
conditions that determine them without their knowledge, but rather 
what they do and the way they do it. That is, the forms of rationality 
that organize their ways of doing things (this might be called the tech­
nological aspect) and the freedom with which they act within these 
practical systems, reacting to what others do, modifying the rules of 
the game, up to a certain point (this might be called the strategic side 
of these practices). The homogeneity of these historico-critical analy­
ses is thus ensured by this realm of practices, with their technological 
side and their strategic side. 
SYSTEMATICITY. These practical systems stem from three broad

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
areas: relations of control over things, relations of action upon others, 
relations with oneself. This does not mean that each of these three 
areas is completely foreign to the others. It is well known that control 
over things is mediated by relations with others; and relations with oth­
ers in turn always entail relations with oneself, and vice versa. But we 
have three axes whose specificity and whose interconnections have to 
be analyzed: the axis of knowledge, the axis of power, the axis of eth­
ics. In other words, the historical ontology of ourselves must answer 
an open series of questions; it must make an indefinite number of 
inquiries which may be multiplied and specified as much as we like, 
but which will all address the questions systematized as follows: How 
are we constituted as subjects of our own knowledge? How are we con­
stituted as subjects who exercise or submit to power relations? How are 
we constituted as moral subjects of our own actions? 
GENERALITY. Finally, these historico-critical investigations are quite 
specific in the sense that they always bear upon a material, an epoch, 
a body of determined practices and discourses. And yet, at least at the 
level of the Western societies from which we derive, they have their 
generality, in the sense that they have continued to recur up to our 
time: for example, the problem of the relationship between sanity and 
insanity, or sickness and health, or crime and the law; the problem of 
the role of sexual relations; and so on. 
Yet by evoking this generality, I do not mean to suggest that it has 
to be retraced in its metahistorical continuity over time, nor that its 
variations have to be pursued. What must be grasped is the extent to 
which what we know of it, the forms of power that are exercised in it, 
and the experience that we have in it of ourselves constitute nothing 
but determined historical figures, through a certain form of problemati­
zation that defines objects, rules of action, modes of relation to oneself. 
The study of (modes of) problematization [(modes de) problemaliza­
lions] (that is, of what is neither an anthropological constant nor a 
chronological variation) is thus the way to analyze questions of general 
import in their historically unique form. 
A brief summary, to conclude and to come back to Kant. 
I do not know whether we will ever reach mature adulthood. Many 
things in our experience convince us that the historical event of the 
Enlightenment did not make us mature adults, and we have not reached 
that stage yet. However, it seems to me that a meaning can be attributed

What is Enlightenment? 
to that critical interrogation on the present and on ourselves which Kant 
formulated by reflecting on the Enlightenment. It seems to me that 
Kant's reflection is even a way of philosophizing which has not been 
without its importance or effectiveness during the last two centuries. 
The critical ontology of ourselves must be considered not, certainly, as 
a theory, a doctrine, nor even as a permanent body of knowledge that 
is accumulating; it must be conceived as an attitude, an ethos, a philo­
sophical life in which the critique of what we are is at one and the 
same time the historical analysis of the limits imposed on us and an 
experiment with the possibility of going beyond them [de leur fran­
chissement possible]. 
This philosophical attitude must be translated into the labor of diverse 
inquiries. These inquiries have their methodological coherence in the 
at once archaeological and genealogical study of practices envisaged 
simultaneously as a technological type of rationality and as strategic 
games of liberties; they have their theoretical coherence in the defini­
tion of the historically unique forms in which the generalities of our 
relations to things, to others, to themselves, have been problematized. 
They have their practical coherence in the care brought to the process 
of putting historico-critical reflection to the test of concrete practices. 
I do not know whether it must be said today that the critical task still 
entails faith in Enlightenment; I continue to think that this task requires 
work on our limits, that is, a patient labor giving form to our impa­
tience for liberty. 
NOTES 
1 Giambattista Vico, The New Science cifGiambattista Vico (1744), abridged trans. T. G. Bergin 
and M. H. Fisch (Ithaca and London: Cornell University Press, 1970), pp. 370, 372. 
a In this paragraph, occurrences of the phrase "the critique" are glosses of "la Critique" (capi­
talized in the French); it should probably be understood as referring not to critique in general 
but, rather, to Kant's own works, or perhaps particularly to his "First Critique," The Critique 
cif Pure Reason. 
2 Charles Baudelaire, The Painter of Modern Life and Other Essays, trans. Jonathan Mayne 
(London: Phaidon, 1964), p. 13. 
3 Charles Baudelaire, "On the Heroism of Modern Life," in The Mirror of Art: Critical Studies 
by Charles Baudelaire, trans. Jonathan Mayne (London: Phaidon, 1955), p. 127. 
4 Baudelaire, Painter, pp. 12, 11. 
5 Ibid., p. 12.



THE MASKED PHILOSOPHER* 
C.D. Allow me to ask you first why you have chosen anonymity? 
M.F. You know the story of the psychologists who went to make a 
little film test in a village in darkest Africa. They then asked the spec­
tators to tell the story in their own words. Well, only one thing inter­
ested them in this story involving three characters: the movement of 
the light and shadow through the trees. 
In our societies, characters dominate our perceptions. Our attention 
tends to be arrested by the activities of faces that come and go, emerge 
and disappear. 
Why did I suggest that we use anonymity? Out of nostalgia for a time 
when, being quite unknown, what I said had some chance of being 
heard. With the potential reader, the surface of contact was unrippled. 
The effects of the book might land in unexpected places and form shapes 
that I had never thought of. A name makes reading too easy. 
I shall propose a game: that of the "year without a name." For a year, 
books would be published without their authors' names. The critics 
would have to cope with a mass of entirely anonymous books. But, 
*Between 1979 and 1984 the newspaper Le Monde published a weekly series of inter­
views with leading European intellectuals. On April 6-7, 1980, an interview between 
Christian Delacampagne and Michel Foucault was published in which the latter opted 
for the mask of anonymity-the philosopher declined to reveal his name-in order to 
demystify the power society ascribes to the "name" of the intellectual. Foucault set out 
to liberate the consumer of culture from a critical discourse that is overdetermined by 
the characters that dominate our perceptions. This interview was reprinted in Entretiens 
avec Le Monde, vol. I: Philosophies (Paris: Decouverte, 1984), pp. 21-50. The transla­
tion, by Alan Sheridan, has been amended.

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
now that I come to think of it, it's possible they would have nothing to 
do: all the authors would wait until the following year before publish­
ing their books ... 
C.D. Do you think intellectuals today talk too much? That they en­
cumber us with their discourses at every occasion, and more often than 
not independent of any occasion? 
M.F. The word intellectual strikes me as odd. Personally, I've never 
met any intellectuals. I've met people who write novels, others who 
treat the sick; people who work in economics and others who compose 
electronic music. I've met people who teach, people who paint, and 
people of whom I have never really understood what they do. But intel­
lectuals? Never. 
On the other hand, I've met a lot of people who talk about "the intel­
lectual." And, listening to them, I've got some idea of what such an 
animal could be. It's not difficult-he's quite personified. He's guilty 
of pretty well everything: of speaking out and of keeping silent, of 
doing nothing and of getting involved in everything .... In short, the 
intellectual is raw material for a verdict, a sentence, a condemnation, 
an exclusion ... 
I don't find that intellectuals talk too much, since for me they don't 
exist. But I do find that more and more is being said about intellectu­
als, and I don't find it very reassuring. 
I have an unfortunate habit. When people speak about this or that, I 
try to imagine what the result would be if translated into reality. When 
they "criticize" someone, when they "denounce" his ideas, when they 
"condemn" what he writes, I imagine them in the ideal situation in 
which they would have complete power over him. I take the words they 
use-demolish, destroy, reduce to silence, bury-and see what the effect 
would be if they were taken literally. And I catch a glimpse of the radi­
ant city in which the intellectual would be in prison or, if he were also a 
theoretician, hanged, of course. We don't, it's true, live under a regime 
in which intellectuals are sent to the ricefields. But have you heard of a 
certain Toni NBgri?l Isn't he in prison simply for being an intellectual? 
C.D. SO what has led you to hide behind anonymity? Is it the way 
in which philosophers, nowadays, exploit the publicity surrounding 
their names? 
M.F. That doesn't shock me in the least. In the corridors of myoid 
lycee I used to see plaster busts of great men. And now at the bottom 
of the front pages of newspapers I see the photograph of some thinker

The Masked Philosopher 
or other. I don't know whether things have improved, from an aesthetic 
point of view. Economic rationality, certainly ... 
I'm very moved by a letter that Kant wrote when he was already very 
old: he was in a hurry, he says, against old age and declining sight, and 
confused ideas, to finish one of his books for the Leipzig Fair. I men­
tion this to show that it isn't of the slightest importance. With or with­
out publicity, with or without a fair, a book is something quite special. 
I shall never be convinced that a book is bad because its author has 
been seen on television. But, of course, it isn't good for that reason 
alone either. 
If I have chosen anonymity, it is not, therefore, to criticize this or 
that individual, which I never do. It's a way of addressing the poten­
tial reader, the only individual here who is of interest to me, more 
directly: "Since you don't know who I am, you will be more inclined 
to find out why I say what you read; just allow yourself to say, quite 
simply, it's true, it's false. I like it or I don't like it. Period." 
C.D. But doesn't the public expect the critic to provide him with pre­
cise assessments as to the value of a work? 
M.F. I don't know whether the public does or does not expect the 
critic to judge works or authors. Judges were there, I think, before he 
was able to say what he wanted. 
It seems that Courbet had a friend who used to wake up in the night 
yelling: "I want to judge, I want to judge." It's amazing how people like 
judging. Judgment is being passed everywhere, all the time. Perhaps 
it's one of the simplest things mankind has been given to do. And you 
know very well that the last man, when radiation has finally reduced 
his last enemy to ashes, will sit down behind some rickety table and 
begin the trial of the individual responsible. 
I can't help but dream about a kind of criticism that would try not 
to judge but to bring an oeuvre, a book, a sentence, an idea to life; it 
would light fires, watch the grass grow, listen to the wind, and catch 
the sea foam in the breeze and scatter it. It would multiply not judg­
ments but signs of existence; it would summon them, drag them from 
their sleep. Perhaps it would invent them sometimes-all the better. 
All the better. Criticism that hands down sentences sends me to sleep; 
I'd like a criticism of scintillating leaps of the imagination. It would 
not be sovereign or dressed in red. It would bear the lightning of pos­
sible storms. 
C.D. SO there are so many things to tell people about, so much inter-

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
esting work being done, that the mass media ought to talk about phi­
losophy all the time ... 
M.F. It's true that there is a traditional discomfort between the "crit­
ics" and those who write books. The first feel misunderstood, and 
the second think the first are trying to bring them to heel. But that's 
the game. 
It seems to me that today the situation is rather special. We have 
institutions administering shortages, whereas we are in a situation 
of superabundance. 
Everybody has noticed the overexcitement that often accompanies 
the publication (or reprinting) of some work that may in fact be quite 
interesting. But it is never presented as being anything less than the 
"subversion of all the codes," the "antithesis of contemporary culture," 
the "radical questioning of all our ways of thinking." One would be jus­
tified in thinking that its a)1thor must be some unknown fellow living 
on the fringes of society. 
On the other hand, others must be banished into total oblivion, from 
which they must never be allowed to reemerge; they were only the 
froth of "mere fashion," a mere product of the cultural institution, and 
so forth. 
A superficial, very Parisian phenomenon, it will be said. I see it, 
rather, as the effect of a deep-seated anxiety. The feeling of "no room," 
"him or me," "it's my turn now." We have to walk in line because of 
the extreme narrowness of the place where one can listen and make 
oneself heard. 
Hence a sort of anxiety that finds expression in innumerable symp­
toms, some funny, some less so. Hence, too, on the part of those who 
write, a sense of impotence when confronted by the mass media, which 
they criticize for running the world of books and creating or destroying 
reputations at will. Hence, too, the feeling among the critics that they 
will not be heard unless they shout louder and pull a rabbit out of the 
hat each week. Hence, too, a pseudopoliticization that masks, beneath 
the need to wage an "ideological struggle" or to root out "dangerous 
thoughts," a deep-seated anxiety that one will not be heard or read. 
Hence, too, the fantastic phobia for power: anybody who writes exerts 
a disturbing power upon which one must try to place limitations, if not 
actually to put an end to it. Hence, too, the declaration, repeated over 
and over, that everything nowadays is empty, desolate, uninteresting, 
unimportant: a declaration that obviously comes from those who, not

The Masked Philosopher 
doing anything themselves, consider that there are too many others 
who are. 
C.D. But don't you think that our period is really lacking in great 
writers and in minds capable of dealing with its problems? 
M.F. No, I don't subscribe to the notion of a decadence, of a lack 
of writers, of the sterility of thought, of a gloomy future lacking in 
prospects. 
On the contrary, I believe that there is a plethora. What we are suffer­
ing from is not a void but inadequate means for thinking about every­
thing that is happening. There is an overabundance of things to be 
known: fundamental, terrible, wonderful, funny, insignificant, andcru­
cial at the same time. And there is an enormous curiosity, a need, a 
desire to know. People are always complaining that the mass media 
stuff one's head with people. There is a certain misanthropy in this 
idea. On the contrary, I believe that people react; the more one con­
vinces them, the more they question things. The mind isn't made of 
soft wax. It's a reactive substance. And the desire to know [savoir] 
more, and to know it more deeply and to know other things increases 
as one tries to stuff peoples' heads. 
If you accept that, and if you add that there's a whole host of people 
being trained in the universities and elsewhere who could act as inter­
mediaries between this mass of things and this thirst for knowledge, 
you will soon come to the conclusion that student unemployment is the 
most absurd thing imaginable. The problem is to multiply the chan­
nels, the bridges, the means of information, the radio and television 
networks, the newspapers. 
Curiosity is a vice that has been stigmatized in turn by Christianity, 
by philosophy, and even by a certain conception of science. Curiosity 
is seen as futility. However, I like the word; it suggests something quite 
different to me. It evokes "care"; it evokes the care one takes of what 
exists and what might exist; a sharpened sense of reality, but one that 
is never immobilized before it; a readiness to find what surrounds us 
strange and odd; a certain determination to throw off familiar ways 
of thought and to look at the same things in a different way; a pas­
sion for seizing what is happening now and what is disappearing; a 
lack of respect for the traditional hierarchies of what is important and 
fundamental. 
I dream of a new age of curiosity. We have the technical means; the 
desire is there; there is an infinity of things to know; the people cap-

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
able of doing such work exist. So what is our problem? Too little: 
channels of communication that are too narrow, almost monopolistic, 
inadequate. We mustn't adopt a protectionist attitude, to stop "bad" 
information from invading and stifling the "good." Rather, we must 
increase the possibility for movement backward and forward. This 
would not lead, as people often fear, to uniformity and leveling-down, 
but, on the contrary, to the simultaneous existence and differentiation 
of these various networks. 
C.D. I imagine that, at this level, the mass media and the universi­
ties, instead of continuing to oppose one another, might play comple­
mentary roles. 
M.F. You remember Sylvain Levi's wonderful saying: when you have 
one listener, it's teaching; when you have two, it's popularization. Books, 
universities, learned journals are also information media. One should 
refrain from calling every channel of information to which one cannot 
or does not wish to gain access a "mass medium." The problem is to 
know how to exploit the differences, whether we ought to set up a 
reserve, a "cultural park," for delicate species of scholars threatened 
by the rapacious inroads of mass information, while the rest of the 
space would be a huge market for shoddy products. Such a division 
does not seem to me to correspond to reality. What's more, it isn't at 
all desirable. If useful differentiations are to be brought into play, there 
must not be any such division. 
C.D. Let's risk a few concrete propositions. If everything is going 
badly, where do we make a start? 
M.F. But everything isn't going badly. In any case, I believe we 
shouldn't confuse useful criticism of things with repetitive jeremiads 
against people. As for concrete propositions, they can't just make an 
appearance like gadgets, unless certain general principles are accepted 
first. And the first of such general principles should be that the right 
to knowledge [droit au savoir] must not be reserved to a particular age 
group or to certain categories of people, but that one must be able to 
exercise it constantly and in many different ways. 
C.D. Isn't this desire for knowledge [envie de savoir] somewhat 
ambiguous? What, in fact, are people to do with all that knowledge 
that they are going to acquire? What use will it be to them? 
M.F. One of the main functions of teaching was that the training of 
the individual should be accompanIed by his being situated in society. 
We should now see teaching in such a way that it allows the individ-

The Masked Philosopher 327 
ual to change at will, which is possible only on condition that teaching 
is a possibility always being offered. 
C.D. Are you in fact for a society of scholars [societe savanteJ? 
M.F. I'm saying that people must be constantly able to plug into cul­
ture and in as many ways as possible. There ought not to be, on the 
one hand, this education to which one is subjected and, on the other, 
this information one is fed. 
C.D. What becomes of the eternal questions of philosophy in this 
learned society [societe savanteJ? ... Do we still need them, these unan­
swerable questions, these silences before the unknowable? 
M.F. What is philosophy if not a way of reflecting, not so much on 
what is true and what is false, as on our relationship to truth? People 
sometimes complain that there is no dominant philosophy in France. 
So much the better for that! There is no sovereign philosophy, it's true, 
but a philosophy or rather philosophy in activity. The movement by 
which, not without effort and uncertainty, dreams and illusions, one 
detaches oneself from what is accepted as true and seeks other rules­
that is philosophy. The displacement and transformation of frameworks 
of thinking, the changing of received values and all the work that has 
been done to think otherwise, to do something else, to become other 
than what one is-that, too, is philosophy. From this point of view, the 
last thirty years or so have been a period of intense philosophical activ­
ity. The interaction between analysis, research, "learned" or "theoret­
ical" criticism, and changes in behavior, in people's real conduct, their 
way of being, their relation to themselves and to others has been con­
stant and considerable. 
I was saying just now that philosophy was a way of reflecting on our 
relationship to truth. It should also be added that it is a way of inter­
rogating ourselves: If this is the relationship that we have with truth, 
how must we behave? I believe that a considerable and varied amount 
of work has been done and is still being done that alters both our rela­
tion to truth and our way of behaving. And this has taken place in a 
complex situation, between a whole series of investigations and a whole 
set of social movements. It's the very life of philosophy. 
It is understandable that some people should weep over the present 
void and hanker instead, in the world of ideas, after a little monarchy. 
But those who, for once in their lives, have found a new tone, a new 
way of looking, a new way of doing, those people, I believe, will never 
feel the need to lament that the world is error, that history is filled with

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
people of no consequence, and that it is time for others to keep quiet 
so that at last the sound of their disapproval may be heard ... 
NOTE 
Italian philosopher, ex-professor at the University of Padua; a leading intellectual influence in 
the extreme-left movement Workers' Autonomy, he underwent four years and three months pre­
ventative detention for armed insurrection against the state, subversive association, and the for­
mation of armed gangs. He was freed on July 8, 1983, after being elected a Radical deputy 
during his imprisonment. His parliamentary immunity was lifted by the Chamber of Deputies, 
new warrants for his arrest were issued, and he took refuge in France.

ABNORMALS,51-57 
human monster, 51-52 
individual to be corrected, 52-53 
onanist, 53-55 
abstinence, 240 
Adam, 181 
adoption, 158 
adultery, 188-89 
aestheticism, 130-31,264,266-68 
Alcibiades (Plato), 88, 95-97, 226, 
228-31,234-36,255,260,267 
275, 285, 293 ' 
Amores (Lucian), 92 
De Anima (Aristotle), 13 
Antipater of Tarsus, 91 
Antiphysis,55 
anti psychiatry movement 45-50 
256 " 
aphrodisia, 89,90-92,263-64 
266-68 ' 
Apolo8)'(Plato),93-94 226-27 
293 " 
Archaeolo8)' of Knowledge 
(Foucault), xxviii, 7 
Aristides, Aelius, 242 
Aristotle, xiii-xiv, xvi, xxix 13-14 
257,268 " 
ars erotica, 259-50 
art, xxxii-xxxiii, 261-62, 310-12 
Artemidorus, 90, 180, 182,241 
asceticism, xxiv, xxxvii, 137, 
182-83, 186,207-8 
care of the self and, 227, 238, 
265-66,274-75,282 
chastity and, 195 
modernity and, 311-12 
self-mastery in, 270-71 
virginity and, 274 
associative rights, 162 
Athanasius, 207-8, 220-21, 275 
Augustine, Saint, 180-82, 196, 
232,258,259,264 IN D EX 
Aurelius, Marcus, 100 101 105 
208,217,219-20,233 234 237 
238,284 ", 
authenticity, 262 
avarice, 186, 188 
BANISHMENT SOCIETIES 
(Greece),23 
Banquet (Xenophon), 258 
bars, 160-61 
Basaglia, F., 45 
Basil of Ancrya, 195 
Basil of Caesarea, 189 
baths, 146-47 
Baudelaire, Charles P., 
xxxii-xxxiii, 310-12 
Beccaria, C. de, 27, 29 
Berlinische Monatsschr,ift· xviii 
303 ' , 
biopolitics, 71, 73-79 
defined, 73 
liberalism and, 73-79 
Birth if the Clinic, The (Foucault) 
262-63 ' 
bisexuality, 152 
Blackstone, W., 27 
Biihm, Franz, 78 
Boswell, John, 141-42 
Boulainvilliers, H. de, 61, 63-64 
Boulez, Pierre, 130 
Brissot de Warville, 27, 29 
Brown, Peter, 179, 196 
Buddhism, 178 
Burckhardt, 278 
CANGUILHEM, GEORGES, xi, xix, 
xxxIx-xl 
Capital (Marx), 225 
care ofthe self, xxiii-xxiv, 269-70 
in ancient Greece, 226, 227-28 
242-49,284-88 ' asceticism and 227 238 
265-66, 274~75, 282 ' 
and free man versus 
philosopher, 293 
~overnmentality and, 88, 225 
III hermeneutic ofthe self 
93-94,224-28,281 ' 
in modern thought, 294-95 
politics and, 228-32, 235 
premises of, xxv-xxvi 
as renunciation of earthly 
attachments, 288 
self-knowledge and, 88 
and well-being of others, 287-88 
see also technologies of the self 
Care of the Self, The (Foucault) 
255 ' 
Cassian, John, 83-84, 183, 185-97, 
208, 240-41, 246-48 
Castel, Robert, 20, 256 
causality, 8-9 
celibacy, 189 
Charcot, Jean Martin, 44-47 
chastity, 185-97 
asceticism and, 195 
monasticism and, 194-96 
self-analysis and, 194 
stages of, 189-92 
virginity and, 94, 194,227 274 288 ' , 
Chicago School, 77, 78-79 
Christianity 
confession and, 178-79,223-24 
237, 242-45 ' 
culture of the self and, 277-80 
284-85 ' 
curiosity and, 325-26 
exagoreusis and, 81, 83, 245-49 
exomologesis and, 81-83, 
243-45,246,249 
humanism and, 314 
monasticism, 194-96, 234

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
power and, 68 
salvation in, 289 
sexual ethics of, 89, 90, 179-83, 
196,266-67 
spirituality of, 208, 210, 226, 
227-28,242-49,274-80 
technologies of the self and, 
208,210,226,227-28, 
242-49,274-80 
truth obligation in, 242-45 
see also asceticism 
Chrysostom, Saint, 189,246 
Cicero, 181,217,233-34,257 
City of God (SI. Augustine), 
180-81 
class consciousness, in 
homosexuality, 142-44,257 
Clausewitz, Karl von, xvi 
Clement of Alexandria, 190-91 
Cocteau, Jean, 148-49 
Coke, E., 61, 63 
College de France, xi-xiii, xvi, 
xxix, 5-10, 132, 281, 282, 289 
communication, problem of, 
297-98 
Confederation Fran~aise des 
Travailleurs Democratique 
(CFIT), xxiii 
Coriferences (Cassian), 83, 84, 185, 
188, 189, 192 
confessions 
Christianity and, 178-79, 
223-24,23~242-45 
hermeneutic role of, 248-49 
in penal and religious institu­
tions,82-83, 178-79,223-24, 
237,242-45,276 
Corifessions (Augustine), 232 
confinement societies 
penal institution, 23-37 
psychiatric hospital, 39-40, 
42-46, 52-53, 123-24 
conscience, 83-84 
examination of, 235-38, 245-49 
freedom of, 307 
Contra Julian (SI. Augustine), 
180-81 
Cooper, David, 45, 48 
Cornier, Henriette, 52, 55 
correspondence, 214-21 
notebooks (hupomnemata) 
versus, ~14, 217, 221 
relationship to self and, 217-20 
courtship, 149-50, 151, 170 
Critique 0/ Practical Reason, The 
(Kant), 279 
curiosity, xxi, 325-26 
Cynics, 97, 196,208, 232, 273 
Cyprian, 244 
DANIEL, JEAN, xvii-xviii, xxii 
death, 104-5,235,260 
fear of, 288-89 
penance and, 245 
salvation through, 289 Deleuze, Gilles, 20 
delinquency, 35-36, 88,116-17 
Demetrius, 98, 216 
Democritus,212 
depsychiatrization movement, 
45-50,256 
Descartes, Rene, 278, 279-80, 
294 
desire, xvii, xViii, xxviii, 263, 
268-69 
detachment, xxxviii 
dialectic, 167 
Dialogue on Love (Plutarch), 92 
Didache (Cassian), 188 
Didascalia, 82 
Dio of Prusa, 95 
discipline, 177-78 
Discipline and Punish (Foucault), 
xv, 263 
Discourses (Epictetus), 98, 103-4 
disparate truth, 212-13 
dreams, 180-81,237 
erotic, 192 
interpretation of, 90-91, 241-42 
drugs, and S&M phenomenon, 
165-66 
Du Buat-Nan~ay, L.-G., 61, 64 
ECOLOGICAL MOVEMENT, 295 
eidetic reductions, 239-40 
England, 31, 61-63, 77 
Enlightenment, xxvi, 303-19 
Baudelaire on, xxxii-xxxiii, 
310-12 
humanism and, 313-15 
Kant on, xviii, xxxi-xxxii, 
279-80,303-9,318-19 
modernity and, 309-12 
nature of, 312-13 
practical systems in, 317-18 
Epictetus, xxix, 96, 102, 103-5, 
208-9,212,235,240,241,260, 
268,270,276,284 
Epicureans, 94, 95, 97, 99, 101, 
212,214,219,237,240, 
260,270 
Epicurus, 95,103,212,214,227, 
232 
episteme, xliii 
Epistles (Jerome), 243-44 
Era of Ruptures (Daniel), 
xvii-xviii 
erotic dreams, 192 
eroticization of power, and S&M 
phenomenon, 165-70 
Esquirol, J.E.D., 42-44, 48 
Ethics (Aristotle), xiv 
ethopoietic writing, 209 
European Left, xxii, xxiii 
exagoreusis, 81, 83, 245-49 
examination, 18 
existentialism, 290 
exomologesis, 81-83, 243-45, 
246,249 FADERMAN, LILLIAN, 168 
Fall, the, 181 
family relationships, 54, 300 
see also marriage 
Farge, Arlette, 88 
Flaubert, Gustave, xxii 
Fontana, Alexandre, 20 
food, sexuality versus, 253, 259 
fornication, 184-85 
chastity and, 194 
varieties of, 188 
France, xxii, 63-64 
May rebellion of 1968, 125 
music in, 129-30 
provinces of, 124 
restrictions in, 122-23 
Frederick II, 308 
freedom, xxv 
of conscience, 307 
as ethical reality, 284-85, 286 
liberation versus, 282-83 
French Revolution, 31-32, 64 
Freret, N., 64 
Freud, Sigmund, 145-46, 155, 
240,284 
friendship, xxviii, xxxvi-xxxvii 
heterosexuality and, 171 
homosexuality and, xxxvi-
xxxviii, 135-40, 155, 159 
institutions and, 170-72 
reciprocity in, xxviii, 257-58 
between women, 138-39 
Fronto, 217, 219-20, 233, 234 
Le Gai Pied, 135, 170 
Galen, 91, 96, 98, 232 
games oftruth, xxvi, 281-82 
definition of, 297 
power relations and, 298-99 
subjectivation and, 289-90, 
296-99 
gay community, friendship and, 
xxxvi-xxxviii, 135-40, 155, 159 
Gay Science, The (Nietzsche), xiv, 
xxx, 14,262 
Genealogy of Morals, The 
(Nietzsche), 274-75 
genetics, xi-xii, 7-10 
Germany 
Ordo-liberalism, 77-78 
Polizeiwissenschaft, 70-71, 74 
ghettos, 146-47, 160-61, 167 
Gordon Riots, 31 
government, 67-71 
biopolitics, 71, 73-79 
and evolution of states, 60-61 
historico-political discourse on, 
61-63 
history of, 67-68, 203-4 
Poliuiwissenschaft, 70-71, 74 
population-wealth problem, 
69-70 
and "reason of state," 68-69 
and role of war in society, 63-64 
"truth regime" in, 81-85

governmentality, xvii, 74-76 
and care of the self, 88, 225 
power relations and, 300 
Grandjean, Anne, 51-52 
Greece, ancient, xxviii-xxix 
as banishment society, 23 
care of the self in, 226, 227-28, 
242-49,284-88 
homosexuality in, 149, 152, 162 
justice in, 15 
study of sexuality in, 142 
greed, 186, 187 
Gregory of Nyssa, 94, 195,227,288 
Guys, Constantin, 311 
HABERMAS, JORGEN, 177,298 
Hall, Kingsley, 48 
health 
medical care and, xxiii, 235, 
244,290,296 
pleasure and, 253, 258-60 
Hegelianism, 125 
heredity, xi-xii, 7-10 
hermeneutic of the self, 93-106 
Alcibiades on, 95-97 
care of of self in, 93-94, 224-28, 
281 
epimeleia heautou in, 93-95 
facing reality in, 99-102 
meditation practices in, 102-5 
in technologies ofthe self, 
223-51 
heroization, 310-12 
heterosexuality, xxxvii 
courtship in, 149-50, 151, 170 
friendship in, 171 
gay culture and, 160, 163-64 
homosexuality versus, 138, 141, 
149-52 
marriage and, 91, 136, 143-44, 
158-59,179,258,268 
heterosexual literature, 148-49, 
164 
Hierocles, 91 
Hippocrates, 226, 258, 265 
History of Sexuality, The 
(Foucault), xix, xv, xvii, xxiv, 
xxvii, xxviii 
ars erotica in, 259-50 
and "austere monarchy of sex," 
128-29,260-61 
ethical concerns in, 131,253-55 
genealogy of ethics and, 262-63, 
266 
preface to volume two, 199-205 
sexual fantasies and, 125-26 
Hobbes, Thomas, 63 
Holland, 158, 159 
homosexuality, xxiv, xxxvi-xxxviii 
in ancient Greece, 149, 152, 162 
class consciousness in, 142-44, 
257 
dissimilation and, 145-46 
friendship and, xxxvi-xxxviii, 
135-40, 155, 159 Index 
gay community and, xxxvi-
xxxvii, 135-40, 155, 159 
gay culture and, 159-61, 163-64 
and gay lifestyle, 153-54 
and gay rights movement, 
143-44, 157, 162, 163, 164, 
172-73 
heterosexuality versus, 138, 
141, 149-52 
history of, 141-42 
male versus female, 145 
as natural behavior, 127-28 
pederasty in, 92, 155, 159, 162, 
188-89,25~258,267 
in prison camps, 139 
reciprocity of pleasure in, 
257-58 
and sexual experimentation, 
150-51 
and S&M phenomenon, 
150-52, 165-70 
stereotypes of, 146 
of teachers, 144-45 
young people and, 152-53 
homosexual literature, 148-49, 
150, 164 
Hortensius (Cicero), 181 
Hotman, F., 63 
humanism, 313-15 
human monster, 51-52 
Husserl, Edmund, 78, 176 
hysteria, 126-27,291 
IDEAL TYPES OF MORAL SYSTEMS, 
xxvi-xxvii 
identity, 166 
writing and, 213-14 
immaturity, 305-7 
incest, 154-55 
individuality, 147, 158, 159 
inheritance laws, 158 
inquiry, 17-18, 18-19 
inquisitorial model, 19 
Institutes of the Cenobites 
(Cassian),83 
Institutiones (Cassian), 185-96 
intellectualism, 322 
interdiction, 52-53 
Interpretation of Dreams 
(Artemidorus),241 
De Ira (Seneca), 237, 245 
Iran, xxii-xxiii 
irony, xvi 
)socrates, 264, 265 
JEROME,243-44 
Jesuits, 171 
Joseph II (Austria), 25, 31 
Jousse, D., 24 
Julius, N.H., 26, 32 
justice 
distribution, 15 
penal institutions, 17-21 331 
KAAN, H., 55 
Kant, Immanuel, xviii, xxxi-xxxii, 
265,279-80,303-9,318-19,323 
Keynes, John Maynard, 78 
knowledge (savoir) 
learning (connaissance) versus, 
12-13 
madness and, 43 
power relations and, 289-91 
sexuality as correlation of 
domain of, 199-200 
theoretical problems of, 8-10 
LEARNED SOCIETY, 327-28 
learning (connaissance) 
domain of recognitions, 202-3 
knowledge (savoir) versus, 
12-13 
sexuality and, 199-200 
theoretical problems of, 8-10 
Leger, Antoine, 52 
Lessons On Prisons (Julius), 
26,32 
Letter to Menoeceus, 94, 227 
lettres de cachet, 24, 31, 88, 202 
Leuret, 175-76 
Levi, Sylvain, 326 
Levi-Strauss, Claude, xl, xxxix, 
155 
liberalism 
biopolitics and, 73-79 
Chicago School, 77, 78-79 
core of, 75-76 
derivation of, 76-77 
German (Ordo-liberalism), 
77-78 
liberation movements, 138, 
157-62 
defining and constructing desire 
in, 163-73 
gay rights, 143-44, 157, 162, 
163, 164, 172-73 
lesbian, 168-69 
problems of, 255-56 
women's movement, 164 
and work of self on self, 282-84 
libido, 182, 188, 191 
Life if Saint Antony (Athanasi us), 
220-21 
Lilburne, J., 61 
listening, 101,236 
literature 
heterosexual, 148-49, 164 
homosexual, 148-49, 150, 164 
of the self, 277. see also 
notebooks (hupomnemata) 
Livingston, F., 30 
logical pOSitivism, 176-77 
logos, 274, 286 
Louis XlV, 63-64 
Lucas, Charles, 26 
Lucian, 92, 149,232 
Lucilius, 98, 215, 217-19, 240 
Lucretius, 99, 238

Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
MACHISMO, 162 
madness, 5-6, 41-45, 114, 115, 
175-76,200,289-90,296 
see also psychiatric power; 
psychiatry 
Madness and Civilization 
(Foucault), 5-6,202,262 
Malle, Louis, 127 
marking societies (Western 
societies), 23 
marriage, 91, 136, 143-44, 158-59, 
179,258,268 
adultery and, 188-89 
Marullus, 215 
Marx, Karl, xxii, 225 
Marxism, 115, 125,202,314 
masked philosopher, xx-xxi, 
321-28 
anonymity and, 321-23 
intellectualism and, 322 
learned society and, 327-28 
mass media and, 324-26 
mass media, 324-26 
masturbation, 126-27, 183 
mathematics, 296 
measure, 17, 18 
mechanics, 35 
Medecins Sans Frontieres 
(Doctors Without Borders), xxiii 
medical care, xxiii, 91, 235, 244, 
290,296 
see also psychiatry 
meditation, 239-40, 270, 278 
and hermeneutic ofthe self, 
102-5 
writing as, 208-9, 214 
Meditations (Descartes), 294 
Meditations (Marcus Aurelius), 
237 
Memorabilia (Xenophon), 293 
Mendelssohn, Moses, 304 
mental illness. see madness 
mercantilism, 71 
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice, xix 
Metaphysics (Aristotle), xiv, 13, 
14 
Middle Ages, 18,23, 50, 170, 189, 
253,278 
mode of subjectivation, xxvii, 
xxx-xxxiii,264-65 
games of truth and, 289-90, 
296-99 
self-knowledge and, 87-92 
modernity, xviii, 309-12 
asceticism and, 311-12 
countermodernity, 310 
in philosophy, 303-4 
postmodernity, 309 
monasticism 
chastity and, 194-96 
Christianity and, 194-96,234 
self-examination in, 245-49 
see also asceticism 
moneychanger metaphor, 240-41, 
248 monosexual relations, 161-62 
Montaigne, 276, 278 
Morel, B.A., 55 
music, 129-30 
Muyart de Vouglans, P., 24 
My Dinner with Andre (Malle), 
127 
Nationaloekonomie, 77 
naturalism, of Aristotle, xiv 
Nazism, 78, 124,314 
Negri, loni, 322 
Neoplatonism, 226, 229 
Nichomachean Ethics (Aristotle), 
13 
Nicocles, 264, 267 
Nietzsche, Friedrich, xiii-xvi, xxix, 
xxx, 14, 125,262,274-75 
night watchman metaphor, 240 
nocturnal pollutions, 192-93 
notebooks (hupomnemata), 
209-14,271-74 
correspondence versus, 214, 
217,221 
formation of self through, 
211-14 
nature of, 209-11 
pu rpose of, 211 
Onania (Tissot), 53 
onanism, 53-55, 188 
Oneirocritica (Artemidorus), 90 
On the Contemplative Life (Philo 
of Alexandria), 94, 227, 236 
On the Daemon of Socrates 
(Plutarch), 103,240 
On Virginity (Gregory of Nyssa), 
227 
optics, 35 
Order of Things, The (Foucault), 
xi-xii, xxvi, 6-7, 262-63, 281 
PAGANISM, 224, 242 
Painter 0/ Modem Life, The 
(Baudelaire), xxxii-xxxiii, 
310-12 
panopticism, 32-36 
Papavoine, Louis Auguste, 52 
parent-child relationship, 54 
Pascal, Blaise, 278 
Pasteur, Louis, 40-41, 44, 45, 46 
pederasty, 92, 155, 159, 162, 
188-89,25~258,267 
Le Peletier de Saint-Fargeau, 27, 
29 
penal theories and institutions, 
17-37 
and age of panopticism, 32-36 
delinquency and, 35-36 
dysfunctions caused by prison, 
25-26 
features of confinement, 30-31 
inquisitorial model, 19 
penal law, 203 
penal psychiatry, 20-21 power relations and, 17-18, 
32-36,281-82 
reform of, 25-30 
types of punishment, 23-25, 
34-35 
penance, 82-83 
performative speech act, 176 
Peter, Jean-Pierre, 20 
Phaedrus (Plato), 272 
phenomenology, 125, 202, 290 
Philo of Alexandria, 94, 101,227, 
236 
physics of power, 35 
physiology, 35 
Pinel, Philippe, 118 
Plato, 88, 93-94, 100,226-27, 
228-31, 232, 234-36, 255, 
257-58, 260, 265, 268, 272, 
275,276,293,304 
pleasure, xxxvii, 129,268-69 
aphrodisia and, 89,90-92, 
263-64,266-68 
asceticism and, 137 
health and, 253, 258-60 
reciprocity of, 256-58 
and S&M phenomenon, 165-70 
Pliny, 217, 232, 234, 260 
Plutarch, 91, 92, 94-97,100-104, 
208-10,235,236,240,257,286 
Poland, xxiii, 122-23 
polemics, 111-13 
police, 171 
politics, 77 
care of the self and, 228-32, 
235 
and homosexual movement, 
143-44, 157, 162, 163, 164, 
172-73 
link with philosophy, 293 
sexuality and, 114 
subjectivation and, 264-65 
truth in, 295-96 
.5ee also biopolitics 
Polizeiwissenschaji, 70-71, 74 
population-wealth problem, 69-70 
pornography, 143 
postmodernity, 309 
power relations, xiv-xvi, xxxv 
capacity and, 317 
care ofthe self and, 287-88 
dangers of, 300-301 
discipline and, 177-78 
domination and, 283 
as evil, 298-99 
government and, 203-4 
knowledge and, 289-91 
mass media and, 324-26 
mobility of, 292 
nature of, 291-93 
penal theories and institutions 
and, 17-18,32-36,281-82 
psychiatric power, 41-50 
resistance in, 167-69,292-93, 
299-300 
self-mastery and, 267

shift in views of, xvii 
in S&M subculture, 150-52, 
165-70 
sovereignty and, xv-xvii, 59-60 
technologies of, 177, 225 
truth and, 296 
pride, 186-88 
prison camps, 139 
prisons. see penal theories and 
institutions 
problematization, xliv, xxxvi, 114, 
117-19,289-90,294,318 
production, technologies of, 177, 
225 
prophetism, 131-32 
prostitution, 146 
Proust, Marcel, 146, 150 
Proust and the Art cif Love 
(Rivers), 146 
prudishness, 149 
psychiatric power, 41-50 
and attitudes toward madness, 
41-45 
depsychiatrization movement, 
45-50,256 
hospital's role in, 39-40, 42-46, 
52-53, 123-24 
in penal psychiatry, 20-21 
and thought and practice of 
physicians, 40-41 
psychiatry 
games of power in, 281-82 
history of, 115, 116-17, 123-24, 
131-32,200,202,291 
psychoanalysis, 47 
Psychopathia Sexualis (Kaan), 55 
Pythagoras, 240 
Pythagoreans, 101, 103,208,219, 
232, 236, 237, 273 
RAPE, 143 
rationalism, 313 
reading, writing and, 211-12, 254 
reality, 99-102 
Rechtstaat, 77 
reciprocity, of pleasure, 256-58 
redemption societies (German), 
23 
reflection, 101 
relationship to self, 131,204 
reading and, 211-12, 254 
writing and, 211-14, 217-19 
see also care ofthe self; 
technologies of the self 
Remusat, c., 24 
Renaissance, 50, 278 
repression, xv, 126-27, 141-42, 
146-48, 160 
De Rerum natura (Lucretius), 238 
resistance, in power relations, 
167-69,292-93,299-300 
rhetoric, 232 
Rieff, Philip, 147-48 
Riot, Phillippe, 20 
Riviere, Pierre, 20-21, 36 Index 
Roepke, W., 78 
Rolland, Romain, 129-30 
Rorty, Richard, 114 
Rosanvallon, P., 76 
Rossi, P., 30 
Rubin, Gayle, 165 
Rufus, Musonius, 91, 95-96, 103, 
232 
Sacred Discourses 
(Aelius Aristide), 242 
Saint-Hilaire, Geoffroy, 55 
Saison, Maryvonne, 20 
Sales, SI. Fran~ois de, 179 
Sartre, Jean-Paul, 262, 298-99 
Schmidt, Daniel, 121 
La Scienza nuova (Vico), 305 
Selden, J., 63 
self-analysis, 194,277 
self-examination, 245-49 
self-government, sexuality and, 
89,90-92 
self-knowledge, 87-92 
and care of the self, 88 
ontological form of, 275-76 
sexuality in, 89, 90-92 
self-mastery, 267, 270-71, 278 
self-reflection, 101 
semiology, 176-77 
Seneca, xxix, 96-100, 102-5, 
208-19,232-34,235,237-38, 
240,244,245-49,260,268 
Sennett, Richard, 145-46, 179 
Serenus, 192 
Serpillon, F., 24 
sexual ethics, xxviii 
of Christianity, 89, 90, 179-83, 
196,266-67 
of monastic life, 195-96,234 
sexuality 
and choice ofloves, 92, 143, 144 
Christianity and, 179-83 
food versus, 253, 259 
formation of domains of 
knowledge about, 204-5 
human rights regarding, 164 
interpretation of dreams and, 
90-91 
liberation of, 283-84 
in married life, 91 
medical regimens in, 91 
moral attitude toward, 116-17 
nature of, 163 
onanism, 53-55, 188 
polities and, 114 
power relations in, 150-52, 
165-70,298-99 
repression and, xv, 126-27, 
141-42, 146-48, 160 
in self-knowledge, 89, 90-92 
tolerance in, 154-55 
see also heterosexuality; 
homosexuality; liberation 
movements 
sign systems, technologies of, 
177,225 silence, 121-22, 236 
single persons, 159 
slavery, 288 333 
S&M phenomenon, 150-52, 
165-70 
Socialism, 78 
Socratics, 208, 273 
solitude, 159, 175-84 
writing and, 207-8 
Sophists, 104 
sovereignty 
establishment of, 63 
power relations and, xv-xvii, 
59-60 
spirituality 
Christian, 208, 210, 226, 227-28, 
242-49,274-80 
philosophy and, 294 
Statesman, The (Plato), 304 
Steiner, George, 148 
Stoics, xxxviii, 97, 99-101, 102, 
196,212,219,232,234-36,238, 
239-40,241,245,254,264-67, 
270,276,279,284-86,289 
subjectivation. see mode of 
subjectivation 
substitute confinement, 24 
surety confinement, 24 
Surpassing the Lave o/Men 
(Faderman), 168 
Synesius ofCyrene, 241-42 
systems ofthought, xi, 201-2 
Szasz, Thomas S., 48 
TECHNOLOGIES OF THE SELF, 
177-78,223-51 
in Christian spirituality, 208, 
210,226,227-28,242-49, 
274-80 
correspondence as, 232, 233-34 
development of, 225-28 
dream interpretation as, 90-91, 
241-42 
examination of self and 
conscience in, 235-38, 245-49 
in Greco-Roman philosophy, 
225-42,254-55,259-60, 
272-74,282,284-85 
remembering, 238-41 
types of technologies and, 177, 
224-25 
see also c~re of the self; 
relationship to self 
telos, xxxvii-xl, 268 
Tertullian, 194,243,244 
Thierry, AJ., 65 
thought 
criticism and, 201 
definition of, xxxiv-xxxv 
historicity of, 201 
irreducibility of, 201 
systems of, xi, 201-2 
theoretical formulations 
concerning, 200-202 
Tissot, Simon, 53

334 Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth 
tolerance, 154-55 
De Tranquillitae (Seneca), 257 
transference, 47 
Treatise on Virginity (Gregory of 
Nyssa), 94, 288 
truth 
games of, xxvi, 281-82, 289-90, 
296-99 
power relations and, 296, 
298-99 
truth obligation, 177-78 
Christianity and, 242-45 
confessions and, 225-24 
"truth regime," 81-85 
UNIFICATION, writing and, 215 
Uses 0/ Pleasure, The (Foucault), 
xxx,xxxiv 
utopia, 161,298 
VAINGLORY, 186 
Van Ussel, J., 55 
verbalization, 84, 249 
see also confessions 
Veyne, Paul, xxi, 67, 75 
Vieo, Giovanni Battista, 505 
Vio, Tomaso de, 81 
virginity, 94, 194,227,274,288 
Vita Antonii (Athanasius), 207-8, 
275 
Wahl, Fran~oise, xxi 
warfare, xv-xvi, 59-65 
and evolution of states, 60-61 
role of, in society, 65-64 
watchman metaphor, 240 
Weber, Max, xxiv-xxv, xxx, 78, 
224,282 
While Paper, The (Cocteau), 
148-49 
Wilde, Oscar, 147-48 
will to knowledge, xii-xiv, 
xvi-xvii, 11-16 
conceptual tools for analyzing, 
12-14 
discursive practices and, 11-12 
modes of transformation 
and,12 
will to truth, xii-xiv, xxix-xxx, 
xxxix 
women 
friendship between, 158-59 
homosexuality of, 145, 168-69 
see also heterosexuality; 
marriage 
World War II, 176 
writing, 101,207-22 
correspondence, 214-21, 232, 
255-34 
as meditation, 208-9, 214 
notebooks (hupomnemala), 
209-14,271-74 
reading and, 211-12, 254 relationship to selfand, 211-14, 
217-19,271-80 
self-training in, 208-9, 275 
solitude and, 207-8 
spiritual, 208, 210 
XENOPHON, 95, 226, 258, 268, 
269,275,295 
ZENO, 219