Psychological Medicine
cambridge.org/psm
Correspondence
Cite this article: Radoilska L, Foreman D
(2023). Epistemic justice is both a legitimateand an integral goal of psychiatry: a reply toKious, Lewis and Kim (2023). Psychological
Medicine 53, 6939 –6940. https://doi.org/
10.1017/S003329172300082X
Received: 5 March 2023
Accepted: 14 March 2023
First published online: 24 April 2023
Corresponding author:
Lubomira Radoilska;
E-mail: L.V.Radoilska@kent.ac.uk
© The Author(s), 2023. Published by
Cambridge University Press
Epistemic justice is both a legitimate and an
integral goal of psychiatry: a reply to Kious,Lewis and Kim (2023)
Lubomira Radoilska1
and David Foreman2
1Department of Philosophy, University of Kent, UK and2Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience,
King ’s College London, London, UK
In a recent Editorial, Kious, Lewis, and Kim ( 2023 ) put forward the claim that psychiatrists
should resist calls to integrate concerns about epistemic injustice into their practice as this con-cept not only fails to add significantly to the current professional standards but would also leadto deleterious clinical outcomes. We believe their claim is mistaken, as it arises from severalmisconceptions about both the nature of epistemic injustice and its clinical relevance. First,epistemic justice is conflated with what the authors term ‘a quest for social justice ’that
could ‘sideline principles of good clinical reasoning ’(Kious et al., 2023 , p. 4). Second, the
claim about the impracticality and/or counterproductivity of epistemic injustice as a criticaltool within psychiatric practice reflects a series of misconceptions about the normative frame-work from which this concept derives, so the standards they evaluate it against are ill-chosen.Pace Kious et al., fostering epistemic justice in any area of knowledge and inquiry could not –
unwittingly or otherwise –inhibit the consideration of relevant evidence, restrict sound argu-
ment or facilitate the casual treatment of testimonies at face value. Third and final, this claimobfuscates some immediate ways in which a focus on epistemic justice as an integral goal willstrengthen psychiatric practice according to its own internal standards. The following discus-
sion will expand on these three critical points in turn.
Doing justice to ‘epistemic justice ’
Kious et al. seek to respond to perceived allegations that psychiatry is epistemically unjust since
many psychiatrists perpetrate epistemic injustice against their patients ( 2023 , p. 2). The kind of
injustice under consideration is testimonial. It occurs when, for instance, a psychiatrist treats a
psychiatric patient as less credible an informant merely in virtue of their being a psychiatric
patient. So, the focus is on truthful patient reports that have been discarded by clinicians asunreal because they are interpreted as a symptom of a mental disorder, e.g. a patient with delu-sions of grandeur is presumed to be delusional when he truthfully reports that he is related to ahigh-ranking foreign official.
Kious et al. assume that cases such asthe above are the evidence base for the perceived allegations
that psychiatry is unjust and proceed to demonstrate that, for all that we know, such cases, if at allproblematic, might be unavoidable accident, not expressions of injustice. In so doing, the authorsfail to appreciate that these cases might be used to illustrate some normative and theoretical argu-ments for the relevance of epistemic justice to psychiatry. The validity of such arguments wouldnot rest on how often a particular illustration happens to be replicated or not in clinical practice.
This conflation between illustrative material and evidence base indicates a graver miscon-
ception about the point of achieving epistemic justice in psychiatry. As Kious et al. ( 2023 ,p .4 )
point out: ‘In an environment where epistemic justice is emphasized, we worry that the scales
could be tilted too far away from truth-finding ’. This worry derives from the authors ’apparent
inability to grasp that epistemic justice has an inherent epistemic dimension: it provides uswith the critical tools to investigate and counteract the ways in which unacknowledged socialprejudices, if left unchecked, would distort, undermine and prevent both knowledge produc-tion and its communication and translation into practice. The particular attention to inputfrom vulnerable and underprivileged contributors serves the purpose of removing inappropri-ate epistemic barriers while reinforcing and applying consistently appropriate checks to coun-ter unmerited epistemic privilege. For both undue epistemic barriers and undue epistemicprivilege lead to universal loss of knowledge, where everyone is adversely affected. Examplesinclude core social practices, such as holding each other responsible where irrelevant modesof reasoning might impact our collective deliberations due to social prejudice, thus leadingto collective loss of vital insights (Radoilska, 2021 ). In this context, counselling psychiatrists
to steer away from epistemic justice as ‘antithetical to appropriate clinical scepticism ’(ibid.)
is extremely unfortunate, leading to missed opportunities to foster shared knowledge andunderstanding, with direr practical implications for unduly underprivileged, but direr epi-stemic implications for unduly privileged contributors.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S003329172300082X  Published online by Cambridge University Press

Who ’s afraid of epistemic justice?
The lack of recognition for the epistemic core of epistemic justice
and respectively injustice has a further unfortunate upshot, thesharp contrast between a moral wrong and just a mistake thatKious et al. ( 2023 , p. 3) employ to show that many of the
instances of testimonial injustice in psychiatry that their oppo-nents identify can be interpreted as honest mistakes and shouldtherefore be deemed as irrelevant to questions of epistemic (in)justice. The thought seems to be that honest mistakes can occa-sionally result from following the correct procedures and forminga clinical judgement on the basis of the evidence available at aparticular moment in time. Later on, this evidence might besuperseded, thus retrospectively giving reason for a very differentclinical judgement. Yet, the discovery of such a mistake –if indeed
it can be called that –is no ground for abandoning evidence-
based reasoning in one ’s future clinical practice, which the
authors wrongly assume is the only way to secure testimonial just-ice for psychiatric patients (see, however, Medina, 2013 ;
Radoilska, 2020 ).
Yet, as shown earlier, a commitment to epistemic, including
testimonial justice does not require anyone to abandon evidence-based reasoning in these or any other cases. For issues of testimo-nial injustice do not arise from the fact that we are somehowconstrained by the relevant evidence as opposed to our interlocu-tors ’wishes that we believe them anyway. Instead, these issues
derive from discounting relevant evidence by, for instance,excluding some sources as unreliable without good reason.
Importantly, testimonial injustice is typically not committed
intentionally. In this sense, it may be qualified as ‘just a mistake ’
as long as we do not lose sight of it being systematic and an insidi-ous moral wrong as well as a grievous epistemic harm. This iswhat makes epistemic injustice extremely difficult to addresswithout any critical tools specifically developed for this purposeand drawing on both expertise by experience and a wide rangeof disciplines, including but not limited to epistemology, ethics,law, economics and sociology.
Why should psychiatry be epistemically just?
As a branch of medicine, psychiatry understands the risks of bias,
and adopted the phenomenological turn to engage the subjectivitythat underlies psychopathology while minimising the effects ofprior prejudice. When we ‘put the world in brackets ’, we assess
subjective phenomena in their own terms, with our own realityalso considered in terms of our subjectivity. Ever since Aristotle,we have understood justice to mean treating equal things equallyand unequal things unequally, which implies we should seek reli-ability and validity in the application of values as much as we dowhen we adduce factual evidence. Epistemic justice tries toaddress the very question Kious et al. elide, which is, how canwe reduce bias in values? Evidence-based models of medicaldecision-making explicitly integrate values into the decision pro-cess (Hunink et al., 2001 ), but without epistemic justice we do nothave a robust methodology to limit bias in how values are
included and integrated with factual evidence. The facts do notdisappear when we turn to values, but instead are re-created astestimony, and Kious et al. do not consider that expert opinionis expert testimony, which should be evaluated differently fromnaïve testimony, even though both have a validity and reliabilityof their own. By failing to do so, they draw the wrong conclusionthat the processes of establishing epistemic justice silence profes-sionalism. That would be hermeneutic injustice, which Kiouset al. do not discuss.
Clearly, testimonial values may conflict. Within biomedical
ethics, Beauchamp and Childress ( 1994 ) have discussed this
extensively and provide a solution, if we consider that testimonialjustice towards patients is captured by their principle of respectfor autonomy. They point out that, in practice, conflict betweenprinciples is the rule, rather than the exception, when principlesare accurately specified in terms of real circumstances. They rec-ommend a process of dialectic and balancing to find an optimalsolution, which however will depend on the values recruited,and how they are weighted. Epistemic justice is about developinga methodology that can address those questions. So, it is central tothe practice of good medicine, unlike Kious et al. claim.
Conclusion
We have shown that Kious et al. have misunderstood epistemic
justice, and hence its value to psychiatry. It is not synonymouswith social justice, nor does it deny the value of expertise.
Instead, the conceptual tools associated with it offer a method
for improving reliability and validity in the realm of values. It isnow accepted that practice should be based on more than mereopinion. Working with epistemic justice enables us to adduce evi-dence to support values which we have previously only been ableto assert, frequently in the face of contrary ones. So, epistemicjustice represents an advance in our methodology of values, andshould become as much part of psychiatric culture as advancesin statistical theory or brain visualisation.
References
Beauchamp, T. L., & Childress, J. F. (1994). Principles of biomedical ethics .
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hunink, M., Glasziou, P., Siegel, J., Weeks, J., Pliskin, J., Elstein, A., &
Weinstein, M. (2001). Decision making in health and medicine:
Integrating evidence and values . Cambridge University Press.
Kious, B. M., Lewis, B. R., & Kim, S. Y. H. (2023). Epistemic injustice and the
psychiatrist. Psychological Medicine ,53,1 –5.https://doi.org/10.1017/
S0033291722003804
Medina, J. (2013). The epistemology of resistance: Gender and racial oppression,
epistemic injustice, and the social imagination . Oxford University Press.
Radoilska, L. (2020). (Ed.) Epistemic injustice and agency. Ethical Theory and
Moral Practice ,23(5), 703 –845.
Radoilska, L. (2021). Circumstance, answerability, and luck. The Monist ,
104(2), 155 –167. https://doi.org/10.1093/monist/onaa0296940 Correspondence
https://doi.org/10.1017/S003329172300082X  Published online by Cambridge University Press