Running Head: The lived experience of people with misophonia  
1 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The lived experiences of people with misophonia in educational, work, and everyday  
settings: an Interpretative Phenomenological Analysis

Running Head: The lived experience of people with misophonia  
2 
 Acknowledgements  
We would like to  express our sincere gratitude to the participant s in the study, without whom this 
study would not have been possible.    
Data Availability Statement  
The data that support the findings of this study are available on request from the corresponding 
author. The data are not publicly available due to privacy or ethical restrictions.  
Funding statement  
The study did not receive funding.  
Conflict of interest disclosure  
There are no conflicts of interest to report.  
Ethics approval statement  
This study gained approval from the Research Ethics Committee of the School of Human 
Sciences at the University of Greenwich and adheres to BPS ethical guidelines.

Running Head: The lived experience of people with misophonia  
3 
 Abstract  
Background and Objectives  
Misophonia is a condition characterised by the experience of negative emotional and 
physiological reactions to specific sounds, such as chewing , pen tapping  or sniffing (Potgieter et 
al., 2019). People suffering from misophonia experience irrational and di sproportionate feelings 
of anger, disgust, and harm ideation that negatively impact their lives. The current study aims to 
address a  gap in  the literature by exploring people ’s lived experience with self-diagnosed 
misophonia in educational, work, and everyday settings.  
Methods  
Five interviews were conducted with individuals who self -diagnosed  as having  misophonia . 
Interview transcripts were analysed using Interpretative Phenomenological Analysis .  
Results  
The analysis revealed four superordinate  themes: ‘Phenomenology of the misophonia reaction ’, 
‘Susceptibility to triggering sounds ’, ‘Coping strategies when triggered ’, and ‘Levels of attention 
and concentration ’. Misophonia was reported as having wide -ranging effects on mental health 
and familial /social relationships . Coping strategies that re -direct attention and concentration , 
such as m indfulness techniques , were reported to be effective in ameliorating aversive reaction s.  
Conclusions  
The findings provide the first phenomenological insight into misophonia  through  ideographical 
analysis of a small number of cases . Future research and implications of the study are discussed.  
Keywords: misophonia, phenomenology , attention,  lived experiences, Interpretative 
Phenomenological Analysis

Running Head: The lived experience of people with misophonia  
4 
 Introduction  
Misophonia is a complex condition characterised by irrational and negative emotional and 
physiological reaction s to certain sounds , which disrupts a person ’s capacity to function 
effectively (Brout et al., 2018 ; Jastreboff & Jastreboff, 2001; Potgieter et al., 2019; Wu et al., 
2014). It was first recognised in 1997 and referred to as Selective Sound Sensitivity Syndrome, 
or 4S (Bernstein et al., 2013), and was then later referred to as misophonia by Jas treboff and 
Jastreboff (2001). Misophonia is known to be a persistent, chronic condition that generally 
worsens with time and is associated with a decreased quality of life (Cavanna, 2014; Claiborn et 
al., 2020; Edelstein et al., 2013; Schröder et al., 201 3; Wu et al., 2014). The current study aims to 
explore the lived experiences of people with misophonia by conducting an Interpretative 
Phenomenological Analysis  of a small number of self -diagnosed cases . We selected self -
diagnosed cases as formal diagnoses  of misophonia remain very rare.  
People with misophonia experience abnormally intense reactions to specific sounds. Most 
commonly, such sounds can be oral or nasal, such as chewing, heavy breathing, sniffling, and 
coughing, but can also include repetitive  clicking, typing, tapping, noise from using utensils or 
keys, and a clock ticking, among others (Dozier, 2015a; Hansen et al., 2021; Jager et al., 2020; 
Jastreboff & Jastreboff, 2002; Wu et al., 2014). When triggered by such sounds, people report 
experien cing irrational levels of anger, disgust, frustration, extreme irritation, hate, distress, 
anxiety, and harmful ideations towards the source of the noise (Dozier, 2015; Jager et al., 2020; 
Jastreboff & Hazell, 2004;  Potgieter et al., 2019). Furthermore, the neurophysiological reaction 
manifests in heavy breathing (Dozier, 2015), muscle tension, pressure and/or pain in the chest, 
arms, or head (Bernstein et al., 2013; Edelstein et al., 2013), as well as increased muscu lar tone,

Running Head: The lived experience of people with misophonia  
5 
 tachycardia, hypertension, and hyperthermia (Cavanna, 2015). In addition, people with 
misophonia often report feeling a lack of self -control and a desire to act out in triggering 
situations (Schröder et al., 2013; Tunç and Başbuğ, 2017). Research  findings suggest that people 
experience stronger reactions to triggers when in familiar environments, such as being around 
family, friends, or in educational or work settings (Bernstein et al., 2013; Edelstein et al., 2013). 
The most common coping strateg ies include wearing earplugs or headphones, avoiding 
triggering situations, engaging in positive internal dialogue, confrontation, and even quitting 
work (Dozier, 2015; Edelstein et al., 2013; Potgieter et al.,2019; Sanchez & Silva, 2018; 
Schröder et al., 2013; Schröder et al., 2017; Wu et al., 2014). Moreover, some extreme cases 
report attempts of self -induced deafness (Veale, 2006) and even suicide (Alekri & Al Saif, 2019) 
directly linked to misophonic experiences. Evidently, misophonia is a highly distre ssing 
condition that negatively affects the sufferers ’ lives.  
Prevalence and Onset  
According to research, the prevalence of misophonia varies, ranging from 6% (Zhou et 
al., 2017) to 20% (Wu et al., 2014) and has been reported as high as 49.1% (Naylor et al ., 2021). 
Although, misophonia is a widely experienced condition (Alekri & Al Saif, 2019; Quek et al., 
2018; Zhou et al., 2017) only a small number of individuals report experiencing severe to 
extreme reactions (Naylor et al., 2021). The onset of misophoni a typically occurs in early 
adolescence, around 13 years of age (Dozier, 2015; Edelstein et al., 2013; Rouw & Erfanian, 
2018; Schröder et al., 2013), with some studies reporting onset as early as seven years of age and 
as late as 50 years of age (Claiborn et al. 2020). Earlier onset age is associated with a greater 
level of misophonia severity, which is correlated positively with the severity of physical

Running Head: The lived experience of people with misophonia  
6 
 reactions and a greater range of triggering sounds (Claiborn et al., 2020). Edelstein et al. (2013) 
sugg est that misophonia is a disorder that produces distinct autonomic effects not seen in 
typically developed individuals. However, Claiborn et al. (2020) argue that the later -life onset 
supports the notion that misophonia is a conditioned response rather tha n a neurodevelopmental 
one.  
Diagnostic criteria , comorbidity  and treatment  
Misophonia remains an under -studied condition, with unclear aetiology and rudimentary 
diagnostic conceptualisation (Brout et al., 2018; Cavanna & Seri, 2015; Palumbo et al., 2018; 
Taylor, 2017). Currently, there are no established diagnostic criteria withi n the  Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders  (5th ed.; DSM –5; American Psychiatric Association, 
2013) or the International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems 10th 
revision (ICD ‐10; Kumar et al., 2017; Potgiete r et al. 2019). In audiology literature, misophonia 
is considered to be categorizable with disorders such as tinnitus (perception of internally abstract 
sounds), hyperacusis (heightened sensitivity toward normal intensity or louder sounds) and 
phonophobia (extreme fear of specific sounds ; Jastreboff & Hazel, 2004; Jastreboff & Jastreboff, 
2015; Potgieter et al., 2019). While in psychological literature, misophonia is linked to 
conditions such as obsessive -compulsive disorder (OCD ; Cusack et al., 2018; Reid et al., 2016), 
anxiety (Quek et al., 2018), depression, attention -deficit  hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), 
Tourette syndrome, posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD), eating disorders (Kluckow et al., 
2014), panic disorders, and personality disorders, among oth er conditions (Erfanian et al., 2019; 
Rouw & Erfanian, 2018; Wu et al., 2014; Zhou et al., 2017).  
Furthermore, Natalini et al. (2020) assessed personality disorders  and maladaptive

Running Head: The lived experience of people with misophonia  
7 
 interpersonal schemas in three people with misophonia. They reported that all the participants 
reported experiencing severe misophonic symptoms and suffered from at least one personality 
disorder . In particular, obsessive -compulsive personality disorder (OCPD) , and heightened 
maladaptive interpersonal schemas  are prominent , with perfectionism being represented in all 
cases. Notably, one of the main limitations of Natalini et al ’s (2020) study is the small sample 
limiting the generalisability of their findings. Further, Natalini et al. (2020) also failed to explore 
the under lying causes of the personality disorders  in each participant. Therefore, the results are 
insufficient to establish a relationship between misophonia and personality disorders . Although 
the findings have clinical implications, the relationship between miso phonia and personality 
disorders  should be explored further to provide sufficient evidence for the relationship between 
the two conditions (Jager et al., 2020; Kumar et al., 2017; Schröder et al., 2013) . However, 
Natalini et al ’s (2017) results support the findings of Schröder et al. (2013), who reported OCPD 
in over half of their study sample (42 patients). Additionally, a recent study by Cassiello -Robbins 
et al. (2021) suggests that individuals with severe misophonia are more likely to meet the criteria 
for a personality disorder . However, the sample size in the studies is also relatively small, 
reducing the generalisability and validity of their conclusions (Cassiello -Robbins et al., 2021, 
Schröder et al., 2013).  
While there is current ly no scientifically supported treatment for misophonia, preliminary 
research (Schroder et al., 2017) and case studies (Bernstein et al., 2013; McGuire et al., 2015; 
Muller et al., 2018) suggest that Cognitive Behaviour Therapies (CBTs) can help reduce 
symptom severity. For example, Schröder et al. (2017) conducted a study where 90 participants 
with misophonia attended eight bi -weekly CBT sessions, with 48% reporting an improvement in

Running Head: The lived experience of people with misophonia  
8 
 their condition. Other case studies report similar results (Cecilione et al., 2021; Muller et al., 
2018; Reid et al., 2016; Schneider & Arch, 2017; Vanaja et al., 2020). However, the studies ’ 
sample consisted predominantly of female adolescents, questioning whether treatment would 
have similar effects on other populations. Desp ite that, CBT methods and techniques such as , 
desensitisation, assertiveness training, emotion regulation, counterconditioning, pre -recorded 
files/in -vivo exposures, avoiding earplugs, or sessions with counsellors were reported to be 
effective in decreasin g misophonia severity (Bernstein et al., 2013; Schneider & Arch , 2017; 
Roushani & Mehrabizadeh Honarmand, 2021).  Alekri and Saif (2019) also report on the 
effective use of Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors (SSRI) alongside psychotherapy.  
Neurophysiology  findings  
According to Møller (2011), there is increased connectivity between the limbic and the 
sympathetic nervous systems, which are associated with abnormal processing of sounds. 
Schröder et al. (2014) used EEG and the oddball paradigm t o measure auditory event ‐related 
potentials (ERPs) differences. In a sample of 20 individuals with misophonia and 14 matched 
controls, they found that the mean amplitude of a marker N1, which is linked to early attention 
and detection of abrupt sensory cha nges (Rinne et al., 2006), was significantly diminished in 
patients with misophonia. These results suggest an underlying neurobiological deficit in people 
with misophonia and a basic impairment in auditory processing  in misophonia patients. 
Additionally, J astreboff and Jastreboff (2013) proposed that misophonia follows the principles of 
conditioned reflexes with enhanced activity between the auditory and the limbic systems of the 
brain.  
San Giorgi (2015) reported similar findings ; they conducted an fMRI st udy and found

Running Head: The lived experience of people with misophonia  
9 
 hyperactivation in the auditory cortex and the left amygdala, which is a region associated with 
emotional reactivity. Moreover, fMRI data by Kumar et al. (2017) suggests that for people with 
misophonia, triggering sounds activate hyperactivit y in the anterior insular cortex (AIC) ,  a 
region associated with sensory processing, decision -making, and motor control . There is  
abnormal functional connectivity between the AIC region and medial frontal, medial parietal, 
and temporal regions, as well as abnormal myelination in the medial frontal cortex. Recently, 
Kumar et al. (2021) proposed a model for misophonia based on “hyper -mirroring ” of the 
orofacial actions of others and reported that there is increased functional connectivity between 
the auditory, visual, and motor cortices in people with misophonia emphasising the complex 
nature of the condition. Additionally, Schröder et  al. (2019) reported similar findings to suggest 
that specific audio -visual cues may elicit increased activity in the right insula, right  anterior 
cingulate cortex  (ACC), and right superior temporal cortex (auditory cortex and silenced 
network) in people w ith misophonia. These findings further support the notion that misophonia 
has distinguished underlying symptomology.  
Attention and Concentration  
One of the main characteristics of misophonia is the overwhelming reaction in people and 
the effect it has on t heir functioning. Seaborne & Fiorella (2018) performed a comprehension test 
on a sample of college students. Despite the results being non -significant, they observed that the 
students who had higher sensitivity to misophonia sounds performed worse on the 
comprehension test but performed better in the control group, and misophonia sensitivity 
significantly moderated the effect of the trigger sound on learning. Furthermore, Silva and 
Sanchez (2019) stated that people with misophonia may have an impairment in their selective

Running Head: The lived experience of people with misophonia  
10 
 attention. They performed a Dichotic Sentence Identification (DSI) on 40 normal -hearing 
participants: 10 with misophonia, 10 with tinnitus and without misophonia, and 20 with both 
misophonia and tinnitus. They concluded that there was a sig nificant difference in the average 
number of correct responses for people with misophonia compared to the two other groups, 
suggesting that individuals with misophonia may have selective attention impairment when 
exposed to triggering sounds. Additionally,  Daniels et al. (2020) conducted a Stroop effect task 
on misophonia participants and matched controls. Results suggest that a stronger misophonia 
reaction is associated with a higher Stroop effect, meaning that more severe levels of misophonia 
are associat ed with worse cognitive control. Moreover, Frank et al. (2020) administrated the 
Attention Network Test (ANT) to 11 people with misophonia and 11 matched controls. They 
observed that the misophonic group had difficulties achieving and maintaining attention  during 
the experiment. However, due to the cross -sectional nature  of the study , it was not possible to 
conclude whether that difference is based on a previous underlying neuropsychological 
deficiency.  
Rationale and Current Study  
To the best of the author s' knowledge, the only qualitative study on misophonia is Dozier 
and Morrison's (2017) interview study on physical and emotional responses. . Twenty -seven 
participants took part in brief online interviews  in which various trigger stimuli were activated 
and responses were discussed . The  results focus ed on physical responses to auditory and visual 
triggers . The study  report ed physical responses to triggers in a range of locations across the body, 
including  the shoulders, neck, jaw, thighs and toes. There is also a brief tabular presentation of 
emotional responses, which are anger, anxiety, desire for escape, disgust, fear, and sadness. This

Running Head: The lived experience of people with misophonia  
11 
 single interview -based qualitative study provides important informati on on physical and 
emotional responses . However,  there remains a need for a presentation of first-person , in-depth 
information on experiences with misophonia  to convey the subjective lifeworld of people who 
struggle with this condition . The current study a ims to address that gap in the literature and 
extend previous knowledge by examining people ’s experiences with misophonia in their 
academic, work, and everyday lives. Deriving from previous literature we propose the following 
research questions aiming to e xplore four areas of people ’s lives: phenomenology, symptoms 
severity, coping and attention:  
RQ1: What is the phenomenology of the misophonic reaction?  
RQ2: Do people with misophonia perceive any links between their symptoms ’ severity and life 
events?  
RQ3:  How do people with misophonia cope in terms of emotional, cognitive, and behavioural 
strategies in educational or work environments?  
RQ4: How does misophonia affect the sufferers ’ attention capacity?  
Method  
Design  
This study used a qualitative design to research in detail and gain comprehensive 
information about people ’s experiences with misophonia. Interpretive Phenomenological 
Analysis (IPA)  was implemented , which aims to provide an in-depth , idiographic insight into the 
personal experience of a phenome non or set of past experiences (Smith & Osborn, 2015).  
Participants  
In this study, participation took a total sample of 5 people above the age of 18 ( M = 42).

Running Head: The lived experience of people with misophonia  
12 
 All participants were recruited through purposeful sampling (See Table 1). The smaller sample 
size is appropriate for IPA as it allows the researcher to examine each participant ’s experiences in 
a greater depth (Hefferon & Gin -Rodriguez, 2011; Robinson, 2014).   
 
Table 1. Participants descriptive information  
Pseudonym  Age Approx age 
of onset  Gender  Country  Occupation  
Sandra  60 7 Female  UK Employed  
Pete 66 Adolescence  Male  UK Retired  
Marissa  35 Entire life  Female  USA  Employed  
Roni  27 Early 
adolescence  Female  Israel  Student/Employed  
Luisa  22 20 Female  Mexico  Student  
 
All participants were invited through a recruitment message posted in two social groups 
dedicated to misophonia on the social media platform Facebook. Individuals  interested were 
invited for an online interview at a time and date agreed upon in advance by both the participant 
and the researcher. All participants were informed in advance that they would not be rewarded 
with any incentives.  
The inclusion criteria con sisted of the participants to self -identify with misophonia. 
Additionally, the participants had to be above the age of 18 and never have had a diagnosis of a 
condition affecting their attention. The latest criteria aimed to provide a sample that did not ha ve 
any distorted attention capacity as one of the research questions examined how misophonia 
affects the levels of concentration.

Running Head: The lived experience of people with misophonia  
13 
 Procedure  
All the participants were provided with an information sheet outlining detailed 
information about the nature of the  study. Each participant was required to read and supply a 
signed consent form prior to the interview and was debriefed post the interview. Prior to 
conducting the interviews, each participant was assured of confidentiality and its limits. They 
were encour aged to discuss their experiences and share as much as they felt comfortable without 
any suggestions from the researcher. Participants were also informed that they could omit any 
questions, take as many breaks as they needed to, or withdraw from participat ing at any moment 
without giving an explanation.   
The data was collected by conducting semi -structured interviews and using open -ended 
questions, such as “Tell me in your own word how it feels when something triggers you .” (See 
Appendix  for full list of questions ). This provided flexibility to the researcher when examining 
the people ’s experiences (Hefferon & Gin -Rodriguez, 2011 ). Interviews were conducted online 
using Microsoft Teams or Zoom platforms. All interviews were audio and video recorded, and 
each participant was informed before the recording started. The average duration of the 
interviews was 45 minutes, ranging between 22 to 57 minutes. All recordings were transcribed, 
anonymi sed, and later destroyed.   
This study gained approval from the Department Research Ethics Committee at the home 
university.  
Data Analysis   
IPA aims to analyse experiences and life events from the participant ’s own perspective. It 
follows three main princi ples: phenomenology, hermeneutics, and an idiograph ic approach

Running Head: The lived experience of people with misophonia  
14 
 (Pietkiewicz & Smith, 2012; Smith et al., 2009). The emphasis on p henomenolog y means that it 
aims to connect with a person ’s subjective world view , and the structure thereof, in a way that 
brack ets previous assumptions . Hermeneutics refers to the process of interpreting experience and 
the meaning they have assigned to it  through verbal, semantic and conceptual layers that mean 
knowledge cannot be a direct representation of reality . Smith & Osborn  (2015) describe the 
double  hermeneutic  process in qualitative research ; this process involves the participant 
interpret ing their experience in narrative form, and subsequently, the researcher interprets that 
interpretation . Thirdly , the idiographic approach  focuses on conveying the uniqueness of the 
person ’s perspective and their understanding of the world rather than combining participants into 
a group prior to analysis . The research interprets each case individually and only then looks at 
convergen ce and divergence across all of them , ensuring that samples are sufficiently small that 
the individual voice can still be heard even after general themes are formed  (Nizza & Smith, 
2021).  
The data in this study were analysed by following Smith et al ’s (20 09) seven steps of IPA 
analysis: (1) reading and re -reading, (2) initial coding, (3) developing emergent themes, (4) 
seeking relationships and clustering themes, (5) moving to the next case, (6) looking for patterns 
across participants, and (7) taking inte rpretations to deeper levels.  
 
Results  
Transcript coding and IPA analysis identified four superordinate themes, each comprised of two 
subordinate themes which are presented in Table 2. The themes developed in this study illustrate 
how people experience the misophonia reaction and how it affects  their lives and functioning in

Running Head: The lived experience of people with misophonia  
15 
 academic, work, and everyday environments. Figure 1 displays the relationships between the 
different themes.  
Table 2 Table of Superordinate Themes  
Superordinate themes  Subordinate themes  
Phenomenology of the misophonia 
reaction  “Brace yourself ”: Effects on emotions, 
cognitions, and behaviours  
 “I was under so much attack ”: The aftermath  
Susceptibility to triggering sounds  “Becoming more sensitive ”: Increased 
sensitivity over time  
 “It gets even worse ”: Mental and physical 
susceptibility to triggers  
Coping strategies when triggered  “I have to get away ”: Avoidant coping  
 “I have done a lot of thinking ”: Internal 
Coping  
Levels of attention and concentration  “Can’t do it. Can ’t concentrate ”: Inability to 
pay attention  
“I didn ’t notice you were doing that ”: 
Attention absorption on other sounds stimuli

Running Head: The lived experience of people with misophonia  
16 
  
Figu re 1. Relationships between experiential and emerging themes
Note:  Connections between themes: the arrow sign represents the direction of influence.

Running Head: The lived experience of people with misophonia  
17 
 Superordinate Theme 1. Phenomenology of the misophonia reaction  
“Brace yourself ”: Effects on emotions, cognitions, and behaviours  
The “Brace yourself ” theme is characterised by statements related to the experience 
of misophonia and how misophonia affects the participant ’s emotions, cognitions, and 
behaviours. Every participant describe d experiencing irrational feelings of anger, irritation, 
rage, and frustration.  Further, s ome of the participants talked about  experiencing 
psychological  (emotional)  pain and argued that it differs from the bodily  sensations they 
experience while triggered . The p articipants shared that they struggle to make “sense ” of their 
psychophysiological reactions when triggered, as the noise they were hearing did not bother 
anybody else: “You really question your sanity. ” The overwhelming feelings made them feel 
as if there was “something wrong ” with them and that they might be mentally ill. Although 
putting a name to their condition did not provide an improvement or a solution to their 
experiences , each participant expressed  a feeling of “relief ” and a sense of normalisation for 
their experiences. Additionally, there was a presence of a sense of wonder about how and 
why they developed misophonia. However, the psychophysiological experiences seem to be 
the primarily acute outcome when triggered, with on e of the participants sharing:  
In the beginning, I would only notice just like anger. Mostly, but now, 
in the last couple of years, it, it becomes like. I get like hot sensation 
and, and high blood pressure, and I can feel my heart like beating really 
quickly. Uhm, and also the like, like real anger like I don ’t know where 
it comes from. (Roni)  
 
All the participants talked about themselves feeling “bad”, “intolerable ”, “abusive ”, 
and saw themselves  an “awful human ” for the way they were reacting when trigge red. They 
talked about the impulse of stopping the triggering noise at any cost. The participants 
expressed the overwhelming need to manifest that frustration into physical violence. 
However, there was a constant fear of ever “attacking someone ”, Luisa com mented: “I hope I

Running Head: The lived experience of people with misophonia  
18 
 never try to physically hurt someone. ”  Overall, the participants ’ reflections indicate that they 
experience feelings of helplessness and vulnerability:  
Part of the problem is that you feel vulnerable to it. You you, you feel 
as though yo u’re out of control you can ’t, you can ’t stop what the other 
person does. You feel helpless and, and I, I don ’t think there ’s anything 
you can do other than internalise it. Try and fight it from within, you 
know. You know, it ’s silly, you know, it, it does n’t make any logical 
sense. So you, you, you have, you force, you have to force yourself to. 
What ’s the word? To try and ignore it to try and come [sigh]. Yeah, it ’s 
difficult really, but I don ’t think there ’s any way of, I don ’t think I found 
a way that w orks. (Pete)  
 
Moreover, the participants  shared experiencing “panic ” simply by seeing a potential 
trigger happening and wondering: “How do I get out of this? ” Misophonia also seems to elicit 
feelings of helplessness in the participants, with Luisa sharing:  “I think the hardest part is that 
you can ’t, you can ’t do anything to really stop [the sound] ”.  
There was a sense of desperation in all the transcripts . This was in the core of the 
sufferer ’s inability to prevent their reactions, indicating that the person continues to 
experience high levels of helplessness that stay present even after the  trigger ing sound has 
stopped . Furthermore, the intense negative emotional reac tions seem to condition a state of 
anticipatory anxiety for any possible future situation when one might be triggered:  
‘Cause you ’re you ’re waiting for the next trigger all the time, you 
know. To brace yourself. (Pete)  
 
“I was under so much attack ”: The af termath  
 
The second theme reflects on the destructive impact following the chronic experience 
of misophonia. Participants talked about feeling “not understood ” and “rejected ” by their 
close ones as no one could truly understand their experiences. Additiona lly, the intensive 
aversive reactions and the conditioned states of anxiety produce d negative consequences in 
the participants ’ lives. The chronic anxiety leads the sufferers to be actively seeking 
avoidance of  any potential triggering situations, such as avoiding family dinners, educational

Running Head: The lived experience of people with misophonia  
19 
 and work engagements out of fear of being triggered: “It’s just really hard sometimes to be 
around people. ” (Roni). This leads to isolation and feelings of loneliness, as th e main 
aversive noise sources are often their close ones. Sandra and Marissa shared they avoid eating 
together with their spouses  and compromise by having their main meal with them. In the case 
of Pete, misophonia and his consequent outbursts were  one of t he reasons for the separation 
between him and his wife:  
We’re living separately now, and it ’s one of the reasons why we got 
separated because, you know, because the problem is always having 
with, you know, it just made me angry. […] uhm things like that ha s 
affected my relationship with a lot more friends. You know, because I, 
I suddenly became extremely ratty, and you know, extremely short 
tempered, you know. Because I was under so much attack. (Pete)  
 
The negative impact of misophonia on mental health was present in all the transcripts. 
Despite being conscious of the normality of the sound, some of the participants expressed 
that it felt “rude” and “disrespectful ” when others were producing the triggeri ng sounds. 
Additionally, participants reported feeling anxious simply in the presence of other people: 
“Makes me nervous around people but also wanna keep distance from people. ” (Roni). 
Moreover, all participants shared how much their personal lives, and t he ones of their close 
ones, have been affected by misophonia. Most importantly,  it seems that the participants 
experience a state of incongruence  between  the natural need for interpersonal relationships 
and to be with one ’s loved ones , and the need to avoid experiencing a misophoni c reaction . 
Further, s trong negative mental health outcomes, such as suicidal ideations, were present in 
one of the participants who shared:  
I’ve had suicidal thoughts about this, […] because of how much I hate 
it and  how little control I felt over it and how much I know it hurts 
people. I ’m not gonna kill myself or anything. Uhm, but I I have the 
thoughts all the, all the time when this happens. Uhm, like it would be 
easier to not be this obnoxious, easily annoyed per son you know to not 
have to be a person that other people feel uncomfortable around. 
(Marissa)

Running Head: The lived experience of people with misophonia  
20 
  
Superordinate Theme 2. Susceptibility to triggering sounds   
“Becoming more sensitive ”: Increased sensitivity over time  
The “Becoming more sensitive ” theme  reflects on the influence of time over the 
susceptibility to triggering sounds. Most  of the participants reported noticing an increase in 
the number of sounds and an overall sensitivity that would trigger them  overtime . Marissa 
shared that she noticed additional triggers and her sensitivity to sounds increased following 
serious health complications of her father.  
 (His) health declined a bit, about five years ago. And I think that my 
noise tolerance, I feel like it prob ably got worse around that time. 
(Marissa)  
 
Pete noted an increase in his sensitivity with age: “it gets worse with age ”. He also 
stated that he has noticed new noises and sounds that started to trigger him:  
When I watch television, there are certain pres enters that have noisy 
mouths. Not, not loud speakers, but they just have a lot of mouth noise, 
incidental mouth noise between speaking. And that ’s never used to 
bother me, but now it does. (Pete)  
 
 Whereas , Roni mentioned the symptoms increased with the s tart of university. In all 
three cases , a change in susceptibility i s associated with the passage of time but also a certain 
change in the surrounding. However, the participants expressed the passage of time being the 
bigger influencer:  
I did notice in the  last couple of years since I started college at least, 
and that there are like more trigger sounds than I thought that I had. 
Uhm? Becoming more sensitive to to, uhm, like if it was only chewing 
and like whistling and some knuckle cracking, now it ’s like almost all 
the mouth sounds. (Roni)  
 
“It gets even worse ”: Mental and physical susceptibility to triggers  
 
The third theme reflects on the change in susceptibility due to the state of the person ’s 
mind and body. The theme was present only in the female participants. More specifically,

Running Head: The lived experience of people with misophonia  
21 
 Sandra, Marissa and Roni talked about noticing being more susceptible to trig gering noises 
when feeling stressed, anxious, worried, or upset: “It gets worse when you ’re anxious or 
worry or upset ” (Marissa).  
My tolerance for anything including sounds is is lower when when I'm 
worried about them [her parents]. (Marissa)  
 
The physiological condition of the body was also reported as an indicator of higher 
sensitivity. The female participants reported noticing an increase in their severity of their 
reactions when they are experiencing tiredness, dehydration, as well as during the ir 
menstruation:  
Uhm, and also, I ’ve noticed that like when I ’m, when I ’m on my period, 
it gets even worse. Which is new, I don ’t know. I, I asked some people 
about it. They said that it also happens to them. So that sucks. (Roni)  
 
But I definitely notice  that it's significantly worse when I'm not 
regulated. So when I'm when I'm stressed out or worried, or upset about 
anything else. Uhm, or, oh my gosh, if I haven't had enough water. If 
I'm dehydrated I, I've noticed like a huge correlation to my level of 
tolerance. (Marissa)  
 
Those points provide an interesting view of the psychophysiological state in a person 
and how hormonal changes aggravate the misophonia reaction.  
Experiential Theme 3. Coping strategies when triggered   
“I have to get away ”: Avoidant c oping   
This theme represents the type of coping in the majority of the triggering situations. 
There is unanimous agreement among the participants that there is a necessity to “get away ” 
from the aversive noise . Sandra, Roni, and Marissa shared they have tried confrontation as a 
way to stop the noise. Pete talked about feeling “trapped ” and mimicking the triggering sound 
as a way of coping. Sandra reported continuing eating if other people around her were eating , 
even if she was already full: “There ’s something about eating yourself that does make it a 
little bit more tolerable ”. Sandra, who used to work as a studio director for a broadcasting

Running Head: The lived experience of people with misophonia  
22 
 company, also shared:  
So, you have to listen to this [production talk]  regardless. Uhm, and 
people would eat apples and crisps, and it would be directly into my 
ear. […] you know that was awful ’cause you can ’t move. You can ’t go 
away […] my misophonia was part of my decision to leave the job that 
I’ve done for 14 years. (Sa ndra, 60)   
 
Luisa talked about “desperately ” trying to put on her headphones in an attempt to 
remove herself from the sound. The desperation in her endeavour to stop her emotional 
reactions at times manifests as self -harming (stabbing nails in wrists and face). Although she 
did not want to self -harm, she explained that hurting herself was  the only way to “ [release]  
the pressure”  and get rid of the psychological pain . For others, the only coping strategies 
involved avoiding or leaving the triggering situati on: 
In my academic life, especially in bigger classes. Uhm, I noticed that, 
like, I needed to take more breaks. Like, to leave the class more than 
other people, or more than I ’m used to and. Uhm, you miss you miss 
information like that. You miss class like  that. (Roni)  
 
All of the external coping strategies, besides mimicking  and continuous  eating , 
involved direct avoidance of the triggering sounds or situations.  
“I have done a lot of thinking ”: Internal coping  
The following theme is characterised by the coping strategies participants employ in 
triggering situations in order to avoid display ing a negative reaction towards the source of the 
sounds. One of the most common ways to cope was rationalisation. All participants talked  
about supressing their reactions by attempting to normalise the triggering sound or situation 
at hand by employing self -talk:  
I have like done a lot of thinking like “Oh my mom is eating and it ’s 
keeping her alive and this sound is an indication that she ’s doing. ” You 
know all this self -talk. Uhm, that she ’s doing something that keeps her 
body alive. OK, and I do a lot of that. And sometimes that ’s helpful 
because then the sound just can. It sometimes can just become 
something insignificant. (Marissa)

Running Head: The lived experience of people with misophonia  
23 
 Another common internal coping mechanism was focusing on their mind and body 
which was present in most of the participants. Marissa, Roni, and Luisa talked about shifting 
their focus onto not having a violent outburst as an attempt to contain their reactions  and 
maintain self-control. Additionally, Roni was also the only participant who talked specifically 
about using meditation and breathing exercises as coping strategies whilst being triggered:   
What I used to do was, like I would, I would like stop, breath e, stop 
breathing and, and I lock my jaw like I just clench my mouth closed. 
Just so like, to shut everything out. (Roni)  
 
Using mindfulness to cope seems to be correlated  with the intensity of the misophonia 
reaction through time and with the way the aver sive reaction affects attention.   
Superordinate Theme 4. Levels of attention and concentration   
“Can’t do it. Can ’t concentrate ”: Inability to pay attention  
All the participants expressed a strong inability to concentrate or pay attention when 
triggered. The seventh theme describes what the participants described as a complete inability 
to direct their attention towards an individual task or stimuli. The coping s trategies discussed 
in the third experiential theme appear to be directly affecting the sufferers ’ attention. All the 
participants explained that they directed their attention inwards in an attempt to rationalise 
the noise or contain their emotional and ph ysiological reaction:  
Absolutely I can ’t do. I can ’t concentrate. […] I, I just really can ’t 
think of anything but the noise. […] If anyone is talking to me, I have 
to put so much mental energy into hearing the other, hearing 
everything else that ’s happen ing. 
[Later in the conversation] It ’s not that I ’m focusing so much on the 
sound. I ’m concentrating so much on not having a response that ’s not 
kind. That ’s what it is. (Marissa)  
 
There ’s a noticeable impairment in attention and concentration for all the participants. 
The two student participants, Roni  and Luisa, explained how misophonia affects their 
concentration negatively while studying or at class. Both expressed a similar experience of

Running Head: The lived experience of people with misophonia  
24 
 their attention being “cut off ” when a triggering sound appe ars. Luisa also expressed losing 
their focus and having to “try and find where I was, again. ” Luisa went on to say:  
I start thinking like I have to concentrate to stop thinking about the 
noise.  But you start thinking about the noise. And you just, yeah, yo u 
just can ’t ignore it.   [...] I just lose the explanation or whatever if I ’m 
reading, I have to read it again and again, it ’s like.  Yes, it ’s it’s just,  I 
can’t avoid it, I can ’t really concentrate. (Luisa)  
 
For all participants, the inability to focus th eir attention on the presence of a triggering 
sound seemed to be based on two reason s: thinking  about the need to stop thinking about the 
triggering sound and/or shifting their focus to containing the aversive reaction. All 
participants stated unanimously that it is impossible to contain their reaction and direct their 
attention towards a desired stimulus, for example a  lecturer during a class.  
“I didn ’t notice you were doing that ”: Attention absorption on other sounds stimuli  
 The final theme that was identified relates to exceptions when some of the 
participants were able to concentrate on a task and not be ing triggered  at first . A few of the 
participants mentioned times when they were able to stay in a room while a trigger noise was 
happening. Roni me ntioned that meditation and breathing exercises helped her with staying 
focused in class. While Sandra and Marissa disclosed not noticing their partner eating in the 
same room as them while concentrating on a particular task; as well as when producing 
different triggering sounds such as working on a keyboard or with a computer mouse:  
There ’ been times where if I don ’t see it and I then I notice he ’s been 
eating for 20 minutes. I ’m like “I didn ’t notice you were doing that. 
That’s interesting. ”, but there w as more than likely a sound in the 
background. Yeah, and then also like. Sometimes if I ’m like laying on 
the ground instead, and like engaging in some kind of artwork or 
something. (Marissa)  
 
This theme also corelates directly with the internal coping them e “I have done a lot of 
thinking ”. Some of the participants shared that since they started practicing mindfulness 
exercises such as mediation, yoga, or breathing exercises, they have noticed an increase in

Running Head: The lived experience of people with misophonia  
25 
 exceptions to those triggering situations . However , the participants stressed that more often 
than not, there has been a background noise  from sources  such as a radio, a TV , or a crowd.  
Discussion  
The present study aimed to explore the experiences of people who struggle with 
misophonia symptoms. The interpretative phenomenological analysis of the interview 
transcripts revealed eight themes organised into four superordinate  themes that correspond 
with the study ’s research questions. The results of this study support previous findings from 
quantitative literature and survey data on how people experience misophonia (Bernstein et al., 
2013; Edelstein et al., 2013; Jager et al.,  2020; Kumar et al., 2017; Wu et al., 2014).  
The first research question aimed to explore the phenomenology of the misophonia 
reaction. In line with previous findings, psychophysiological responses were similar among 
all participants. The first emerged th eme, “Brace yourself ”: Effects on emotions, cognitions, 
and behaviours  reflects on those reactions and the complex nature of misophonia before, 
during, and after being triggered. For the sufferers, misophonia brought feelings of irrational 
anger, irritatio n, and frustration (Bernstein et al., 2013; Edelstein et al., 2013; Potgieter et al., 
2019), but also anxiety about the experience of the misophonia reaction (Wu et al., 2014), as 
well as  the experience of psychological  (emotional) pain and  fear of acting on their anger. 
The findings unveil the high intensity of the response and provide a better understanding of 
how deeply misophonia affects people ’s mental health. “I was under so much attack ”: The 
aftermath  theme reflects on the adverse outcomes of the chr onic experience of misophonia. 
Participants reported actively seeking stimulus avoiding behaviour. Those findings clearly 
illustrate how misophonia compromises the ability to engage in daily activities and limits 
people ’s interpersonal interactions (Cavann a, 2014). The findings suggest that misophonia 
produces long -term negative psychological outcomes, such as anxiety, self-forced isolation,

Running Head: The lived experience of people with misophonia  
26 
 self-harm, and suicidal ideations. In addition, misophonia appears to impact the family and 
social lives of the suffe rers highly, affecting their marriages and relationships with members 
of their family , friends , and co -workers . There is a clear indication of adverse outcomes on 
people ’s mental health, with participants providing a different perspective on findings related 
to comorbidity . For example, l iterature suggests that misophonia has high comorbidity with 
other psychopathological conditions  (Erfanian et al., 2019; Quek et al., 2018; Zhou et al., 
2017) . However, the study ’s results indicate that misophonia might play an aggravating role 
in the sufferer ’s mental health.  
In relation to the second research question, participants did not report noticing any 
identifiable links between their symptoms ’ severi ty and life events. However, participants 
reported an increase in sensitivity to and number of symptoms over time, which were 
reflected in the “Becoming more sensitive ”: Increased sensitivity over time  and “It gets even 
worse ”: Mental and physical suscepti bility to triggers  themes, respectively. These results 
support the findings by Jager et al. (2020) and Natalini et al. (2020) and reflect on the way 
that misophonia  tends to become progressively worse over time . Interestingly, participants 
reported their s ensitivity increasing depending on their mental and physiological conditions ; 
for example,  being  anxious or experiencing hormonal changes . However, nearly all 
participants explained their symptoms are worsening with time without a clear indicator of a 
specific time or an event.  
The third research question explored people ’s coping strategies triggered in academic, 
work,  and everyday settings. The transcripts analysis suggested two general types of coping: 
internal and external. The “I have to get away ”: Avoidant coping  theme refers  to external 
coping strategies. This theme supports previous finding s as participants reported they are 
unable to stay in the same space as the  ongoing  trigger if they have the option to leave

Running Head: The lived experience of people with misophonia  
27 
 (Dozier, 2015b; Edelstein et al., 2013; Potgieter et al.,2019; Sanchez & Silva, 2018; Schröder 
et al., 2013; Schröder et al., 2017; Wu et al., 2014). “I have done a lot of thinking ”: Internal 
Coping  refers to the process of shifting one ’s attention inwards . The results indicate how 
participants actively focus on their responses to avoid an outburst by using rationalisation of 
the sound and/or using medi tation and breathing exercises to contain their reaction. These 
analyses  seem to correspond with findings from case studies where patients ha ve been 
undergoing treatment using CBT  and mindfulness  techniques (Cecilione et al., 2021; Reid et 
al., 2016; Schneider & Arch, 2017; Schröder  et al., 2017).   
The final research question explored whether people with miso phonia have impaired 
attention capacity. All participants reported not being able to pay attention or concentrate in 
the presence of a trigger ; this is represented in the “Can’t do it. Can ’t concentrate ”: Inability 
to pay attention  theme. These findings are congruent with previous research on misophonia 
suggesting altered attention capacity ( Daniels et al., 2020; Frank et al., 2020; Seaborne & 
Fiorella, 2018; Silva & Sanchez, 2019). All the participants expressed an inability to 
concentrate on anything but the triggering noise.  However, coping mechanisms and attention 
capacity seem to be inextricably intertwined. Some participants expressed the need to shift 
their attention inwards to contain their reactions. These findings suggest t hat people use their 
attention  as an internal coping mechanism . This  raises the question of whether people with 
misophonia struggle with attention control due to an underlying biological condition  or 
whether their inner coping strategy takes over the majority of their cognitive capacity and 
limits their attention span.  The last theme, “I didn ’t notice you were doing that ”: Attention 
absorption on other sounds stimuli , represents the state of what Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi 
calls “the flow of consciousnes s” – a state of mind where one loses perception of time as they 
are intensely concentrated on a task (Csikszentmihalyi, 1990). Interestingly, a couple of the

Running Head: The lived experience of people with misophonia  
28 
 participants reported not being able to be triggered when involved in a captivating activity. 
Howe ver, they reported that it was likely due to the presence of a  background noise. 
Nonetheless, it represents moments in participants ’ lives  when their attention has not been 
disrupted immediately after the appearance of the triggering noise ; an attribute th at is a part 
of the misophonia conceptualisation (Jager et al., 2020). One participant shared being able to 
stay present and concentrate by practising medi tation and breathing exercises. Literature 
suggests that mindfulness practices can facilitate the exp erience of intense levels of 
concentration (Marty -Dugas et al., 2021; Schneider & Arch, 2017). Therefore,  these findings 
may suggest that mindfulness practices can diminish the aversive experience of misophonia.  
Limitations and Future Directions  
There are  some limitations to this study that should be taken under consideration 
when evaluating its findings. Firstly, the researcher ’s lack of experience in interviewing could 
have prevented them from exploring the participants ’ experiences in detail. Secondly, the 
study ’s heterogeneous sample contradicts one of the advisable rules in IPA sampling. 
According to Noon (2018), a homogeneous sample enables the researcher to explore in -depth 
individuals who have experienced a particular phenomenon. Additionally, altho ugh 
participants were asked if they had tinnitus, hyperacusis, and /or a condition affecting their 
attention , conducting  in-depth screening for any psychopathological and physiological 
conditions might have been helpful in fully understanding the participants ’ experiences. 
Finally, the interviews were conducted two years after the start of the pandemic due to 
COVID -19. This should be taken under consideration as it might have affected the 
participants ’ experiences but might not have been evident du ring the interviews.  
We contend that a strength of the study is the second author having misophonia. 
Dealing with the condition for over a decade and various triggers provided them with

Running Head: The lived experience of people with misophonia  
29 
 knowledge of the misophonia experience, which in turn helped to analyt ically connect with 
the subjective experiences reported by the participants .  
The current study provides a valuable foundation for future research. First ly, 
considering the negative experiences and consequences of misophonia, it is worth exploring 
how it a ffects psychosocial development in people and the secondary effects it has on 
people ’s mental health. Secondly, susceptibility seems to be influenced by people ’s mental 
and emotional states. Therefore, it is worth exploring how personality traits  such as 
neuroticism  could influence misophonia progression in life. Furthermore, the connection 
between internal coping and attention seems of utmost importance. The majority of the 
sample  shared experiencing the need to shift their attention into containing their misophonic 
reaction . Therefore, it is worth exploring whether  the disrupted concentration in triggered 
people is direct ly related to misophonia  or to a different pathological condition . Lastly, 
mindfulness practices were reported to positively contribut e to the ameliorat ion of the 
experience of misophonia by reducing  aversive reactions. Therefore,  in addition to the 
existing case report on mindfulness and misophonia ( Schneider & Arch, 2017), it would be 
beneficial to thoroughly explore  the effects of mindfulness on misophonia reactivity over an 
extended period  using longitudinal qualitative methods , such as diary studies.  
Conclusion  
To conclude, misophonia is experienced as a real and distressing condition that 
impacts people ’s lives  and creates a complex set of subjective phenomena and interacting 
effects on emotions and behaviour s, which  cause difficulties and distress .  
The data in this study confirmed that the misophonic reaction induces strong negative 
emotions, such as anger, disgust, and fr ustration, as well as what has been described as 
emotional  pain. The chronic ex perience of the condition  seems to lead to an anticipatory

Running Head: The lived experience of people with misophonia  
30 
 anxiety response in  people  who are vigilant for future aversive sounds , further aggravat ing 
their mental health. Participants reported impairment in their close  relationships,  social  
isolation, and exacerbate d symptoms . Moreover, a key finding is a person ’s diminished 
capacity to concentrate when triggered . This seems to be directly connected with the coping 
mechanisms used by a sufferer  as the attention is focused on containing the aversive reaction .    
This study supports findings from past quantitative research papers and contributes to 
qualitative literature as the first phenomenological study of people ’s lived experiences with 
misophonia.  By presenting in -depth accounts of how people subjectively experience 
misophonia, it provides a valuable addition to the quantitative research and case report 
research that is growing on the topic . Educating the public ab out the findings in this paper 
can potentially benefit the sufferers and those around them  by enabling non-sufferers to 
empathise with the lifeworld of those with misophonia and gain insight into the challenges of 
living with it .

Running Head: The lived experience of people with misophonia  
31 
 Reference s 
 
Alekri, J.,  & Al Saif, F. (2019). Suicidal misophonia: a case report.  Psychiatry and Clinical 
Psychopharmacology , 29(2), 232 -237. 
https://doi.org/ 10.1080/24750573.2019.1597585  
American Psychiatric Association. (2013).  Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental 
disorders  (5th ed.) . https: //doi.org/ 10.1176/appi.books.9780890425596   
Berger, R. (2015). Now I see it, now I don ’t: Researcher ’s position and reflexivity in 
qualitative research. Qualitative Research, 15 (2), 219–234. 
https://doi.org/ 10.1177/14687941124684 75 
Bernstein, R., Angell, K., & Dehle, C. (2013). A brief course of cognitive behavioural therapy 
for the treatment of misophonia: A case example.  The Cognitive  Behaviour  
Therapist,  6, E10 . https: //doi.org/ 10.1017/S1754470X13000172  
Brout, J. J., Edelstein, M., Erfanian, M., Mannino, M., Miller, L. J., Rouw, R., Kumar, S., & 
Rosenthal, M. Z. (2018). Investigating Misophonia: A Review of the Empirical 
Literature, Clinical Implications, and a Research Agenda. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 
12, 36. https: //doi.org/ 10.3389/fnins.2018.00036  
Cassiello -Robbins, C., Anand, D., McMahon, K., Brout, J., Kelley, L., & Rosenthal, M. Z. 
(2021). A preliminary investigation of the association between misophonia and 
symptoms of psychopathology and personality disorders.  Frontiers in Psychology , 11, 
3842 . https://doi.org/ 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.519681  
Cavanna A. E. (2014). What is misophonia and how can we treat it?.  Expert review of 
neurotherapeutics , 14(4), 357–359. https: //doi.org/ 10.1586/14737175.2014.892418  
Cavanna, A. E., & Seri, S. (2015). Misophonia: current perspectives.  Neuropsychiatric 
Disease and Treatment , 11, 2117 –2123 . https://doi.org/ 10.2147/NDT.S81438

Running Head: The lived experience of people with misophonia  
32 
 Cecilione, J. L., Hitti, S. A., & Vrana, S. R. (2021). Treating adolescent misophonia with 
Cognitive Behavioral Therapy: Considerations for including exposure . Clinical Case 
Studies . https://doi.org/ 10.1177/15346501211045707  
Claiborn, J. M., Dozier, T. H., Hart, S. L., & Lee, J. (2020). Self -Identified Misophonia 
Phenomenology, Impact, and Clinical Correlates.  Psychological Thought , 13(2). 
https://doi.org/ 10.37708/psyct.v13i2.454  
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1990).  Flow: The psychology of optimal experience . Ebury Publishing  
Cusack, S. E., Cash, T. V ., & Vrana, S. R. (201 8). An examination of the relationship between 
misophonia, anxiety sensitivity, and obsessive -compulsive symptoms.  Journal of 
Obsessive -Compulsive and Related Disorders , 18, 67-72. 
https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.jocrd.2018.06.004  
Daniels, E. C., Rodriguez, A., & Zabelina, D. L. (2020). Severity of misophonia symptoms is 
associated with worse cognitive control when exposed to misophonia trigger 
sounds.  PloS ONE , 15(1), e0227118 . https://doi.org/ 10.1371/journal.pone.0227118  
 Dodgson, J. E. (2019). Reflexivity in Q ualitative Research. Journal of Human Lactation, 
35(2), 220 –222. https://doi.org/ 10.1177/0890334419830990  
Dozier, T. H. (2015a). Counterconditioning treatment for misophonia.  Clinical Case 
Studies , 14(5), 374 -387. https://doi.org/ 10.1177/1534650114566924  
Dozier, T. H. (2015b). Etiology , composition, development and maintenance of misophonia : 
A Conditioned Aversive Reflex Disorder.  Psychological Thought, 8 (1), 114 -129. 
https://doi.org/ 10.5964/psyct.v8i1.132  
Dozier, T. H., & Morrison, K. L. (2017). Phenomenology of misophonia: Initial physical and 
emotional responses.  The American Journal of Psychology, 130 (4), 431–438. 
https://doi.org/ 10.5406/amerjpsyc.130.4.0431

Running Head: The lived experience of people with misophonia  
33 
 Edelstein, M., Brang, D., Rouw, R., & Ramachandran, V . S. (2013). Misophonia: 
physiolog ical investigations and case descriptions.  Frontiers in Human 
Neuroscience , 7, 296 . https://doi.org/ 10.3389/fnhum.2013.00296  
Erfanian, M., Kartsonaki, C., & Keshavarz, A. (2019). Misophonia and comorbid psychiatric 
symptoms: a preliminary study of clinical  findings.  Nordic Journal of 
Psychiatry , 73(4-5), 219–228. https://doi.org/ 10.1080/08039488.2019.1609086  
Frank, B., Roszyk, M., Hurley, L., Drejaj, L., & McKay, D. (2020). Inattention in 
misophonia: Difficulties achieving and maintaining alertness. Journal  of Clinical and 
Experimental Neuropsychology , 42(1), 66–75. 
https://doi.org/ 10.1080/13803395.2019.1666801  
Halcomb, E. J., Gholizadeh, L., DiGiacomo, M., Phillips, J., & Davidson, P. M. (2007). 
Literature review: considerations in undertaking focus group research with culturally 
and linguistically diverse groups. Journal of Clinical Nursing , 16(6). 
https://doi. org/10.1111/j.1365 -2702.2006.01760.x  
Hansen, H. A., Leber, A. B., & Saygin, Z. M. (2021). What sound sources trigger 
misophonia? Not just chewing and breathing.  Journal of Clinical Psychology , 77(11), 
2609 –2625 . https://doi.org/ 10.1002/jclp.23196  
Hefferon,  K., & Gil -Rodriguez, E. (2011). Interpretative phenomenological analysis.  The 
Psychologist, 24 (10), 756–759. 
Jager, I., de Koning, P., Bost, T., Denys, D., & Vulink, N. (2020). Misophonia: 
Phenomenology, comorbidity and demographics in a large sample.  PloS ONE , 15(4), 
e0231390 . https://doi.org/ 10.1371/journal.pone.0231390  
Jastreboff P., & Hazell J. (2004).  Tinnitus retraining therapy: Implementing the 
neurophysiological model . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Running Head: The lived experience of people with misophonia  
34 
 https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511544989  
Jastreboff, M. M., & Jastreboff, P. J. (2001). Components of decreased sound tolerance: 
hyperacusis, misophonia, phonophobia. ITHS News Lett, 2 (5-7), 1-5. 
Jastreboff, M. M., & Jastreboff, P. J. (2002). Decreased sound tolerance and tinnitus 
retraining therapy (TRT).  The Australian and New Zealand Journal of Audiology, 
24(2), 74 -84. 
Jastreboff, P. J., & Jastreboff, M. M. (2015). Decreased sound tolerance: hyperacusis, 
misophonia, diplacousis, and polyacousis.  Handb ook of Clinical Neurology , 129, 
375–387. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/B978 -0-444-62630 -1.00021 -4 
Kluckow, H., Telfer, J., & Abraham, S. (2014). Should we screen for misophonia in patients 
with eating disorders? A report of three cases.  The International Journal of Eating 
Disorders , 47(5), 558–561. https://doi.org/ 10.1002/eat.22245  
Kumar, S., Dheerendra, P., Erfanian, M., Benzaquén, E., Sedley, W., Gander, P. E., ... & 
Griffiths, T. D. (2021). The motor basis for misophonia.  Journal of Neuroscience . 
https://doi.org/ 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0261 -21.2021   
Kumar, S., Tansley -Hancock, O., Sedley, W., Winston, J. S., Callaghan, M. F., Allen, M., 
Cope, T. E., Gander, P. E., Bamiou, D. E., & Griffiths, T. D. (2017). The Brain Basis 
for Misophonia.  Current Biology:CB , 27(4), 527–533. 
https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.cub.2016.12.048  
Marty -Dugas, J., Smith, A. C., & Smilek, D. (2021). Focus on your breath: Can mindfulness 
facilitate the experience of flow?  Psychology of Consciousness: Theory, Research, 
and Practice.  Advance online publication . https://doi.org/ 10.1037/cns0000251  
McGuire, J. F., Wu, M. S., & Storch, E. A. (2015). Cognitive -behavioral therapy for 2 youths 
with misophonia.  The Journal of Clinical Psychiatry , 76(5), 573–574.

Running Head: The lived experience of people with misophonia  
35 
 https://doi.org/ 10.4088/JCP.14cr09343  
Møller, A. R. (2011). Misophonia, phonophobia, and "exploding head" syndrome. In A. R. 
Møller, B. Langguth, D. De Ridder, & T. Kleinjung (Eds.),  Textbook of tinnitus  (pp. 
25–27). Springer Science + Business Media . https://doi.org/ 10.1007/978 -1-60761 -
145-5_4 
Morse, J. M., Barrett, M., Mayan, M., Olson, K., & Spiers, J. (2002). Verification Strategies 
for Establishing Reliability and Validity in Qualitative Research. International 
Journal of Qualitative Methods , 13–22. https://doi.or g/160940690200100202  
Muller, D., Khemlani -Patel, S., & Neziroglu, F. (2018). Cognitive -behavioral therapy for an 
adolescent female presenting with misophonia: a case example.  Clinical Case 
Studies , 17(4), 249 -258. https://doi.org/10.1177/1534650118782650  
Natalini, E., Dimaggio, G., Varakliotis, T., Fioretti, A., & Eibenstein, A. (2020). Misophonia, 
maladaptive schemas and personality disorders: a report of three cases.  Journal of 
Contemporary Psychotherapy , 50(1), 29 -35. https://doi.org/ 10.1007/s10879 -019-
09438 -3 
Naylor, J., Caimino, C., Scutt, P., Hoare, D. J., & Baguley, D. M. (2021). The prevalence and 
severity of misophonia in a UK undergraduate medical student population and 
validation of the Amsterdam misophonia scale.  Psychiatric Quarterly , 92(2), 60 9-619. 
https://doi.org/ 10.1007/s11126 -020-09825 -3 
Nizza,  I. E., Smith,  J. A. (2021 ). Essentials of interpretative phenomenological 
analysis . United States:  American Psychological Association.  
Palumbo, D. B., Alsalman, O., De Ridder, D., Song, J. J., & Vanneste, S. (2018). Misophonia 
and potential underlying mechanisms: A perspective.  Frontiers in Psychology , 9, 953 . 
https://doi.org/ 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.00953

Running Head: The lived experience of people with misophonia  
36 
 Pietkiewicz, I. & Smith, J.A. (2012). Praktyczny przewodnik interpretacyjnej analizy 
fenomenologicznej w badaniach jakościowych w psychologii. Czasopismo 
Psychologiczne, 18 (2), 361 -369. 
Potgieter, I., MacDonald, C., Partridge, L., Cima, R., Sheldrake, J., & Hoare, D. J. (2019). 
Misophonia: A scoping review of research.  Journal of Clinical Psychology , 75(7), 
1203 -1218 . https://doi.org/ 10.1002/jclp.22771   
Quek, T. C., Ho, C. S., Choo, C. C., Nguyen, L. H., Tran, B. X., & Ho, R. C. (2018). 
Misophonia in Singaporean Psychiatric Patients: A Cross -Sectional 
Study.  International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health , 15(7), 
1410 . https://doi.org/ 10.3390/ijerph15071410   
Reid, A. M., Guzick, A. G., Gernand, A., & Olsen, B. (2016). Intensive cognitive -behavioral 
therapy for comorbid misophonic and obsessive -compulsive symptoms: A systematic 
case study.  Journal of Obsessive -Compulsive and Related Disorders, 10,  1–9. 
https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.jocrd.2016.04.009  
Rinne, T., Särkkä, A., Degerman, A., Schröger, E., & Alho, K. (2006). Two separate 
mechanisms underlie auditory change dete ction and involuntary control of 
attention.  Brain Research , 1077 (1), 135–143. 
https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.brainres.2006.01.043  
Robinson, O. C. (2014). Sampling in interview -based qualitative research: A theoretical and 
practical guide.  Qualitative Research i n Psychology, 11 (1), 25–41. 
https://doi.org/ 10.1080/14780887.2013.801543  
Roushani, K., & Mehrabizadeh Honarmand, M. (2021). The effectiveness of Cognitive -
Behavioral Therapy on anger in female students with misophonia : A Single -Case 
Study.  Iranian Journal of Medical Sciences , 46(1), 61–67.

Running Head: The lived experience of people with misophonia  
37 
 https://doi.org/ 10.30476/ijms.2019.82063.  
Rouw, R., & Erfanian, M. (2018). A large ‐scale study of misophonia.  Journal of Clinical 
Psychology , 74(3), 453 -479. https://doi.org/ 10.1002/jclp.22500  
San Giorgi, R. (2015). Hyperactivity in amygdala and auditory cortex in misophonia: 
preliminary results of a functional magnetic resonance imaging study.  Amsterdam 
Brain Cognition Journal , 2, 21-28. 
Sanchez, T. G., & Silva, F. (2018). Familial misophonia or selective sound sensitivity 
syndrome: evidence for autosomal dominant inheritance?.  Brazilian Journal of 
Otorhinolaryngology , 84(5), 553–559. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.bjorl.2017.06.014  
Schneider, R. L., & Arch, J. J. (2017). Case study: a novel application of mindfulness -and 
acceptance -based components to treat misophonia.  Journal of Contextual Behavioral 
Science , 6(2), 221 -225. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.jcbs.2017.04.003  
Schröder, A. E., Vulink, N.  C., van Loon, A. J., & Denys, D. A. (2017). Cognitive behavioral 
therapy is effective in misophonia: An open trial.  Journal of Affective Disorders , 217, 
289–294. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2017.04.017  
Seaborne, A., & Fiorella, L. (2018). Effects of background chewing sounds on learning: The 
role of misophonia sensitivity.  Applied Cognitive Psychology , 32(2), 264 -269. 
https://doi.org/ 10.1002/acp.3387  
Schröder, A., van Diepen, R., Mazaheri, A., Petropoulos -Petalas, D., Soto de Amesti, V ., 
Vulink, N., &  Denys, D. (2014). Diminished n1 auditory evoked potentials to oddball 
stimuli in misophonia patients.  Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience , 8, 123 . 
https://doi.org/ 10.3389/fnbeh.2014.00123  
Schröder, A., van Wingen, G., Eijsker, N., San Giorgi, R., Vulink, N. C., Turbyne, C., & 
Denys, D. (2019). Misophonia is associated with altered brain activity in the auditory

Running Head: The lived experience of people with misophonia  
38 
 cortex and salience network.  Scientific Reports , 9(1), 7542 . 
https://doi.org/ 10.1038/s41598 -019-44084 -8 
Schröder, A., Vulink, N., & Denys, D. (2013). Misophonia: Diagnostic criteria for a new 
psychiatric disorder.  PloS ONE , 8(1), e54706 . 
https://doi.org/ 10.1371/journal.pone.0054706  
Seaborne, A., & Fiorella, L. (2018). Effects of background chewing sounds on learning: The 
role of misophonia sensitivity.  Applied Cognitive Psychology , 32(2), 264 -269. 
https://doi.org/ 10.1002/acp.3387   
Silva, F., & Sanchez, T. G. (2019). Evaluation of selective attention in patients with 
misophonia.  Brazilian Journal of Otorhinolaryngology , 85(3), 303–309. 
https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.bjorl.2018.02.005  
Smith, J. A., & Osborn, M. (2015). Interpretative phenomenological analysis as a useful 
methodology for research on the lived experience of pain.  British Journal of 
Pain , 9(1), 41–42. https://doi.org/ 10.1177/2049463714541642  
Smith, J. A., Flowers, P., & Larkin, M. (2009). Interpretative phenomenological analysis: 
Theory, method and research . Sage Publications Ltd.  
Smith, J. A., Harré, R., & Van Langenhove, L. (1995). Idiography. In J. A. Smith, R. Harré, & 
L. Van Langenhove, Rethinking psychology  (pp. 56 -69). Sage.  
Starman, A. B. (2013). The case study as a type of qualitative research.  Journal of 
Contemporary Educa tional Studies/Sodobna Pedagogika , 64(1). 
Taylor S. (2017). Misophonia: A new mental disorder?. Medical Hypotheses , 103 , 109–117. 
https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.mehy.2017.05.003  
Then, K. L., Rankin, J. A., & Ali, E. (2014). Focus group research: what is it and how can it  
be used?.  Canadian Journal of Cardiovascular Nursing , 24(1), 16–22.

Running Head: The lived experience of people with misophonia  
39 
 Tight, M. (2017).  Understanding case study research: Small-scale research with meaning . 
Sage. https://doi.org/10.4135/9781473920118  
Tunç, S., & Başbuğ, H. S. (2017). An extreme physical reaction in misophonia: stop 
smacking your mouth!.  Psychiatry and Clinical Psychopharmacology , 27(4), 416 -
418. https://doi.org/ 10.1080/24750573.2017.1354656  
Vanaja, C. S., & Abigail, M. S. (2020). Misophonia: An evidence -based case 
report. American Journal of Audiology , 29(4), 685 -690. 
https://doi.org/ 10.1044/2020_AJA -19-00111  
Veale D. (2006). A compelling desire for deafness.  Journal of Deaf Studies and Deaf  
Education , 11(3), 369–372. https://doi.org/ 10.1093/deafed/enj043  
Yin, R. K. (2009). Case study research: Design and methods (V ol. 5). Sage.  
Wu, M. S., Lewin, A. B., Murphy, T. K., & Storch, E. A. (2014). Misophonia: incidence, 
phenomenology, and clinical correlates in an undergraduate student sample.  Journal 
of Clinical Psychology , 70(10), 994–1007 . https://doi.org/ 10.1002/jclp.22098  
Yin, R. K. (2009).  Case study research: Design and methods  (V ol. 5). sage.  
Zhou, X., Wu, M. S., & Storch, E. A. (2017). Misophonia symptoms among Chinese 
university students: Incidence, associated impairment, and clinical correlates.  Journal 
of Obsessive -Compulsive and Related Disorders , 14, 7-12. 
https://doi.org/ .1016/j.jocrd.2017.05.

Running Head: The lived experience of people with misophonia  
40 
 Appendix: Interview Guide  
Phenomenol ogy of the misophonia auditory reaction  
- Going back in time, can you recall when your symptoms first occurred?  
- Have you ever been triggered by just looking at the trigger sound being produced but 
without hearing it? Would you explain how it feels?  
- Tell me in your own word how it feels when something triggers you. What kind of 
emotions do you experience?  
- Tell me what you think about once you ’re being triggered.  
- Will you please explain how you feel physically?  
- What is the severity of your react ion? Do you feel you can control it?  
- Tell me, before you could name your condition as misophonia, what were you 
thinking of your reactions when you were triggered?  
- How has it affected your day -to-day life and your relationships?  
Perceived links betwe en symptoms and life events  
- Have you noticed if there ’s time when you feel more susceptible to triggers?  
- Have you noticed a change in your symptoms ’ severity?  
How cope in terms of emotional, cognitive, and behavioural strategies in an educational or 
work environment  
- Tell me about a time when you were triggered in a class, a meeting or with a client, 
but could not leave the room. How did it feel?  
- What was going through your head at that time?  
- How did you cope with it?   
- How did you feel once you could leave?  
- How has misophonia affected your academic and occupational life?

Running Head: The lived experience of people with misophonia  
41 
 - Has it affected relationships with your colleagues/ co -workers?  
- Has it played a role in important decisions such as place of study, work environment 
or choice of caree r?  
- Have you ever felt that your misophonia has set you back in any way?  
Misophonia and impaired attention capacity  
- How has misophonia affected your attention?  
- Tell me about your level of concentration when there are triggers around you.  
- Have you noticed if misophonia has affected your productivity in any way? If yes, 
how?  
- Are there times when you are being able to ignore the trigger and concentrate solely 
on your task?  
- If yes, how do you think you are being able to do that?