The  Turkish  Form  of  the  Misophonia  Scale
Validity  and  Reliability  Test  StudyStudies  in  Psychology  
Merve  Deniz  Sakarya1 ,Psychology  Studies
ORCID:  M.D.S.  0000-0002-0885-4903;   E.Ç.  
0000-0002-1548-4314  
Application/Submitted:  22.12.2020  
Revision  Request/Revision  Requested:  
23.02.2021Fatih  Sultan  Mahallesi  Eskisehir  Yolu  18.  km  06790  
Etimesgut,  Ankara-Turkey  E-mail/E-mail:  
mdeniz@baskent.edu.trInstitute  of  Audiology  and  Speech  Disorders
Kabul/Accepted:  18.01.2022  Faculty  of  Health  Sciences,  Department  of  Audiology  
and  Ankara  University,  Health  Sciences
Son  Revizyon/Last  Revision  Received:  
07.01.2022  Faculty  of  Health  Sciences,  Department  of  Audiology,
Psychology  Studies  -  Studies  in  Psychology,  42(1):  
231–255.PhD  Program,  Ankara,  Turkey  2  Instructors,  
Baskent  University,
Citation/Citation:  Deniz  Sakarya,  M  and  Cakmak,  E.  
(2022).  Validity  and  reliability  testing  of  the  Turkish  
version  of  the  Misophonia  Scale.
This  work  is  licensed  under  Creative  Commons  Attribution-NonCommercial  4.0  International  License  Corresponding  author:  Merve  Deniz  Sakarya,  
Baskent  University,  Faculty  of  Health  Sciences,  
Department  of  Audiology,  Baglica  CampusAnkara  Turkey
https://doi.org/10.26650/SP2020-845239  There  is  no  consensus  on  the  prevalence,  assessment  and  management  of  
misophonia.  One  of  the  biggest  obstacles  to  misophonia  research  is  the  scarcity  
of  psychometrically  robust  assessment  tools.  The  aim  of  this  study  is  to  evaluate  
the  Misophonia  Questionnaire  (Misophonia  Questionnaire;  Wu  et  al.,  2014).
To  meet  the  need  for  a  measurement  tool  for  clinical  and  population-based  
assessments  of  misophonia  by  making  its  Turkish  adaptation.  The  research  
was  carried  out  with  638  undergraduate  students  aged  between  18-26  at  
Baÿkent  University.  Exploratory  (N  =  420)  and  confirmatory  factor  analysis  (N  
=  218)  were  applied  within  the  scope  of  construct  validity,  and  internal  
consistency  and  discriminant  validity  tests  were  performed.  Internal  consistency,  
split-half  and  test-retest  methods  were  used  for  reliability.  In  the  exploratory  
factor  analysis,  it  was  observed  that  the  scale  had  a  three-factor  structure:  
misophonia  symptoms,  misophonia  emotions  and  behaviors  -  avoidance  and  
internalization,  misophonia  feelings  and  behaviors  -  aggression  and  
externalization .  In  the  confirmatory  factor  analysis,  the  fit  indices  for  the  three-
factor  structure  were  found  to  be  within  acceptable  limits.  As  a  result  of  
discriminant  validity,  it  was  seen  that  those  with  clinical  misophonia  had  a  
higher  mean  in  all  factors  than  those  without.  The  Cronbach  Alpha  internal  
consistency  coefficient  for  the  whole  scale  was  .89  (for  the  factors  .79,  .85  and  
.83,  respectively),  the  halving  reliability  coefficient  was  .83  (.86,  .87  and  .81  for  
the  factors),  and  the  test-retest  reliability  coefficient  was  found  to  be .  It  was  
found  to  be  .78.  With  this  study,  the  Misophonia  Scale,  which  can  be  used  to  
evaluate  misophonia  in  the  general  sample,  has  been  translated  into  Turkish.  
As  a  result  of  the  psychometric  analyzes,  data  supporting  the  validity  and  reliability  of  the  Misophonia  Scale  were  obtained.ABSTRACT  Misophonia  is  a  state  of  decreased  voice  tolerance  to  certain  
sounds  that  triggers  severe  emotional  or  physiological  responses.  Individuals  
with  misophonia  may  feel  disgust,  anxiety,  anger  towards  specific  sounds  such  
as  chewing  food,  lip  smacking,  breathing,  etc.
Keywords:  Misophonia  scale,  validity,  reliabilityValidity  and  Reliability  Testing  Study  of  the  Turkish  
Version   of  the  Misophonia  Scale   DOI:  10.26650/SP2020-845239
Eda  Cakmak2Research  Article/Research  ArticlePsychology  Studies  -  Studies  in  Psychology  Vol/Volume:  42,  Issue/Issue:  1,  2022
1  Lecturer,  Baskent  University,Machine Translated by Google

Keywords:  Misophonia  Questionnaire,  validity,  reliability  
Psychology  Studies  -  Studies  in  Psychology  Vol/Volume:  42,  Issue/Issue:  1,  2022ABSTRACT  
Misophonia  is  a  disorder  where  individuals  experience  decreased  tolerance  to  certain  sounds  that  trigger  intense   
emotional  or  physiological  responses  in  them.  People  with  misophonia  can  feel  disgust,  anger,  anxiety,  and  they  may   
experience  anger  outbursts  when  exposed  to  certain  sounds  that  are  insignificant  to  other  people,  such  as  chewing,   lip-
smacking,  and  breathing.  There  is  no  consensus  on  the  prevalence,  assessment,  and  management  of  misophonia.  A   
major  barrier  to  the  research  on  misophonia  is  the  lack  of  robust  psychometric  assessment  tools.  This  study  aims  to  
meet   the  need  for  a  measurement  tool  for  clinical  and  population-based  evaluations  intended  for  misophonia  by  adapting  
the   Misophonia  Questionnaire  (Wu  et  al.,  2014)  to  Turkish.  The  research  was  carried  out  on  638  undergraduate  students  
at   Baskent  University,  from  18  to  26  years  of  age.  Exploratory  factor  analysis  was  conducted  on  420  participants  (73%   
female,  27%  male)  and  confirmatory  factor  analysis  was  conducted  on  218  participants  (62%  female,  38%  male).  The   
statistical  reliability  was  evaluated  using  the  internal  consistency  coefficient,  split  half,  and  test-retest  methods.  In  the   
Misophonia  Questionnaire,  misophonia  was  explained  by  the  following  three  subscale  factors:  misophonia  symptoms,   
misophonia  emotions  and  behaviors-avoidance  and  internalization,  and  misophonia  emotions  and  behaviors-aggression   
and  externalization.  These  were  used  in  the  exploratory  factor  analysis.  The  confirmatory  factor  analysis  found  that  the   
fit  indexes  were  within  acceptable  limits.  With  the  discriminant  validity,  the  participants  with  clinical  misophonia  were   
observed  to  have  a  higher  mean  in  all  factors  than  those  without.  The  internal  consistency  coefficient  of  the  scale  was   
calculated  at  .89,  and  for  the  three  subscale  factors  mentioned  earlier  were  .79,  .85,  and  .83,  respectively.  The  calculated   
test-retest  reliability  coefficient  was  .78,  which  applied  to  75  participants.  The  split-half  reliability  coefficient  was  .83   (for  
each  subscale  factor,  was  .86,  .87,  and  .81,  respectively).  With  this  study,  the  Misophonia  Questionnaire,  which  can   be  
used  to  evaluate  misophonia  in  the  general  population,  was  adapted  into  Turkish.  From  the  psychometric  analysis,   data  
supporting  the  validity  and  reliability  of  the  Misophonia  Scale  were  obtained.  
232   Validity  and  Reliability  Test  of  the  Turkish  Version  of  the  Misophonia  Scale
The  items  of  the  MQ  were  translated  into  Turkish  by  a  native  translator.  Whether  the   items  
gave  the  same  meaning  in  different  cultures  was  checked  by  the  researchers.  Lastly,   the  
translations  were  checked  by  two  linguists.  After  the  necessary  adjustments  were  made,   the  final  
version  of  the  scale  was  created.  The  research  was  carried  out  on  638  undergraduate   students  at  
Baskent  University,  from  18  to  26  years  of  age.  Exploratory  factor  analysis  was   There  are  a  variety  of  scales  evaluating  misophonia,  such  as  the  Amsterdam  Misophonia   
Questionnaire  (A-MISO-S;  Schröder  et  al.,  2013),  Misophonia  Questionnaire  (MQ)  (Wu  et  al.,   
2014)  and  MisoQuest  (Siepsiak  et  al.,  2020).  However,  there  is  no  valid  and  reliable  Turkish   
measurement  tool  to  evaluate  the  symptoms  and  effects  of  misophonia.  Therefore,  the  aim   of  the  
current  study  is  to  adapt  the  MQ  (Wu  et  al.,  2014)  into  Turkish.  EXTENDED  ABSTRACT  
Method  Misophonia,  defined  as  an  abnormally  strong  reaction  to  a  sound  with  a  specific   pattern  and/
or  meaning  to  an  individual  (Jastreboff  &  Jastreboff,  2014),  is  a  phenomenon   that  has  not  been  
given  enough  attention  in  the  literature  until  recent  years.  Studies   on  misophonia  consist  mostly  of  
case  reports;  thus,  studies  with  large  populations  are   necessary  to  understand  this  phenomenon.  
Measurement  tools  have  been  developed  in   the  international  literature  in  recent  years  to  better  
understand  the  nature  of  misophonia.   Machine Translated by Google

While  the  original  of  the  MQ  was  explained  with  two  factors,  based  on  the  results  of   the  
exploratory  factor  analysis,  the  Turkish  adaptation  of  the  scale  was  explained  with  three   factors
—by  the  number  of  eigenvalues  greater  than  1,  Horn’s  (1965)  parallel  analysis  and   screen  plot  
methods.  The  second  original  factor,  misophonia  emotions  and  behaviors  is   explained  with  two  
sub-factors.  To  discuss  and  confirm  the  accuracy  of  this  factor,  it  was   discussed  with  the  author  
of  the  original  scale,  Dr.  Wu.  The  final  version  of  the  scale  was   formed  by  renaming  the  factors.  
The  first  factor  was  named  as  “misophonia  symptom,”  the   second  factor  “misophonia  emotions  
and  behaviors—avoidance  and  internalization,”  the   third  factor  “misophonia  emotions  and  
behaviors—aggression  and  externalization.”  The   principal  component  analysis  and  direct  oblimin  
rotation  methods  were  used  to  determine   the  structural  validity  of  the  MQ.  According  to  the  
exploratory  factor  analysis  results,  the   Bartlett’s  test  statistic  for  sphericity  was  obtained—(ÿ2  =  
2948.28  df  =  136  p  <  .001)—and   the  Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin  coefficient  was  .89,  so  it  was  found  to  
be  sufficient  (Alpar,  2017).   
The  percentage  of  variance  for  the  first,  second  and  third  factors  were  37.13%,  10.83%,  and   
7.56%,  respectively,  with  a  total  variance  of  55.2%.  According  to  the  confirmatory  factor   analysis,  
it  was  observed  that  the  fit  indexes  of  the  model  were  within  acceptable  limits:  ÿ2 /  df  =  2.23,  
Root  Mean  Square  Error  of  Approximation  (RMSEA)  =  .07,  Comparative  Fit  Index   (CFI)  =  .91,  
Goodness  of  Fit  Index  (GFI)  =  .88,  and  Adjustment  Goodness  of  Fit  Index  (AGFI)  =   .84  
(Özdamar,  2017).  Regarding  the  discriminant  validity,  clinical  misophonia  was  observed   to  have  
a  higher  mean  in  all  factors  than  those  without.  Results  conducted  on  420  participants  (73%  female,  27%  male)  and  confirmatory  factor  analysis  was   
conducted  on  218  participants  (62%  female,  38%  male).   
The  MQ  contains  17  items.  The  original  scale  consists  of  three  parts:  “misophonia   
symptoms,”  “misophonia  emotions  and  behaviors,”  and  “misophonia  severity.”  The  items  are   
scored  from  0  (not  at  all  true)  to  4  (always  true).  The  misophonia  symptom  factor  consists   of  
seven  specific  sounds  that  often  cause  annoyance  in  individuals.  The  misophonia   emotions  and  
behaviors  factor  evaluates  negative  feelings  and  behaviors  developing  against   misophonia  
symptoms.  Misophonia  severity,  the  last  part  of  the  scale,  gives  information   about  the  severity  
of  misophonia  and  is  not  included  in  the  factor  structure  and  scoring.  In   this  section,  the  
participant  is  asked  to  score  sensitive  sounds  on  a  scale  from  1  (minimal)  to   15  (very  severe),  
according  to  the  degree  that  it  affects  their  daily  life.  Scores  of  seven  and   above  indicate  
clinically  significant  misophonia  (Wu  et  al.,  2014).  The  17  items  from  section   1  and  2  are  included  
in  the  scoring  of  the  scale.  
233  Deniz  Sakarya  M,  Cakmak  E
Psychology  Studies  -  Studies  in  Psychology  Vol/Volume:  42,  Issue/Issue:  1,  2022Machine Translated by Google

After  reaching  a  consensus  with  original  scale’s  author,  it  was  deemed  that  the  construct   
validity  of  the  scale  met  the  desired  criteria  in  a  three-factor  structure—using  explanatory   
and  confirmatory  factor  analysis  methods.  The  internal  consistency  coefficient  of  the  scale   
was  found  to  be  high.  Overall,  the  results  of  the  study  indicate  that  the  Turkish  version  of   the  
MQ  has  adequate  reliability  and  validity  values  for  a  Turkish  sample.  It  is  presented  as  a   
practical,  valid,  and  reliable  measurement  tool  that  can  be  used  in  large  population  studies   
on  misophonia  in  the  Turkish  setting.  The  factor  structure  of  the  Turkish  version  of  the  MQ  is  different  from  the  original  scale.   Based  on  the  results  of  the  reliability  analysis  of  the  MQ,  the  internal  consistency   
coefficient  was  calculated  as  .89,  and  for  each  of  the  three  factors  was  .79,  .85,  and  .83   
respectively.  The  split-half  reliability  coefficient  was  calculated  as  .83  (for  each  subscale   
factor,  it  was  .86,  .87,  and  .81,  respectively)  and  the  test-retest  correlation  coefficient  as  .78.  
Discussion  
Psychology  Studies  -  Studies  in  Psychology  Vol/Volume:  42,  Issue/Issue:  1,  2022Validity  and  Reliability  Test  of  the  Turkish  Version  of  the  Misophonia  Scale
234   Machine Translated by Google

Until  recent  years,  evaluation  and  treatment  reports  in  the  form  of  case  reports  have  
been  published  in  the  literature,  and  more  recently,  studies  with  larger  samples  have  
been  planned  in  order  to  better  understand  the  nature  of  misophonia,  to  evaluate  and  
manage  misophonia  (eg,  Jager  et  al.,  2020a;  Rouw  and  Erfanian,  2018).  These  studies,  
which  will  be  conducted  in  a  large  sample,  are  important  in  order  to  better  understand  the  
development  of  misophonia,  other  disorders  associated  with  misophonia,  how  certain  
factors  modulate  the  severity  of  the  misophonic  response,  and  ultimately  to  develop  
management/ treatment  protocols.  Standard  measurement  tools  that  measure  misophonia  
are  necessary  in  the  planning  of  these  scientific  studies.  Despite  the  existence  of  
measurement  tools  whose  validity  and  reliability  are  supported  in  the  international  
literature,  the  lack  of  psychometrically  robust  assessment  tools  is  cited  as  the  biggest  
obstacle  to  the  investigation  and  treatment  of  misophonia  (Rosenthal  et  al.,  2021).
There  is  no  standard  assessment  tool  in  Turkey,  studies  on  misophonia  are  still  
published  in  the  form  of  case  reports.  A  standard  assessment  tool  will  contribute  to  the  
dissemination  of  research  on  misophonia  and  the  creation  of  a  common  literature  in  
Turkey.  In  addition,  a  standard  Turkish  measurement  tool  was  used  to  evaluate  misophonia  
in  clinical  use  and  to  measure  the  effectiveness  of  the  intervention.Misophonia  is  an  abnormally  strong  response  to  a  specific  and/or  meaningful  sound  
(Jastreboff  &  Jastreboff,  2014).  The  term  misophonia  was  coined  in  the  early  2000s  by  
combining  the  Greek  words  “miso” (hate)  and  “phonia” (sound)  to  describe  a  group  of  
patients  who  differed  from  other  patients  in  terms  of  reduced  sound  tolerance  problem  
(Jastreboff  &  Jastreboff,  2001;  2014).  Individuals  with  misophonia  are  often  sensitive  to  
sounds  that  are  considered  insignificant  by  other  people,  such  as  popping  gum,  chewing  
and  cracking  sounds,  breathing,  whistling,  lip  smacking,  pencil  clicking  (Cavanna  &  Seri,  
2015).  Individuals  may  feel  different  emotions  such  as  disgust,  anxiety  and  mild  anger  as  
a  result  of  their  extreme  sensitivity  to  sounds,  and  sometimes  they  may  experience  
tantrums.  This  situation  causes  the  behavior  of  avoiding  the  triggering  sound  (Brout  et  al.,  
2018).  The  severity  of  misophonia  varies  from  person  to  person,  and  as  its  severity  
increases,  it  negatively  affects  the  quality  of  life  of  people  (Jager  et  al.,  2020a).  The  
negative  effects  of  misophonia  on  people's  social  life,  school  life,  family  and  work  life  have  
been  shown  in  many  studies  (Rouw  and  Erfanian,  2018;  Sanchez  and  da  Silva,  2018;  
Schröder  et  al.,  2017).
Psychology  Studies  -  Studies  in  Psychology  Vol/Volume:  42,  Issue/Issue:  1,  2022Deniz  Sakarya  M,  Cakmak  E
235  Machine Translated by Google

Abnormal  reactions  to  certain  sounds  in  misophonia  in  different  situations  and  conditions  
are  independent  of  the  hearing  of  individuals  and  mostly  the  intensity  and  other  physical  
characteristics  of  the  sound.  Responses  to  sound  depend  more  on  the  context  in  which  the  
sound  occurs,  past  experiences,  and  the  patient's  psychological  profile  (Jastreboff  &  Jastreboff,  
2001;  Jastreboff  &  Jastreboff,  2003;  Schröder  et  al.,  2013).  Although  the  etiology  is  not  fully  
known,  the  fact  that  this  complaint  has  also  been  reported  in  the  families  of  individuals  with  
misophonia  in  some  studies  in  the  literature  suggests  that  there  may  be  a  genetic  transmission  
(Rouw  and  Erfanian,  2018;  Sanchez  and  da  Silva,  2018).  In  the  literature,  the  age  of  onset  is  
shown  as  childhood  and  adolescence  (Edelstein  et  al.,  2013;  Sanchez  and  da  Silva,  2018;  
Schröder  et  al.,  2013).Characteristics  and  Mechanism  of  Misophonia
It  is  stated  that  the  limbic  system  and  autonomic  nervous  system  play  a  primary  role  in  
adverse  reactions  to  sound,  while  other  systems  in  the  brain  are  involved  in  the  process  
secondarily.  It  is  thought  that  the  auditory  system  functions  normally  in  individuals  who  develop  
such  reactions  to  sound,  but  the  functional  connections  between  the  auditory  system,  the  limbic  
system  and  the  autonomic  nervous  system  increase  (Jastreboff  &  Jastreboff,  2014).
It  is  still  debated  whether  misophonia  is  a  potentially  inducible  physiological  condition,  a  
symptomatic  indicator  of  an  underlying  psychiatric  disorder,  or  a  separate  symptom  that  can  
be  seen  together  with  other  psychiatric  disorders  (Cavanna  and  Seri,  2015).  Although  it  is  not  
included  in  current  diagnostic  criteria  such  as  DSM-5  and  ICD-10,  Schröder  et  al.  (2013)  
reported  that  misophonia  should  be  evaluated  in  a  separate  psychiatric  disease  group  and  
presented  some  diagnostic  criteria  regarding  this.It  is  also  important  in  terms  of  evidence-based  practice.  In  2018,  when  this  study  was  planned,  
it  was  determined  that  the  only  measurement  tool  with  psychometric  evaluations  in  the  
international  literature  was  the  Misophonia  Questionnaire- MQ;  Wu  et  al.,  2014.  Therefore,  in  
this  study,  it  was  aimed  to  translate  this  scale  into  our  language  and  to  test  the  psychometric  
properties  of  the  Turkish  version.  With  this  adapted  measurement  tool,  professionals  who  want  
to  evaluate  misophonia  in  Turkey  and  examine  the  effectiveness  of  misophonia  treatment  will  
be  able  to  use  the  Misophonia  Scale,  which  is  a  standard  measurement  tool,  as  well  as  clinical  
observation  and  interview  forms,  and  thus  have  an  objective  tool  for  evaluation  and  follow-up.  
It  is  thought  that  with  the  adaptation  of  the  scale  to  Turkish,  scientific  studies  on  misophonia  
will  increase  in  our  country.
Psychology  Studies  -  Studies  in  Psychology  Vol/Volume:  42,  Issue/Issue:  1,  2022Validity  and  Reliability  Test  of  the  Turkish  Version  of  the  Misophonia  Scale
236   Machine Translated by Google

is  a  mystery.  In  Turkey,  Öz  (2016)  stated  that  misophonia  should  be  considered  as  a  
separate  psychiatric  condition  and  developed  various  diagnostic  criteria  for  misophonia  in  
his  research.  However,  some  psychiatrists  have  evaluated  misophonia  as  a  symptom  of  
different  psychiatric  problems  such  as  obsessive  compulsive  disorder,  generalized  anxiety  
disorder  or  schizotypal  personality  disorder  rather  than  a  separate  condition  (Ferreira  et  al.,  
2013).  Jastreboff  and  Jastreboff  (2014),  on  the  other  hand,  reported  that  very  few  of  the  
patients  with  misophonia  they  examined  under  the  sound  tolerance  problem  had  psychiatric  
problems,  and  that  most  of  these  patients  recovered  without  the  need  for  a  psychiatric  
intervention  with  the  application  of  certain  versions  of  voice  therapy  and  counseling  
approaches.  Although  it  has  been  reported  that  different  methods  such  as  Tinnitus  
Reeducation  Therapy  (Jastreboff  &  Jastreboff,  2014),  Oppositional  Conditioning  (Dozier,  
2015),  Cognitive  Behavioral  Therapy  (Jager  et  al.,  2020b;  Schröder  et  al.,  2017)  are  
effective  in  the  management  of  misophonia,  a  consensus  has  been  reached.  There  is  no  established  standard  treatment  protocol.
With  the  increasing  interest  in  the  concept  in  the  international  arena,  some  measurement  
tools  have  been  developed  to  evaluate  misophonia.  Among  these  tools  are  Amsterdam  
Misophonia  Questionnaire  (A-MISO-S;  Schröder  et  al.,  2013),  Misophonia  Questionnaire  
(MQ;  Wu  et  al.,  2014),  MisoQuest  (Siepsiak  et  al.,  2020),  The  Duke  Misophonia  Questi  
onnaire  ( DMQ;  Rosenthal  et  al.,  2021);  Misophonia  Response  Scale  (Dibb  et  al.,  2021).  
The  A-MISO-S  is  the  first  tool  to  assess  misophonia,  created  by  adapting  the  Yale-Brown  
Obsessive-Compulsive  Scale  (Y-BOCS;  Goodman  et  al.,  1989)  items  to  misophonia.  When  
the  current  research  was  planned,  the  only  measurement  tool  available  apart  from  the  
Misophonia  Scale  (Wu  et  al.,  2014)  was  the  A-MISO-S  (Schröder  et  al.,  2013),  and  its  
psychometric  properties  were  not  presented  at  the  time  this  tool  was  developed,  and  its  
validity  and  reliability  were  tested  later  (Naylor).  et  al.,  2020).  The  development  of  these  
scales  has  enabled  the  concept  to  be  better  understood  by  disseminating  the  researches.Evaluation  of  Misophonia  
Misophonia  has  not  been  a  frequently  evaluated  concept  until  recently.  One  of  the  
reasons  why  misophonia,  for  which  academic  interest  has  been  low  until  recent  years,  has  
not  been  adequately  researched  in  the  international  literature  is  that  individuals  seeking  
treatment  apply  to  many  different  fields  such  as  otology,  audiology,  psychiatry,  psychology  
and  neurology  (Jastreboff  &  Jastreboff,  2014).  In  Turkey,  it  is  unclear  whether  misophonic  
individuals  perceive  their  misophonia  as  a  problem  and  to  which  units  they  refer.
Psychology  Studies  -  Studies  in  Psychology  Vol/Volume:  42,  Issue/Issue:  1,  2022Deniz  Sakarya  M,  Cakmak  E
237  Machine Translated by Google

In  the  analyzes  carried  out  by  Wu  et  al.  (2014)  to  determine  the  factor  structure  
of  the  scale ,  it  was  seen  that  it  has  a  two-factor  structure:  misophonia  symptoms  
and  misophonia  emotions  and  behaviors .  Again,  in  analyzes  for  construct  validity,  
the  Misophonia  Scale's  relationship  with  the  Adult  Sensory  Questionnai  re-ASQ  
(Adult  Sensory  Questionnai  re-ASQ;  Kinnealey  &  Oliver,  2002,  cited  by  Wu  et  al.,  
2014)  was  moderate;  the  relationship  with  visual  sensitivity,  olfactory  sensitivity  and  
tactile  sensitivity  was  found  to  be  low  as  expected.  The  internal  consistency  
coefficient  of  the  scale  was  found  to  be  .86  for  misophonia  symptoms  and  misophonia  
emotion  and  behavior  factors,  and  .89  for  the  whole  scale.In  order  to  evaluate  misophonia  symptoms  in  Turkey,  a  comprehensive  
misophonia  symptom  list  was  created  for  the  first  time  in  a  thesis  study  in  the  field  of  
psychiatry,  and  this  list  was  named  the  “Misophonia  Interview  Scale” (Öz,  2016).  A  
Turkish  screening  scale  for  differentiating  misophonia  and  other  sound  tolerance  
problems  (hyperacusis,  phonophobia)  was  prepared  in  a  doctoral  thesis  study  
conducted  in  the  field  of  audiology  (Alluÿoÿlu,  2020).  Considering  that  the  lack  of  a  
measurement  tool  that  rapidly  evaluates  misophonia  in  our  country,  whose  validity  
and  reliability  has  been  tested,  is  an  important  deficiency  for  clinical  applications  and  
population-based  studies,  the  aim  of  this  study  is  to  adapt  the  Misophonia  Scale  
developed  by  Wu  et  al.  (2014)  into  Turkish.  This  scale  was  developed  to  evaluate  
the  symptoms  of  misophonia  and  the  emotions  and  behaviors  that  occur  during  
exposure  to  triggering  sound.  The  original  scale  consists  of  three  parts:  misophonia  
symptoms,  misophonia  feelings  and  behaviors ,  and  misophonia  severity .  In  the  
misophonia  symptoms  section,  there  are  seven  specific  sounds  that  people  with  
misophonia  are  often  disturbed  by,  such  as  mouth  smacking  and  paper  rustling,  and  
it  is  questioned  how  sensitive  people  are  to  these  sounds  compared  to  other  people.  
In  the  misophonia  emotions  and  behaviors  section,  negative  emotions  and  behaviors  
developed  against  misophonia  symptoms  are  evaluated  (eg,  "you  have  violent  
thoughts,  you  feel  anxious  and  distressed").  In  this  section,  which  consists  of  10  
questions  that  include  expressions  of  emotion  and  behavior,  individuals  are  asked  
to  what  extent  they  develop  the  emotions  and  behaviors  defined  in  the  items  when  
they  encounter  a  disturbing  sound.  The  severity  of  misophonia  section  was  created  
by  adapting  the  items  of  the  National  Institute  of  Mental  Health  Global  Obsessive-
Com  pulsive  Scale;  Murphy  et  al.,  1982;  cited  in  Wu  et  al.,  2014  to  misophonia.  In  
this  section,  the  number  and  degree  of  sensitive  voices  and  how  much  these  voices  interfere  with  daily  life  are  evaluated.
Psychology  Studies  -  Studies  in  Psychology  Vol/Volume:  42,  Issue/Issue:  1,  2022Validity  and  Reliability  Test  of  the  Turkish  Version  of  the  Misophonia  Scale
238   Machine Translated by Google

Participants
A  second  data  consisting  of  218  students  was  used  for  confirmatory  factor  analysis.  Of  the  
participants  in  this  part  of  the  study,  62%  (N  =  135)  were  female  and  38%  (N  =  83)  were  male  students.  
The  mean  age  of  the  students  was  20.6  and  the  standard  deviation  was  2.4.Method
A  data  set  of  420  participants  was  used  for  explanatory  factor  analysis  from  this  sample.  73%  (N  
=307)  of  the  participants  in  this  group  were  female  and  27%  (N  =113)  were  male  students.  The  mean  age  
of  the  students  is  20.9  and  the  standard  deviation  is  1.6.The  only  adaptation  study  of  the  scale  other  than  Turkish  is  the  Chinese  culture  adaptation  (Zhou  et  
al.,  2017).  In  the  adaptation  study,  the  items  were  translated  from  English  to  Chinese  and  translated  and  
back-translated  by  bilinguals.  The  internal  consistency  coefficient  was  .89  for  misophonia  symptoms  and  
misophonia  emotions  and  behaviors  factor;  reported  as  .90  for  the  entire  scale.  However,  no  additional  
psychometric  results  were  presented  in  this  study.  Within  the  scope  of  this  study,  it  was  aimed  to  adapt  
the  Misophonia  Scale  into  Turkish.
The  original  scale  consists  of  two  factors  in  total.  Misophonia  symptoms,  which  is  the  first  factor  in  which  
the  presence  of  misophonia  symptoms  is  questioned,  consists  of  seven  statements.  The  items  range  
from  “absolutely  not  true” (0)  to  “always  true” (4).Faculty  of  Dentistry,  22%  (N  =  138)  were  students  of  Faculty  of  Education,  30%  (N  =  189)  were  students  
of  Faculty  of  Engineering,  27%  (N  =  173)  were  students  of  Faculty  of  Health  Sciences.  26%  (N  =  165)  of  
the  students  were  in  the  1st  grade,  21%  in  the  2nd  grade  (N  =  133  students)  38%  (N  =  244)  in  the  3rd  
grade,  15%  (N  =  96)  4  She  continues  to  class.The  Misophonia  Scale  was  applied  to  638  undergraduate  students  between  the  ages  of  18-26  at  
Baÿkent  University.  Since  the  number  of  students  in  the  faculties  was  not  equal,  weighting  was  made  and  
students  from  each  faculty  participated  in  the  study  in  line  with  the  determined  number.  15%  (N  =  99)  of  
respondents  were  Law  School,  6%  (N  =  39)
Data  Collection  Tool  
Misophonia  Scale  The  
Misophonia  Scale,  developed  by  Wu  et  al.  (2014),  measures  misophonia  symptoms  and  emotions  
and  behaviors  developed  in  exposure  to  triggering  sound.
Psychology  Studies  -  Studies  in  Psychology  Vol/Volume:  42,  Issue/Issue:  1,  2022Deniz  Sakarya  M,  Cakmak  E
239  Machine Translated by Google

240   Validity  and  Reliability  Test  of  the  Turkish  Version  of  the  Misophonia  Scale
Psychology  Studies  -  Studies  in  Psychology  Vol/Volume:  42,  Issue/Issue:  1,  2022In  order  
to  make  the  Turkish  adaptation  of  the  Transaction  Misophonia  Scale,  the  person  who  developed  the  scale  in  
2018,  Dr.  With  permission  from  Monica  S.  Wu.  The  items  in  the  scale  were  translated  into  Turkish  by  a  translator  
and  the  status  of  each  item  giving  the  same  meaning  as  the  original  language  was  examined  by  the  researchers.  
The  translation  was  checked  by  two  linguists  and  necessary  corrections  were  made  as  a  result  of  the  feedback  
given.  After  the  translation  process  was  completed,  the  content  of  the  items  was  evaluated  by  a  specialist  
psychologist  and  an  audiologist.
Data  analysisThe  statements  in  the  last  part  of  the  scale  give  information  about  the  severity  of  misophonia  and  are  not  
included  in  the  factor  structure  and  scoring.  The  person  is  asked  to  choose  the  number  and  degree  of  sensitive  
sounds  and  how  much  they  interfere  with  their  daily  life  from  a  scale  ranging  from  "1  to  15".  Markings  of  7  and  above  
in  this  section  represent  clinically  significant  misophonia  (Wu  et  al.,  2014).
This  study  was  approved  by  the  Medical  and  Health  Sciences  Research  and  Ethics  Committee  of  Baÿkent  
University  (Project  No:  KA18/412).has  a  response  category.  The  second  factor,  which  measures  the  emotions  and  behaviors  that  occur  as  a  result  of  
exposure  to  the  triggering  sound,  named  misophonia  emotions  and  behaviors ,  consists  of  10  questions.  These  
items  have  a  5-point  Likert-type  response  category  ranging  from  “never” (0)  to  “always” (4).  The  scored  part  of  the  
scale  is  made  by  considering  the  answers  given  to  a  total  of  17  statements  in  these  two  factors.  There  is  no  reverse  
item  in  the  scale  and  the  total  score  ranges  from  0  to  68.  As  the  scale  score  increases,  it  should  be  considered  that  
the  frequency  of  misophonia  symptoms  and  the  negative  emotions  and  behaviors  that  the  person  develops  against  
it  increase.
The  scale  was  applied  in  the  form  of  paper  and  pencil  by  going  to  the  classrooms.Before  the  application,  the  Turkish  Misophonia  Scale  was  administered  to  five  university  students  in  order  to  
examine  the  intelligibility  of  the  items.  As  a  result  of  the  answers  from  the  students,  it  was  seen  that  more  than  one  
marking  was  made  on  the  scale  in  the  fourth  part  of  the  scale.  For  this  reason,  corrections  were  made  on  how  to  
mark  on  the  directive  and  the  final  version  of  the  scale  was  created  (See  Appendix  1).  The  number  of  students  in  the  
faculties  determined  for  the  study  was  requested  in  writing  from  the  Registrar's  Office.
Item-total  score  correlations  were  calculated  for  the  item  analysis  of  the  Misophonia  Scale.  The  construct  
validity  of  the  scale  was  examined  with  exploratory  and  confirmatory  factor  analyses.Machine Translated by Google

241  Deniz  Sakarya  M,  Cakmak  E
Psychology  Studies  -  Studies  in  Psychology  Vol/Volume:  42,  Issue/Issue:  1,  2022Confirmatory  factor  analysis  was  used  to  test  the  suitability  of  the  determined  factor  structures.  
Based  on  the  factor  structure  that  emerged  in  the  exploratory  factor  analysis,  a  first-level  three-
factor  confirmatory  factor  analysis  model  was  created.  In  evaluating  the  model's  goodness  of  fit,  
the  ratio  of  the  chi-square  value  to  the  degree  of  freedom,  the  mean  square  root  of  errors  (Root  
Mean  Square  Error  of  Approximation  -  RMSEA),  the  comparative  fit  index  (CFI),  the  goodness  of  
fit  index  (Goodness  of  Fit  Index)  -  GFI)  were  tested  with  the  adjusted  Goodness  of  Fit  Index  
(AGFI)  measures.
In  the  reliability  analyzes  of  the  scale,  the  Cronbach's  alpha  coefficient,  which  is  the  measure  
of  the  internal  consistency  of  the  items,  was  calculated.  As  another  reliability  test  method,  the  split-
half  reliability  coefficient  was  examined  within  the  scope  of  the  split-half  method.  For  test-retest  
reliability,  the  scale  was  reapplied  to  75  people  with  14-day  intervals  under  the  same  conditions,  
and  its  reliability  was  examined  with  the  test-retest  reliability  coefficient.  Statistical  analyzes  were  
performed  using  IBM  SPSS  version  25.0  and  IBM  SPSS  AMOS  version  25.0  package  programs.
Results
Item  AnalysisIn  the  internal  consistency  validity,  the  relationships  between  the  total  score  of  the  scale  and  
its  factors  were  examined  with  the  Pear  final  correlation  coefficient.  In  the  discriminant  validity  
analysis,  Kolmogorov-Smirnov  test  and  Levene  test  were  used  to  examine  the  suitability  of  the  
total  score  and  factors  of  the  scale  with  normal  distribution  and  the  homogeneity  of  variances,  and  
were  examined  with  the  t  test  in  independent  groups.is  not.  The  suitability  of  the  sample  for  the  exploratory  factor  analysis  in  the  misophonia  scale  was  
tested  with  the  Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin  (KMO)  sample  adequacy  measure.  Principal  component  
method  and  direct  oblimin  rotation  method  were  used  in  exploratory  factor  analysis.  Eigenvalue  
criterion  (Kaiser's  criterion)  and  Horn's  parallel  analysis  methods  were  used  to  determine  the  
number  of  factors.
Within  the  scope  of  the  item  analysis  of  the  scale,  the  correlations  of  each  item  with  the  total  
score  were  examined.  The  correlation  coefficients  obtained  vary  between  .35  and  .67.  In  addition,  
the  Cronbach's  alpha  coefficients  obtained  when  any  item  was  removed  from  the  scale  range  
from  .87  to  .89,  and  the  item  was  not  removed  from  the  scale  because  it  was  smaller  than  the  
calculated  alpha  coefficient.Machine Translated by Google

242   Validity  and  Reliability  Test  of  the  Turkish  Version  of  the  Misophonia  Scale
Psychology  Studies  -  Studies  in  Psychology  Vol/Volume:  42,  Issue/Issue:  1,  2022Validity  Analysis
For  the  exploratory  factor  analysis  of  the  scale,  the  adequacy  of  the  sample  and  the  suitability  of  the  
analysis  were  tested  first.  The  fact  that  it  was  found  to  be  significant  by  Bartlett's  test  of  sphericity  (2948.28,  
sd=136,  p  <  .001)  and  the  Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin  (KMO)  coefficient  as  .89  showed  the  suitability  of  the  sample.  
When  the  diagonal  values  of  the  inverse  of  the  correlation  matrix  of  the  misophonia  scale  were  examined,  
no  multicollinearity  was  observed  between  the  variables.
As  a  result  of  principal  component  analysis,  three  factors  with  eigenvalues  greater  than  1  were  obtained.
When  evaluated  with  Horn's  (1965)  parallel  analysis  method,  three  factors  were  observed  that  were  greater  
than  the  mean  value  of  the  eigenvalues  calculated  on  the  scale,  based  on  the  correlation  matrix.  The  total  
variance  explanation  percentage  of  the  scale  with  three  factors  was  calculated  as  55.2%.Exploratory  Factor  AnalysisWhile  the  item  “you  become  physically  aggressive”  among  the  items  in  the  scale  has  the  lowest  item  
average  with  .73;  “Eating  sounds  (eg,  chewing,  swallowing,  mouth  slurping,  slurping)”  item  has  the  highest  
item  average  with  2.55.
The  three  factors  that  emerged  when  the  direct  oblimin  rotation  process  was  applied  were  named  
according  to  their  contents.  Accordingly,  the  first  factor  was  found  to  be  misophonia  symptoms.  One  of  the  
factors  of  the  original  scale,  “misophonia  emotions  and  behaviors”,  was  divided  into  two  in  the  factor  analysis,  
and  thus  a  three-factor  structure  emerged  in  the  Turkish  form.  The  second  factor  was  misophonia  emotions  
and  behaviors  –  avoidance  and  internalization,  and  the  third  factor  was  misophonia  emotions  and  behaviors  
–  aggression  and  externalization.  The  variance  explanation  percentages  of  these  factors  were  obtained  as  
37.13%,  10.83%  and  7.56%,  respectively.  It  was  observed  that  the  factor  loads  of  the  items  in  all  factors  
ranged  from  .32  to  .83.  Information  about  the  factors  and  the  factor  loads  obtained  are  presented  in  Table  1.Machine Translated by Google

243  coefficients
6.  Some  vowels  and/or  
consonants  (for  example:  the  “k”  sound).2.18   
1.09   .44   
.47   
1.37   
1.26   Location.
1.27   
.48  
1.96   Matter
3.  Rustling  (for  example:  plastic  
or  paper  rustling).
.74   
1.  You  leave  your  current  
location  to  go  to  a  place  
where  the  disturbing  sound(s)  can  
no  longer  be  heard?2.55   
1.88   
.37   
.61  Partner
7.  Ambient  sounds  (eg:  clock  ticking,  
refrigerator  humming).1.32   
.74   .49  
.51  
.32   
.73   SS  Factor  1  Factor  2  Factor  3
.68   
.94   
1.11   Total
4.  Noises  that  people  make  
through  the  nose  (for  example:  
inhaling,  exhaling,  sniffing)..57   
2.  Do  you  consciously  avoid  
certain  situations,  places,  objects  
and/or  people  associated  with  
that  sound  because  of  the  thought  that  
there  may  be  disturbing  sound(s)?1.34   
1.27   
.35  
3.  Do  you  cover  your  
ears?variance
Misophonia  Emotions  and  Behaviors  –  Avoidance  and  Internalization  (Eigenvalue:  1.84;  Explained  variance:  10.83%,  Cronbach  Alpha=  .85).74   
.55   2.  Repeated  clicks
2.16   
.27   
.54   Misophonia  Symptoms  (Eigenvalue:  6.31;  Explained  variance:  37.13%,  Cronbach  Alpha=  .79 )
.50   
1.16   
.71   correlation
5.  Noises  that  people  make  in  the  
throat  (eg:  throat  clearing,  coughing)..52  
2.17   Deniz  Sakarya  M,  Cakmak  E
.66   
.65   
1.90   
1.35   Materials
2.32   
.55   
.59  adjusted
(for  example:  hitting  the  table  with  a  
pencil,  tapping  the  floor  with  the  foot).
.44  1.33   
.51  1.  Eating  sounds  (eg:  chewing,  
swallowing,  smacking,  slurping).
.52  
.60   
.51   
Psychology  Studies  -  Studies  in  Psychology  Vol/Volume:  42,  Issue/Issue:  1,  2022Table  1.
Item  Descriptive  Statistics,  Explanatory  Factor  Analysis  Results  of  the  Misophonia  Scale  and
Distribution  of  Factor  Loads  of  the  SubstancesMachine Translated by Google

Table  2.
Comparison  of  One-Factor,  Two-Factor  and  Three-Factor  Models  in  Confirmatory  Factor  Analysis
Fit  Index  Results  (N=  218)1.18   
2.  Are  you  angry?
.11   
.84  4.  Are  you  worried  or  distressed?
Misophonia  Emotions  and  Behaviors  –  Aggression  and  Externalization  (Eigenvalue:  1.29;  Explained  variance:  7.56%,  Cronbach  Alpha=  .83)
RMSEA   .69   
First  Level  Three.61  
.42   
First  Level  Two.76   
.80   
.78   
First  Level  Single
.07   .58   
.73   
347.81  (117)   .83   1.21   
2.17   
.80   5.  Are  you  sad  or  depressed?
1.  Do  you  have  violent  
thoughts?
.51  
CFI   
Factor  Model*6.  Are  you  nervous?
.67  
2.97   .59   
.65   
.61   
Factor  Model*
.91   .41   
1.03   
255.94  (115)   .77  .74   
1.25   
.79   1.74   
1.20   
1.37   
GFI   2.19   
3.  Do  you  become  
physically  aggressive?
ÿ2  (sd)   
.09   .61  
.56  
.52  
3.60   
.88   Validity  and  Reliability  Test  of  the  Turkish  Version  of  the  Misophonia  Scale
.64  
.83   
ÿ2 /sd   
Factor  Model*.57   
.54   
.73  1.29   
1.29   
AGFI  1.24   
2.23   1.24   
4.  Are  you  verbally  
aggressive?
424.34  (118)   
.85   
Note.  ÿ2 /sd:  Ratio  of  chi-square  value  to  degrees  of  freedom,  RMSEA:  Root  mean  square  of  approximate  errors,  CFI:  Comparative  index  of  
fit,  GFI:  Goodness  of  fit  index,  AGFI:  Adjusted  goodness  of  fit  index.  *Covariance  correction  between  4th  and  5th  items  in  the  second  factor
244   Confirmatory  Factor  Analysis
As  a  result  of  the  confirmatory  factor  analysis,  when  the  fit  indices  of  the  three-factor  model  
obtained  in  the  exploratory  factor  analysis  were  examined,  its  value  was  285.34  (sd=116,  p  
<.001),  and  the  value  used  to  evaluate  the  goodness  of  fit  of  the  model  was  divided  by  the  
degree  of  freedom,  and  the  result  was  2.46.  The  fit  indices  values  are  as  follows:  RMSEA=.08,  
CFI=.89,  GFI=.87  and  AGFI=.82.  When  the  modification  indices  were  examined  in  the  model,  
the  covariances  of  the  error  terms  of  the  4th  and  5th  items  in  the  second  factor  were  corrected.  
After  this  correction,  it  was  observed  that  the  fit  indices  of  the  model  were  better  (sd=2.23,  
RMSEA=.07,  CFI=.91,  GFI=.88  and  AGFI=.84).
One,  two  and  three  factor  models  were  also  tested  with  confirmatory  factor  analysis  and  
compared  based  on  chi-square  difference  tests.  The  results  obtained  are  presented  in  Table  2.  
When  the  results  were  examined,  it  was  found  that  the  fit  of  the  three-factor  structure  to  the  data  
was  quite  good  compared  to  the  other  two  models.
Psychology  Studies  -  Studies  in  Psychology  Vol/Volume:  42,  Issue/Issue:  1,  2022Machine Translated by Google

SS   The  Total  Score  of  the  Misophonia  Scale  and  the  Mean,  Standard  Deviation  Values  of  the  Factors  and  the  Relationship  Between  
them  (N=  218)
4  
Mean,  Standard  Deviation  and  Test  Statistics  of  the  Scale  Total  Scores  and  Factors  of  Individuals  with  and  Without  Misophonia  According  to  the  
Misophonia  ScaleTable  3.
Table  4.1   Location.
14.16   
Behaviors  –  Aggression  and  
Externalization
SS   
-7.49*  
3.87   .79*  
28.07  
40.71  
4.95   5.56   
Without  Misophonia
Misophonia  Emotions  and3-  Misophonia  Emotions  and
5.50  
5.86   
4.99  .89*   
4.17   
Without  Misophonia10.59  -   
t  
-5.59*  
-5.78*  .53*  
135  
83  
-7.31*  .61*  
Misophonis  Olan
Behaviors  –  Aggression  and  
ExternalizationBehaviors  –  Avoidance  and  
Internalization
Location.
Misophones  Toplam
8.13  .66*   
-  
Misophonis  Olan15.70  13.56   
-   
Without  Misophonia
Misophonia  Emotions  and1-  Misophone  Toplam
12.48  
16.88  
135  .88*   
Without  Misophonia-   
135  32.88   
4-  Misophonia  Emotions  and
N   
Misophonia  Symptoms
3.91  Deniz  Sakarya  M,  Cakmak  E
135  
83  
5.04  6.02   
12.54   
Misophonis  Olan
Behaviors  –  Avoidance  and  
Internalization2-  Misophonia  Symptoms
12.00  
12.27   
83  6.19   
Misophonis  Olan 83  23
245  *p<  .001  *p<.001  Search  the  total  score  of  the  Misophonia  Scale  and  the  factors  of  the  scale  for  internal  consistency  analysis.
As  seen  in  Table  3,  all  correlations  are  significant.  The  relations  of  the  factors  with  the  total  score  range  
between  .79  and  .89,  and  the  relations  between  the  factors  vary  between  .53  and  .66.
When  the  data  analyzes  regarding  the  question  in  the  fourth  part  of  the  study  were  examined,  the  rate  of  those  
who  marked  7  or  more  in  the  sample  of  218  people  was  found  to  be  38%  (N  =  83).  Based  on  this  cut-off  score,  
the  total  score  of  the  scale  and  the  scores  of  the  factors  of  those  with  misophonia  compared  to  those  without  
misophonia  were  analyzed  with  the  independent  samples  t-test.  The  results  obtained  are  presented  in  Table  4.The  relationships  between  them  were  examined.  Obtained  results  are  presented  in  Table  3.Internal  Consistency  and  Distinctive  Validity
Information  on  clinically  significant  misophonia  not  included  in  the  scale's  scoring
Psychology  Studies  -  Studies  in  Psychology  Vol/Volume:  42,  Issue/Issue:  1,  2022Machine Translated by Google

246   Validity  and  Reliability  Test  of  the  Turkish  Version  of  the  Misophonia  Scale
Psychology  Studies  -  Studies  in  Psychology  Vol/Volume:  42,  Issue/Issue:  1,  2022In  the  exploratory  factor  analysis,  it  was  seen  that  the  scale  was  better  explained  by  the  three-
factor  structure,  unlike  the  original  structure.  In  the  factor  analysis  conducted  by  Wu  et  al.  (2014)  
for  the  original  scale,  the  existence  of  a  third  factor  was  mentioned  when  the  eigenvalue  and  
parallel  analysis  method  were  taken  into  account.  The  authors  emphasized  that  although  the  
scale  is  better  explained  by  the  two-factor  structure,  it  tends  to  have  a  three-factor  structure.  In  
order  to  discuss  the  accuracy  of  the  three-factor  structure  that  emerged  in  this  study,  Dr.  When  
Wu  was  contacted,  he  stated  that  the  three-factor  structure  of  the  scale  was  appropriate  and  the  
factors  were  renamed  and  the  final  version  of  the  scale  was  created.  warn-When  the  split-half  method  was  used,  the  reliability  coefficients  obtained  were  .83  for  the  whole  
scale  and  .86,  .87  and  .81  for  each  factor.  Finally,  the  reliability  analysis  of  the  scale  was  
examined  with  the  test-retest  method.  The  scale  was  re-administered  14  days  after  the  first  
application  of  the  scale  to  75  people,  and  the  test-retest  reliability  coefficient  was  calculated  as  
.78  after  two  applications.According  to  the  results  presented  in  Table  4,  it  is  seen  that  those  with  misophonia  have  
higher  scores  than  those  without.  All  differences  between  groups  were  statistically  significant.
As  a  result  of  the  item  analysis  of  the  scale,  it  was  seen  that  the  contribution  of  the  item-total  
correlation  coefficients  to  the  Misophonia  Scale  was  sufficient.  When  the  Cronbach's  alpha  
coefficients  obtained  by  removing  any  item  from  the  scale  were  examined,  it  was  observed  that  
the  original  item  structure  of  the  scale  was  preserved  because  results  were  smaller  than  the  total  
internal  consistency  coefficient  of  the  scale.Within  the  scope  of  reliability  analyzes  for  the  Misophonia  Scale,  the  Cronbach  Alpha  
coefficient  for  the  internal  consistency  of  the  measurement  was  .89  for  the  whole  scale,  .79  for  
misophonia  symptoms,  .85  for  misophonia  emotions  and  behaviors  –  avoidance  and  
internalization,  and  misophonia  emotions  and  behaviors  –  aggression  and  externalization.  It  was  calculated  as  .83.
In  this  study,  the  Turkish  adaptation  of  the  Misophonia  Scale  developed  by  Wu  et  al.  (2014)  
was  made  in  order  to  evaluate  misophonia,  which  is  frequently  examined  at  the  level  of  case  
studies  in  the  literature  and  which  is  needed  as  a  measurement  tool  for  population-based  studies.  
As  a  result  of  the  study,  data  supporting  that  the  Misophonia  Scale  is  a  valid  and  reliable  
measurement  tool  were  reached.Reliability  Analysis
Argumentit  is  valid.Machine Translated by Google

247  Deniz  Sakarya  M,  Cakmak  E
Psychology  Studies  -  Studies  in  Psychology  Vol/Volume:  42,  Issue/Issue:  1,  2022The  confirmatory  factor  analysis  conducted  for  the  Turkish  version  of  the  scale  also  gave  sufficient  
results  for  the  three-factor  structure.  Since  the  fit  indices  were  found  to  be  acceptable  and  close  to  
acceptable  in  confirmatory  factor  analysis,  the  three-factor  structure  was  confirmed  by  confirmatory  
factor  analysis.  In  addition,  when  the  three-factor  structure  was  compared  with  both  the  single  and  the  
two-factor  structure  in  the  original  scale,  the  three-factor  structure  was  supported.While  the  variance  explained  for  misophonia  symptoms  in  the  original  scale  was  38%,  it  was  similarly  
37.13%  in  this  study.  While  the  rate  of  variance  explained  by  the  dual  factor  structure  of  the  original  
scale  was  52.50%,  it  was  47.96%  in  this  study.  The  variance  explained  by  the  three-factor  structure  
increases  to  55.52%.  This  finding  shows  that  the  adapted  scale  was  adequately  explained  with  a  
three-factor  structure.
In  the  current  study,  it  is  thought  that  the  fact  that  individuals'  aggressive  and  externalizing  
responses  (eg,  being  physically  aggressive,  verbally  aggressive,  having  violent  thoughts)  are  better  
explained  under  a  separate  factor  as  a  result  of  the  triggering  sound  may  be  a  result  of  cultural  
differences.  Although  the  feeling  of  anger  is  universal,  the  expression  of  this  emotion  at  the  level  of  
aggression  may  differ  between  cultures.  For  example,  in  Far  Eastern  societies  where  social  cohesion  
is  important  and  assertiveness  is  low,  there  is  a  tendency  to  hide  anger  and  express  it  less  openly  
compared  to  Western  cultures  where  individuality  is  prominent  (Liu,  2014).  The  display  of  direct  
physical  aggression  among  students  is  less  allowed  (Fuji  hara  et  al.,  1999).  Studies  in  which  this  
scale  will  be  examined  in  different  samples  and  cross-cultural  studies  on  anger  expression  in  Turkey  
will  contribute  to  a  better  understanding  of  this  factor  structure.
Wu  et  al.  (2014)  gave  a  score  of  7  and  above  from  the  question  in  the  last  part  of  the  scale  as  the  
cut-off  point  for  clinically  significant  misophonia.  In  this  study,  using  this  cut-off  score  for  discriminant  
validity,  the  scale  and  factor  scores  of  individuals  who  were  below  and  above  the  said  score  were  
compared.  The  sum  of  misophonia  and  symptoms  of  misophonia  in  those  with  clinically  significant  
misophonia  compared  to  those  without,Seven  items  in  the  misophonia  symptoms  factor,  which  is  the  first  factor  of  the  scale,  are  the  same  as  
in  the  original  study.  However,  items  in  the  misophonia  emotions  and  behaviors  factor  were  loaded  
on  two  separate  factors,  unlike  the  original  scale.  Four  items  in  this  factor  were  loaded  on  a  separate  
factor,  thus  forming  the  third  factor  under  the  name  of  misophonia,  emotions  and  behaviors-aggression  
and  externalization.Machine Translated by Google

248   Validity  and  Reliability  Test  of  the  Turkish  Version  of  the  Misophonia  Scale
Psychology  Studies  -  Studies  in  Psychology  Vol/Volume:  42,  Issue/Issue:  1,  2022In  the  misophonia  symptoms  factor,  the  lowest  score  was  .52  in  the  original  study  (Wu  et  
al.,  2014),  and  .70  in  the  Chinese  study  (Zhou  et  al.,  2017),  similar  to  the  item  “some  voiced  or  
silent  sounds”.  In  both  studies,  the  most  frequently  disturbed  sound  was  repetitive  sounds,  
while  the  second  highest  score  belonged  to  eating  sounds.  In  this  study,  the  highest  score  
belongs  to  the  eating  sounds  first  and  then  to  the  repetitive  sounds.
Although  this  single  assessment  in  the  last  section,  which  was  not  included  in  the  Misophonia  
Scale  scoring,  seems  to  yield  higher  results,  in  any  case,  misophonia  was  detected  at  a  higher  
rate  in  the  Turkish  sample  than  in  the  literature.  The  higher  symptom  rates  detected  by  the  
Misophonia  Scale  may  be  due  to  the  higher  number  of  individuals  with  misophonia  in  the  
Turkish  sample.  Another  explanation  may  be  that  the  way  individuals  express  their  discomfort  
is  culturally  different.  Öz  (2016)  Turkish  sample-In  the  study,  internal  consistency,  split-half  and  test-retest  methods  were  used  to  examine  
the  reliability  of  the  scale.  The  Cronbach  alpha  internal  consistency  coefficient  was  found  to  be  
.89,  and  the  results  are  consistent  with  the  results  of  the  original  scale  (Wu  et  al.,  2014)  and  the  
results  of  the  Chinese  adaptation  study  (Zhou  et  al.,  2017).  The  high  internal  consistency  
coefficient  in  the  current  study,  along  with  a  halving  reliability  coefficient  of  .83  and  a  test-retest  
correlation  coefficient  of  .78,  support  that  the  Turkish  version  of  the  Misophonia  Scale  is  a  
reliable  measurement  tool.
In  case  studies  (Edelstein  et  al.,  2013;  Tunç  &  Baÿbuÿ,  2017)  and  some  large  sample  studies  
(Jager  et  al,  2020a;  Schröder  et  al.,  2013),  the  biggest  triggers  for  individuals  with  misophonia  
are  eating,  chewing,  and  smacking  sound.  appears  to  be.  Although  the  results  show  parallelism,  
the  rate  of  discomfort  for  these  two  items  in  this  study  is  quite  high  compared  to  other  studies  
using  the  same  scale.  It  is  estimated  that  the  possible  reason  for  this  may  be  related  to  the  
incidence  of  misophonia  in  the  Turkish  sample.  Although  the  prevalence  of  misophonia  is  not  
fully  known  in  the  literature,  Wu  et  al.  (2014)  expressed  clinically  significant  misophonia  in  
university  students  as  19.9%  and  Zhou  et  al.  (2017)  as  .16.6%  when  evaluated  with  the  
Misophonia  Scale;  In  the  current  study,  this  rate  was  found  to  be  38%  with  the  same  scale.
Jastreboff  and  Jastreboff  (2014)  estimate  the  rate  of  clinically  significant  misophonia,  which  
they  predict  from  the  data  of  individuals  with  sound  tolerance  problems,  to  be  approximately  3.2%.The  fact  that  misophonia  feelings  and  behaviors-avoidance  and  internalization,  misophonia  
emotions  and  behaviors-aggression  and  externalization  factors  had  a  higher  average  was  
accepted  as  evidence  for  the  discriminant  validity  of  the  scale.Machine Translated by Google

249  Deniz  Sakarya  M,  Cakmak  E
Psychology  Studies  -  Studies  in  Psychology  Vol/Volume:  42,  Issue/Issue:  1,  2022In  the  original  article  (Wu  et  al.,  2014),  the  clinically  significant  misophonia  cut-off  point  was  
set  with  reference  to  the  National  Institute  of  Mental  Health  Global  Obsessive-Compulsive  Scale,  
and  its  effectiveness  was  not  evaluated  according  to  clinical  diagnostic  criteria.  Diagnostic  criteria  
have  been  developed  for  misophonia  in  studies  conducted  both  in  the  international  literature  
(Schröder  et  al.,  2013)  and  in  Turkey  (Öz,  2016).  In  future  studies,  it  may  be  recommended  to  
examine  the  effectiveness  of  the  cut-off  point  by  applying  the  scale  to  individuals  diagnosed  with  
misophonia  according  to  clinical  diagnostic  criteria.  In  addition,  since  there  were  no  individuals  
diagnosed  with  misophonia  in  this  study,  its  criterion-related  validity  could  be  examined  by  an  
expert  on  people  who  were  clinically  diagnosed  with  misophonia  in  future  studies.is.
There  are  some  limitations  of  the  research.  The  validity  and  reliability  test  of  this  scale,  as  in  
the  original  version  (Wu  et  al.,  2014),  was  conducted  only  with  university  students,  and  its  
generalizability  is  limited.  It  is  thought  that  it  would  be  appropriate  to  test  the  scale  in  a  larger  
sample  of  all  ages  and  education  levels  in  future  studies.  Since  there  is  no  other  Turkish  
measurement  tool  that  measures  misophonia,  an  examination  of  its  convergent  validity  could  not  
be  made  in  this  study.  The  fact  that  the  relationship  between  the  Misophonia  Scale  and  other  
measurement  tools  evaluating  the  structures  related  to  misophonia  was  not  evaluated  in  this  
study  is  among  the  limitations.  In  future  studies,  additional  findings  for  validity  can  be  obtained  by  
examining  the  relationship  of  the  Misophonia  Scale  with  the  measurement  tools  that  measure  
misophonia  or  problems  related  to  misophonia.
As  a  result,  results  supporting  that  the  Misophonia  Scale  is  a  valid  and  reliable  measurement  
tool  in  evaluating  misophonia  have  been  reached.  This  scale  will  contribute  to  the  dissemination  
of  population-based  studies  that  will  provide  a  better  understanding  of  misophonia  in  our  country  
and  to  the  evaluation  of  misophonia  in  the  clinical  setting.Although  he  found  the  misophonia  rate  to  be  7.7  in  his  study,  misophonia  was  evaluated  
according  to  the  diagnostic  criteria  developed  by  the  researcher.  Despite  the  increase  in  studies  
on  misophonia,  it  is  stated  that  there  is  a  generalization  and  comparison  problem  between  
research  results  due  to  the  difference  in  evaluating  misophonia  (Siepsiak  et  al.,  2020).  Therefore,  
more  studies  are  needed  to  confirm  the  results.Machine Translated by Google

Fujihara,  T.,  Kohyama,  T.,  Andreu,  J.  M.  ve  Ramirez,  J.  M.  (1999).  Justification  of  interpersonal   
aggression  in  Japanese,  American,  and  Spanish  students.  Aggressive  Behavior:  Official  Journal   of  
the  International  Society  for  Research  on  Aggression,  25(3),  185-195.  https://doi.org/10.1002  
Goodman,  W.  K.,  Price,  L.  H.,  Rasmussen  S.  A,  Mazure,  C.,  Fleischmann,  R.  L.,  Hill,  C.  L.,  Heninger,  R.   
ve  Charney  D.  S.  (1989).  The  Yale-Brown  Obsessive  Compulsive  Scale.  I.  Development,  use,  and   
reliability.  Arch  Gen  Psychiatry  46(11),  1006–1011.  doi:10.1001/archpsyc.1989.01810110048007  
Horn,  J.  L.  (1965).  A  rationale  and  test  for  the  number  of  factors  in  factor  analysis.  Psychometrika,  30,   Brout,  JJ,  Edelstein,  M.,  Erfanian,  M.,  Mannino,  M.,  Miller,  LJ,  Rouw,  R.,  Kumar  ve
Rosenthal,  M.  Z.  (2018).  Investigating  misophonia:  A  review  of  the  empirical  literature,  clinical   
implications,  and  a  research  agenda.  Frontiers  in  Neuroscience,  12(36),  1-13.  https://doi.  org/10.3389/
fnins.2018.00036  Cavanna,  A.  E.  ve  Seri,  S.  (2015).  Misophonia:  Current  perspectives.  
Neuropsychiatric  Disease  and   Treatment,  11,  2117-2123.  https://doi.org/10.2147/NDT.S81438  Dibb,  B.,  
Golding,  S.  E.  ve  Dozier,  T.  H.  (2021).  The  development  and  validation  of  the  Misophonia   Response  
Scale.  Journal  of  Psychosomatic  Research,  149,  Article  110587.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.  
jpsychores.2021.110587  Bibliography/References  
Allusoglu,  S.  (2020).  Scale  to  be  used  to  distinguish  impaired  sound  tolerance  disorders
Dozier,  T.  H.  (2015).  Counterconditioning  treatment  for  misophonia.  Clinical  Case  Studies,  14(5),  374-  
387.  https://doi.org/10.1177/1534650114566924  Edelstein,  M.,  Brang,  D.,  Rouw,  R.  ve  Ramachandran,  
V.S.  (2013).  Misophonia:  Physiological   investigations  and  case  descriptions.  Frontiers  in  Human  
Neuroscience,  7,  296-307.  https://doi.  org/10.3389/fnhum.2013.00296.  development  (Unpublished  doctoral  dissertation).  Hacettepe  University,  Ankara.
Ferreira,  G.  M.,  Harrison,  B.  J.  ve  Fontenelle,  L.  F.  (2013).  Hatred  of  sounds:  Misophonic  disorder  or   just  
an  underreported  psychiatric  symptom?  Annals  of  Clinical  Psychiatry,  25(4),  271-274.   Alpar,  R.  (2017).  Applied  multivariate  statistical  methods  (5th  ed.).  Ankara:  Detay  Publishing.Author  Contributions:  Conception/Design  of  Study-  M.D.S.,  E.Ç.;  Data  Acquisition-  M.D.S.,  E.Ç.;  Data  
Analysis/  Interpretation-  M.D.S.,  E.Ç.;  Drafting  Manuscript-  M.D.S.,  E.Ç.;  Critical  Revision  of  Manuscript-  
M.D.S.,  E.Ç.;   Final  Approval  and  Accountability-  M.D.S.,  E.Ç.  Acknowledgements:  Audiologist  Beyza  Nur  Kurt,  Audiologist  Damla  Uçar  and  Res.  See.  We  thank  Gamze  Nas  for  her  valuable  
contributions  to  the  study  during  the  data  collection  process.
Acknowledgements:  We  thank  Audiologist  Beyza  Nur  Kurt,  Audiologist  Damla  Uçar  and  Research  Assistant  
Gamze   Nas  for  their  valuable  contributions  to  the  study  during  the  data  collection  process.  
Psychology  Studies  -  Studies  in  Psychology  Vol/Volume:  42,  Issue/Issue:  1,  2022Grant  Support:  This  study  was  approved  by  Baskent  University  Institutional  Review  Board  (Project  no:  KA18/412)   
and  supported  by  Baskent  University  Research  Fund.  
250   Author  Contributions:  Working  Concept/Design-  MDS,  E.Ç.;  Data  Collection-  MDS,  E.Ç.;  Data  Analysis/Interpretation  
MDS,  E.Ç.;  Manuscript  Draft-  MDS,  E.Ç.;  Critical  Review  of  Content  -  MDS,  E.Ç.;  Final  Approval  and  Responsibility  MDS,  
E.Ç.Validity  and  Reliability  Test  of  the  Turkish  Version  of  the  Misophonia  Scale
Financial  Disclosure:  This  study  was  approved  by  the  Medical  and  Health  Sciences  Research  and  Ethics  Committee  of  
Baÿkent  University  (Project  No:  KA18/412)  and  was  supported  by  the  Baÿkent  University  Research  Fund.Conflict  of  Interest:  The  authors  declared  no  conflict  of  interest.Peer  Review:  External  independent.
Conflict  of  Interest:  The  authors  have  no  conflict  of  interest  to  declare.   Machine Translated by Google

Deniz  Sakarya  M,  Cakmak  E
251  Rouw,  R.  ve  Erfanian,  M.  (2018).  A  Large-Scale  study  of  misophonia.  Journal  of  Clinical   Psychology,  74(3),  
453-479.  https://doi.org/10.1002/jclp.22500  Sanchez,  T.  G.  ve  da  Silva,  F.  E.  D.  (2018).  Familial  misophonia  or  
selective  sound  sensitivity  syndrome:   Evidence  for  autosomal  dominant  inheritance?  Brazilian  Journal  of  
Otorhinolaryngology,  84  (5),   553-  559.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bjorl.2017.06.014  misophonia,  phonophobia.  ITHS  News  Lett,  2,  5-7.
Schröder,  A.  E.,  Vulink,  N.  C.,  van  Loon,  A.  J.  ve  Denys,  D.  A.  (2017).  Cognitive  behavioral  therapy  is   effective  in  
misophonia:  An  open  trial.  Journal  of  Affective  Disorders,  217,  289-294.  http://dx.doi.  org/10.1016/
j.jad.2017.04.017   Siepsiak,  M.,  ÿliwerski,  A.,  ve  ÿukasz-Dragan,  W.  (2020).  Development  and  psychometric  
properties   of  misoquest—a  new  self-report  questionnaire  for  misophonia.  International  Journal  of   Environmental  
Research  and  Public  Health,  17(5),  1797.  https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph17051797  Tunç,  S.  ve  Baÿbuÿ,  H.  S.  
(2017).  An  extreme  physical  reaction  in  misophonia:  Stop  smacking  your   mouth!.  Psychiatry  and  Clinical  
Psychopharmacology,  27(4),  416-418.  https://doi.org/10.1080/24  750573.2017.1354656  Jastreboff,  M.  M.  ve  Jastreboff,  P.  J.  (2001).  Components  of  decreased  sound  tolerance:  Hyperacusis,   
disorder.  PLoS  One,  8(1),  54706.  https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0054706  Jastreboff,  P.  J.  ve  Jastreboff,  M.  M.  (2014).  Treatments  for  decreased  sound  tolerance  (hyperacusis   and  
misophonia).  Seminars  in  Hearing,  35(2),  105-120.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1055/s-0034-1372527  Liu,  C.  (2014).  
Chinese,  why  don’t  you  show  your  anger?:A  comparative  study  between  Chinese  and   Americans  in  expressing  
anger.  International  Journal  of  Social  Science  and  Humanity,  4(3),   206-209.  DOI:  10.7763/IJSSH.2014.V4.347  Jastreboff,  P.  J.  ve  Jastreboff,  M.  M.  (2003).  Tinnitus  retraining  therapy  for  patients  with  tinnitus  and   decreased  
sound  tolerance.  Otolaryngologic  Clinics  of  North  America,  36(2),  321-336.  https://doi.  org/10.1016/
S0030-6665(02)00172- X  
Wu,  M.  S.,  Lewin,  A.  B.,  Murphy,  T.  K.  ve  Storch,  E.  A.  (2014).  Misophonia:  Incidence,   Oz,  G.  (2016).  The  prevalence  of  misophonia  symptoms,  sociodemographic  characteristics  and  their  relationship  
with  psychological  symptoms  in  Ankara  (Unpublished  doctoral  dissertation).  Hacettepe  University,  Ankara.  
Ozdamar,  K.  (2017).  Scale  and  test  development  structural  equation  modeling  IBM  SPSS,  IBM  SPSS  AMOS  and  
MINITAB  applied  (1st  Edition).  Eskisehir:  Nisan  Bookstore.179–185.  
Naylor,  J.,  Caimino,  C.,  Scutt,  P.,  Hoare,  D.  J.  ve  Baguley,  D.  M.  (2020).  The  prevalence  and  severity   of  misophonia  
in  a  UK  undergraduate  medical  student  population  and  validation  of  the  Amsterdam   Misophonia  Scale.  
Psychiatric  Quarterly,  92(2),  609-619.  https://doi.org/10.1007/s11126-020-  09825-3  
Rosenthal,  M.  Z.,  Anand,  D.,  Cassiello-Robbins,  C.,  Williams,  Z.  J.,  Guetta,  R.,  Trumbull,  J.  ve  Kelley,   L.  (2021).  
Development  and  initial  validation  of  the  Duke  Misophonia  Questionnaire.  Frontiers  in   Psychology,  12,  Article  
e709928.  doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2021.709928  
Schröder,  A.,  Vulink,  N.  ve  Denys,  D.  (2013).  Misophonia:  Diagnostic  criteria  for  a  new  psychiatric   Jager,  I.  J.,  Vulink,  N.  C.,  Bergfeld,  I.  O.,  van  Loon,  A.  J.  ve  Denys,  D.  A.  (2020b).  Cognitive  behavioral   therapy  for  
misophonia:  A  randomized  clinical  trial.  Depression  and  Anxiety,  38(7),  708-718.   https://doi.org/10.1002/
da.23127  Jager,  I.,  Koning,  P.,  Bost,  T.,  Denys,  D.  ve  Vulink,  N.  (2020a).  Misophonia:  Phenomenology,   comorbidity  and  
demographics  in  a  large  sample.  PloS  One,  15(4),  Article  e0231390.  https://doi.  org/10.1371/
journal.pone.0231390  
Psychology  Studies  -  Studies  in  Psychology  Vol/Volume:  42,  Issue/Issue:  1,  2022Machine Translated by Google

Validity  and  Reliability  Test  of  the  Turkish  Version  of  the  Misophonia  Scale
252   Zhou,  X.,  Wu,  M.  S.  ve  Storch,  E.  A.  (2017).  Misophonia  symptoms  among  Chinese  university  
students:   Incidence,  associated  impairment,  and  clinical  correlates.  Journal  of  Obsessive-
Compulsive  and   Related  Disorders,  14,  7-12.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jocrd.2017.05.001  phenomenology  and  clinical  correlates  in  an  undergraduate  student  sample.  Journal  of  Clinical   
Psychology,  70(10),  994-1007.  https://doi.org/10.1002/jclp.22098  
Psychology  Studies  -  Studies  in  Psychology  Vol/Volume:  42,  Issue/Issue:  1,  2022Machine Translated by Google

Deniz  Sakarya  M,  Cakmak  E
Sometime0   
Anytime2   4  
Rarely Often1   3   
253  Never5   Definitely
1   I  1
not  true
0  1  2  3  4  0  1  2  3  4  
0  1  2  3  4  Instructions:  Please  rate  the  following  statements  that  apply  to  you,  from  0  to  4,  with  0  being  “Absolutely  
not  true”  and  4  “Always  true”.
Anytime
7   3   
1.  Compared  to  other  people,  I  am  sensitive  to  the  following  sounds:  Eating  
sounds  (eg:  chewing,  swallowing,  smacking,  slurping).
4   
8  Other:  ______0  1  2  3  4  2   
0  1  2  3  4  Rarely  true  Sometimes  true  Often  true
2   
6  Some  vowels  and/or  consonants  (for  example:  the  “k”  sound).4  
3  Rustling  (for  example:  plastic  or  paper  rustling).MISOPHONIA  SCALE
Ambient  sounds  (eg:  clock  ticking,  refrigerator  humming).
0  1  2  3  4  1   
TRUE
Noises  that  people  make  through  the  nose  (for  example:  inhaling,  exhaling,  
sniffing).  Noises  that  people  make  in  the  throat  (for  example:  throat  clearing,  
coughing).0   
Repetitive  clicking  (for  example:  pen  tapping  on  table,  foot  tapping  on  the  
floor).
0  1  2  3  4  
Instructions:  If  you  have  given  a  score  of  “1-Rarely  true”  or  higher  for  any  of  the  above  statements,  
please  continue  to  the  section  below  and  rate  the  following  statements  from  0  “Never”  to  4  “Always”.
Psychology  Studies  -  Studies  in  Psychology  Vol/Volume:  42,  Issue/Issue:  1,  2022Machine Translated by Google

Validity  and  Reliability  Test  of  the  Turkish  Version  of  the  Misophonia  Scale
254   0  1  2  3  4  2  
6  Are  you  nervous?
4  Do  you  become  verbally  aggressive?0  1  2  3  4  
1.  Minimal  or  very  slight  sound  sensitivity  within  the  normal  range.  I  spend  a  little  
time  dealing  with  and  being  affected  by  my  sensitivity  to  sound.  It  does  not  affect  my  
daily  activities  at  all  or  almost  at  all.0  1  2  3  4  
0  1  2  3  4  3  Do  you  cover  your  ears?
1  Do  you  have  violent  thoughts?
0  1  2  3  4  
Instructions:  Please  determine  the  degree  of  your  sensitivity  to  sound  by  ticking  only  one  
of  the  scales  given  below,  from  1  (at  least)  to  15  (very  loud).  When  marking,  please  
answer  by  considering  the  number  and  degree  of  the  sounds  you  are  sensitive  to  and  
how  much  they  interfere  with  your  daily  life.0  1  2  3  4  
3.  When  you  become  aware  of  the  disturbing  sound,  how  often  because  of  that  sound;
0  1  2  3  4  5  Are  you  sad  or  depressed?
2  Are  you  angry?
_______  2.  When  you  become  aware  of  the  disturbing  sound,  how  often  because  of  
that  sound;  Do  you  leave  your  location  to  go  to  a  place  where  the  disturbing  
sound(s)  can  no  longer  be  heard?
4  Are  you  worried  or  distressed?0  1  2  3  4  
0  1  2  3  4  
4.  If  you  do  not  have  any  sound  sensitivity,  please  tick  here.1   
0  1  2  3  4  
3  Do  you  become  physically  aggressive?
5  Other:  ________________Do  you  consciously  avoid  certain  situations,  places,  objects,  and/or  
people  associated  with  that  sound,  with  the  thought  that  there  may  be  
disturbing  sound(s)?
Psychology  Studies  -  Studies  in  Psychology  Vol/Volume:  42,  Issue/Issue:  1,  2022Machine Translated by Google

Deniz  Sakarya  M,  Cakmak  E
255  4.  Slight  degree  of  sound  sensitivity.  It  is  the  6th  sensitivity  to  sound,  noticed  by  me  and  
someone  else,  that  affects  my  life  mildly  at  level  5,  that  I  can  deal  with  or  be  affected  by  for  
a  short  time.  Easily  tolerated  by  others.
10.High  degree  of  sound  sensitivity.  What  hinders  me  is  the  sensitivity  to  sound,  
which  turns  my  daily  activities  into  an  "active  11th  challenge".  I  can  spend  all  my  time  
dealing  with  or  being  affected  by  sound  sensitivity.  others  in  my  daily  activities.
13.Very  high  sound  sensitivity.  It  is  sensitivity  to  sound  that  completely  blocks  
me  and  requires  close  supervision  for  my  activities  such  as  eating  and  sleeping.  
Because  of  this  15th  reason,  I  find  it  difficult  to  carry  out  my  daily  activities.7.  Moderate  sound  sensitivity.  It  is  the  8th  sensitivity  of  sound  that  seriously  affects  my  life  
and  I  consciously  put  a  lot  of  energy  into  dealing  with  it  or  not  being  affected  by  it.  I  need  
some  help  from  others  in  my  daily  activities.
needs  a  lot  of  help.
Psychology  Studies  -  Studies  in  Psychology  Vol/Volume:  42,  Issue/Issue:  1,  2022Machine Translated by Google

Machine Translated by Google