Journal   of   Literary   Studies   and   Linguistics   https:// doi.org/10.1007/s41244-023-00320-3

TOPIC   POST

## »Making   Up   Misophonic   People«

## To   popularize   a   medical   category   on   social   media

Cornelius   Schubert   •   Nicole   Zillien

Received:   May   10,   2023 /   Accepted:   August   15,   2023   '   The

Author(s)   2023

Summary Misophonia   is   described   by   those   affected   as   one   of   the   first   fullyfledged   illness   diagnoses   of   the   Internet   age.   People   gather   in   forums   and platforms   who   feel   an   insurmountable   hatred   of   specific   noises.   In   this   article we   look   at   the   emergence   of   the   diagnosis   of   'misophonia'   as   a   medical   category in   social   media.   We   examine   how   misophonia   becomes   a   popular   diagnosis, how   experts   and   laypeople   refer   each   other   and   what   resistance   they   are confronted   with   in   this   process.   We   see   the   emergence   of   the   medical   category as   a   'making   up   people':   as   the   emergence   of   a   group   of   affected   people   who identify   closely   with   the   diagnosis   and   fight   with   great   vigor   for   recognition   as an   illness.

Keywords Misophonia   ·   Social   media   · Medicalization   · Media   sociology   ·   medical   sociology

Cornelius   Schubert

Faculty   of   Social   Sciences,   Technical   University   of   Dortmund,   Dortmund,   Germany   Email: cornelius.schubert@tu-dortmund.de

Nicole   Zillien

Institute   of   Sociology,   University   of   Koblenz,   Koblenz,   Germany   Email: zillien@uni-koblenz.de

## »Making   Up   Misophonic   People«

On   the   Popularization   of   a   Medical   Category   in   Social   Media

Abstract Those   affected   by   misophonia   describe   it   as   one   of   the   first   full-fledged diagnoses   of   the   internet   age.   People   who   feel   an   insurmountable   hatred   of   specific sounds   gather   in   forums   and   on   platforms.   In   this   chapter,   we   analyze   the emergence   of   misophonia   as   a   medical   category   on   social   media.   We   examine how   misopho-nia   becomes   a   popular   diagnosis,   how   experts   and   lay   people   refer to   each   other,   and   what   resistance   they   face   in   this   process.   We   understand   the development   of   the   medical   category   as   »making   up   people«:   as   the   development of   a group   of   affected   persons   who   identify   closely   with   the   diagnosis   and   vigorously fight   for   its  ecognition   as   an   illness. r

Medical   Sociology Keywords Misophonia   ·   Social   Media   · Medicalisation   ·   Media   Sociology   ·

## 1   Introduction:   The   hatred   of   noises

Anyone   who   feels   strongly   disturbed   by   the   everyday   noises   of   other   people   and sometimes   reacts   with   aggression   or   avoidance   behavior   to   chewing   and   smacking noises,   breathing,   clearing   their   throat,   foot   tapping   or   finger   drumming   will   quickly come   across   other   sufferers   if   they   do   the   appropriate   online   research.   Thousands of   posts   on   Instagram,   Twitter   or   Reddit,   in   podcasts,   self-help   forums   and YouTube   videos   report   the   psychological   and   physical   suffering   that   everyday noises   can   cause.   Those   affected   exchange   ideas   on   the   social   web   about   which very   different   noises   trigger   the   anger,   what   uncertainty,   shame   and   sometimes decades   of   torment   this   is   associated   with,   and   to   what   extent   the   social environment   is   filled   with   helplessness,   lack   of   understanding   or   even   support -zung   reacts,   which   coping   strategies   seem   promising   and   what   effects   can   occur, from   social   withdrawal   to   dismissals   at   work   to   massive   partnership   problems. Many   of   those   affected   continue   to   report   the   first   time   a   certain   noise   bothered them   so   much,   although   it   was   usually   only   much   later   -   and   often   on   the   social web   -   that   they   found   out   that   they   were   not   alone,   that   others   felt   very   similar   and that ,   which   is   perhaps   the   most   important   finding,   their   suffering   has   a   scientific name:   'Miso-phonia'   -   the   hatred   of   noises.

Misophonia   is   generally   understood   to   be   a   reduced   tolerance   to   noise,   which, triggered   by   a   specific   and   usually   everyday   trigger   noise,   results   in   emotional reactions   such   as   irritation,   anger,   aggression,   disgust   or   flight   behavior   as   well   as physical   reactions   such   as   an   increase   in   blood   pressure   on   the   part   of   those affected ,   breathing   problems,   sweating,   muscle   tension   or   even   racing   heart, whereby   from   the   observer's   perspective   these   reactions   are   in   a   "grotesque disproportionate   to   the   perceived   noise" (Schwemmle/Arens   2021,   p.   4)   (see   also Ferrer-Torres/GimØnez- Llort   2022).   Misophonia   is   not   a   medically   recognized   or clearly   defined   disorder.   she   is

A   strong   sensitivity   to   noise   is   reported.   Misophonia   only   became   an   independent diagnosis   through   social   media   in   the   late   1990s examines   this   popularization   of   misophonia   as   a   legitimate   diagnosis   by   experts   and laypeople   on   social   media.   We   analyze   how   those   affected Little   known,   difficult   to   classify   and   therefore   an   essentially   controversial   category. Medically   it   is   referred   to   as   a   subcategory   of   hypersensitivity   to   noise Hardly   anything   is   known   about   when   people   suffer   from   misophonia   and   report   it.   Only a   few   famous   personalities,   such   as   Marcel   Proust, popular,   that   is,   noticed   by   many   (Döring   et   al.   2021).   This   article discuss   their   hatred   of   specific   noises   on   the   social   web   and   to   what   extent with   overlaps   with   hyperacusis   (general   noise   interolerance)   and   phonophobia   (fear   or anxiety   of   certain   sounds).   About   that,   since

Experts   refer   to   these   online   discourses   on   the   Internet   and   what   effects   are   associated with   the   production   and   distribution   of   the   new   category.

from   groups   of   people   through   scientific   expertise   is   shown   in   the   case publicly.   The   self-designation   and people«   describes.   In   contrast   to   hacking,   which   is   of   strong   harm Concept   of   the   science   theorist   and   language   philosopher   Ian   Hacking,   who Misophonia   requires   a   strong   involvement   of   the   affected   lay   people,   for   example the   social   creation   of   a   new   category   of   people   with   the   formula   »making   up The   starting   point   of   our   analysis   is   one   outlined   in   the   next   section to   describe   the   (internet)   public.   Ultimately,   we   analyze   the   production   and   distribution of   the   personal   category   based   on   relevant   online   material We   assume   that   using   the   example   of   social   media   exchange under   the   hashtag   #misophonie   on   YouTube,   Instagram   or   Twitter   and   exchange   ideas becomes. the   creation   of   the   disease   and   person   category.   We'll   give   afterwards misophonic   people   -   in   other   words:   'making   up   misophonic   people'   online. This   background   led   to   the   emergence   of   the   misophonia   debate   in   science   and   science Misophonia   allows   internet-driven   changes   in   the   expert-layperson   relationship   to   break through   as   if   through   a   prism,   which   is   further   spelled   out   in   the   conclusion -Identification   of   laypeople   online   becomes   an   important   element a   general   overview   of   the   exchange   on   health   topics   online

## 2   »Making   up   people«:   To   produce   and   establish The   person   category

2007,   p.   285   ff.).   For   example,   he   is   interested   in   how   long   and   how   long 'Homosexuals',   'prostitutes',   'suicidal   people',   'obese   people'   or   'ADHD   people' carried   out   by   sociological   and   medical   categories   of   people   (hacking what   criteria   people   are   classified   as   'homeless,'   'criminals,'   'geniuses,'   'poor,' are   classified   -   and   what   effects   are   associated   with   these   categorizations.   Hacking claims   that   historically   new   categories   each   represent   new   foreign Since   the   beginning   of   the   1980s,   the   Canadian   Ian   Hacking   has   carried   out   a   large number   of   scientific-philosophical   studies   on   the   origins   and   development   in   particular

social   process   from   which   not   only   a   new   category   but   also   »a (Hacking   1986;   2006;   2007) .   'Making   up   people'   is   what   this   means and   self-images   implied   what   he   referred   to   in   the   formula   'making   up   people'1

'new   kind   of   person' (Hacking   2007,   p.   285),   that   is,   a   previously   non-existent   species behavior   and   self-experience.

From   a   sociological   point   of   view,   classifications   are   nothing   new   (cf.   Durkheim/ Mauss   1987):   Processes   of   'making   up   people'   can   be   observed   in   all   societies,   but only   for   two   centuries,   according   to   Hacking   (2007,   p.   305).

the   sciences   are   so   central   to   our   understanding   of   'who   we   are'.

Categories   are   therefore   increasingly   drawing   on   scientific   ones

Classifications   are   generated,   with   hacking   being   particularly   effective   for   classifications the   social   sciences,   psychology   and   medicine.2   A   historical   example   is   provided   by   the study   'Sexual   Behavior   in   the   Human'   published   in   1948

who   have   sex   with   people   of   their   own   gender   has   manifestly   changed   (Es-peland/ Stevens   2008,   p.   413).   The   Kinsey   Report,   which   was   widely   discussed   in   the   public and   scientific   community   at   the   time,   states,   among   other   things,   that: Male"   by   the   sex   researcher   Alfred   Kinsey,   which   examines   people's   self-image, a   tenth   of   American   men   for   long   periods   or   permanently

only   have   sex   with   men.   These   sober   numbers   had   a   profound   impact.   The   people who   had   previously   been   stigmatized   as   criminals   or   sick felt   confirmed   by   the   statistics.   The   10   percent   figure   was   generalized,   simplified   and found   in   speeches,   on   posters   and   soon   also   in   the

granted   feature   of   how   gay   and   lesbian   people   understood   themselves« (Espeland/ Medien:   »[T]he   idea   that   10%   of   any   population   is   gay   [...]   became   a   taken   for Stevens   2008,   p.   413).   Kinsey's   works   therefore   forced   a   "making   up   peo-ple"   that   not only   categorized   homosexuals,   but   also

'making   up   people'   therefore   develops   'a   special   dynamic   of   self-description   and description   of   others   [...]:   assigned   categories   influence   the   categorized   people,   their self-perception   and   their   actions,   or   they   open   up   new   ones public   visibility,   which   ultimately   led   to   the   development   of   the gay   rights   movement   (Espeland/Stevens   2008,   p.   413).   In   the   process   of assumed   that   classifications   and   the   classified   interact   in   an   endless   loop,   what Hacking   (1986,   p.   125)   calls   the   'looping'   effect,   which   is   the   type Possibilities   of   self-identification' (Bennani/Müller   2018,   p.   310).   This   will

'Autistics'   show   that   only   with   the   creation   of   this   category   does   an   idea   of   it   emerge and   manner,   'in   which   a   classification   may   interact   with   the   people   classified' (Hacking 2007,   p.   285).   This   can   be   seen   using   the   example   of   the   »highly   functional

1   The   formula   'making   up   people'   was   translated   into   German   as   'making   people   right,'   which   means The   social   production   process   of   the   personal   category   only   captures   little.   Due   to   the   lack   of   our   own translation   suggestions,   we   are   sticking   with   the   original   English   version,   which,   however,   can   also   have the   potential   for   irritation,   if   not   for   social   and   historical   reasons,   but   for   one

Contextless   invention   of   the   person   category   is   assumed.

2 Sociologically,   the   terms   classification,   categorization   and   typification   can   be   distinguished   from   one another   (cf.   Zifonun   2018).   In   the   following   we   use   the   terms   category   and   categorization or   classification   and   classification   are   largely   synonymous   in   order   to   point   out   the   general   patterns   of (scientific)   classifications   and   their   categories   for   'Making   Up   People'.

now' (Hacking   2006,   p.   4).   Before   the   scientific   establishment   of   the   category [...].   But   people   didn't   experience   themselves   in   this   way,   they   didn't   interact   with corresponding   ways   of   being   emerged:   »Before   1950,   maybe   even   before   1975, incorrectly   as   "retarded",   there   was   no   suitable   interpretive   framework   and   consequently no   adequate   form   of   self-perception   and   external   perception, their   friends,   their   families,   their   employers,   their   counsellors,   in   the   way   they   do »There   probably   were   a   few   individuals   who   were   regarded   as   retarded   and   worse what   changed   with   the   establishment   of   the   new   category. high-functioning   autism   was   not   a   way   to   be   a   person«,   so   Hacking,   der   fortfährt: Those   affected   were   therefore   considered   to   be   'high-functioning   autistic   people' (Asperger   syndrome).

In   general,   hacking   assumes   that   it   is   the   scientific   experts   who,   legitimized   by   their membership   in   established   institutions,   drive   the   creation   and   development   of   categories and   both die   sogenannten   »engines   of   discovery«,   die   auf   »the   production   of   knowledge,   understanding,   and   the   potential   for   improving   or   controlling   deviant   human   beings« Attribution   of   categories   to   specific   realities.   Analytically   differentiates Hacking   (2007,   p.   305)   describes   seven   specific   scientific   practices   at   this   point, Determine   how   to   deal   with   those   classified.   Expert   communities   therefore   practice labeling   'from   above',   that   is,   they   construct   through   them the   scientific   discourse   as   well   as   the   manner   of   social (Hacking   2007,   p.   310)   to   act   as   catalysts   for   'making   up   people'.

and   will   be   explained   here   in   brief:

as   a   statement   of   percentage   shares   or   a   representation   of   development   trends The counting of   classified   people,   as   in   the   case   of   homosexuals   outlined   above, primarily   aims   at   their   data   recording   and   numerical   representation, over   time.

Quantifying   means   the   numerical   derivation   of   the   categories   themselves , if,  or   example,   obese   people   along   the   body   mass   index   or   gifted   people f can   be   determined   based   on   their   intelligence   quotient.

The normalization is   created   by   an   orientation   towards   average   values,   which   are   called Gauges   of   normality   apply   and   -   as   in   the   case   of   body   size   -   the   determination   of deviations   and   thus   enable   the   attribution   of   anomie   along   specific   threshold   values:

'The   normal   spectrum   of   the   spectrum   ends   somewhere

Height   and   begin   the   abnormal   dwarfs   or   giants,   but   overall represent   a   vanishing   minority' (Link   2014,   p.   65).

Correlating   is   considered   a   central   scientific   practice   for   sociologists,   who are more eager   to   search   for   connections   the   less   they   know.

Autism,   for   example,   has   been   correlated   with   all   sorts   of   things,   "not   excluding   the relative   lengths   of   the   mother's   fingers   and   testosterone   in   the   fetus." (Hacking   2007,   S.   309).

In   contrast   to   the   practices   of   statistical   and   social   scientific   analysis   described   so   far, medicalization   can   be   interpreted   as the naturalization   of   social   processes,   for   example around   1900

were   observed   in   large   department   stores:   agoraphobia   and   kleptomania   were the   negative   effects   of   availability   found   in   the   female   middle   class

den   zu   den   »mental   diseases   du   jour,   discussed   not   only   in   the   popular   media,   but MagSamhrÆin  012,   S.   280). 2 also   at   great   length   in   the   weighty   medical   and   legal   journals   of   the   day« (Lenz/

Biologizing occurs when   biological   causes   of   social   practices   in   their of   parenting   practices   and   plausibly   explains   that   the   ability   to   give   birth   and

Care   and   housework   leads:   »Some   organizational   effort   would   be   necessary   if lost   relevance. can   also   be   seen   in   autism,   for   which,   in   the   course   of   geneticization,   previous psychoanalytic   attempts   to   explain   it,   such   as   the   alleged   lovelessness 'Overweight'   can   be   observed,   which   was   once   viewed   as   a   weakness   of   the   will 'Prevent   the   consequences   of   these   physical   conditions' (Goffman   1994,   p.   106). importance   be   highlighted.   Goffman   (1994),   for   example,   opposes   the   biologization breastfeed   is   by   no   means   necessarily   a   primary   responsibility   for so-called   'refrigerator   mothers'   as   a   cause   of   childhood   developmental   disorders 'we   search   for   inherited   genetic   tendencies' (Hacking   2007,   p.   294).   The   fact   that geneticization   is   accompanied   by   a   decrease   in   attributions   of   responsibility   is   clear Ultimately , geneticization is   understood   as   an   enhanced   form   of   biologization   and the   most   recent   scientific   practice,   for   example   in   dealing   with first   became   the   domain   of   medicine,   then   that   of   biology,   »and   at   present Even   under   modern   conditions   not   too   much,   they   wanted   noticeable   social the   engines   of   discovery   and   the   knowledge   that   they   produce,   but   each   acting   in   its Overall,   these   social   and   natural   science   practices   contribute   to   the   establishment, clarification   and   stabilization   of   categories   of   people.   This   in   turn   is   the   prerequisite   for three   social   connection   practices,   »each   deriving   from

own   specific   way« (Hacking   2007,   S.   310   f):

Normalization   includes   the   measures,   medications,   aids   and   coping   strategies,   mostly suggested   by   experts,   that   are   intended   to   eliminate   the   established   anomie,   alleviate the   diagnosed   illness   or   even   thwart   discrimination   on   the   part   of   those   classified .

Bureaucratization   serves,   among   other   things ,   to   implement   normalization measures,   but   also   institutionalizes   decisions   about   belonging to   specific   categories,   standardizes   processes   for   dealing   with   those   classified   or

allocates   financial   resources.   This   is   what   political   and   social   experts   advise for   example,   to   support   the   'homeless'   in   a   certain   way

To   treat   'obese'   people   medically   or   to   have   'prostitutes'   controlled   by   the   state (Hacking   2007,   p.   292).

who   demand   autonomy   from   the   classifications   controlled   by   science   and   bureaucracy and   often   respond   to   change   through   collective   action Ultimately,   the resistance ('resistance')   comes   from   those   who   are   classified,

2018,   p.   310).   This   means   that   those   classified   do   not   always   agree   with   the   scientific attributions   made   by   the   experts of   categories   and   the   improvement   of   their   situation   (Bennani/Müller

According   to   Hacking   (1986,   p.   168),   we   partly   counteract   this   'from   below'   and   try   'to take   back   control   from   the   experts   and   the   institutions,   sometimes   by   creating   new

Defend   classification   practices   against   the   experts. experts,   new   institutions' (Hacking   2007,   p.   311).   The   'rebellion'   therefore represents   a   counter-reaction   by   the   classified,   which   in   the   case   of   dysfunctional

The   possibilities   of   popularization   on   social   media   platforms   have   fundamentally changed.   Both   for   social   and   natural   science   practices   as   well   as   for We   now   assume   that   the   process   of   'making   up   people'   takes   place   through   the affected   and   by   the   metrics   of   the   platforms   themselves The   social   connection   practices   can   be   assumed   that   they   are   no   longer   alone

are   determined   by   the   experts,   but   also   by   the   social   media   exchanges   of   those are   shaped.

In   the   next   section   we   outline   the   general   one   against   this   background We   dedicate   ourselves   to   the   empirical   investigation   of   relevant   online   material   on misophonia. State   of   research   on   health-related   Internet   use   by   laypeople

## 3   Popularization   and   medicalization   in   the   social   web

represents   the   population,   but   a   complex   process   that   takes   place   over   several The   questions   of   'making   up   people'   are   particularly   interesting   because   the   expansion and   establishment   of   medical   categories   is   often   done   by   those   affected The   importance   of   Internet   services   for   communication   on   medical   topics   has   been recognized   since   the   late   1990s   and   discussed   with   regard   to   changes   in   the relationship   between   experts   and   laypeople   (Hardey   1999) .   For Research   on   medicalization   processes   (Conrad   2007)   has   shown   that   patients Lay   people   are   promoted   (Conrad/Potter   2000).   So   has   the   sociological action' (Conrad   2007,   p.   9).   This   also   means   that   popularization   is   not   a   simple simplification   of   medical   terms   with   subsequent   teaching actively   fight   for   the   biologization   or   geneticization   of   their   suffering.   The   social construction   of   medical   categories   is,   as   Conrad   puts   it:   »collective

Instances   are   distributed   and   shaped   by   them.

Social   media   therefore   reinforces   a   process   that   was   already   apparent.   On   the   one hand,   self-help   groups   have   not   only   achieved   success   since   the   mid-1970s social,   but   also   scientific,   usually   medical,

Recognition.   Those   affected   organize   themselves   in   self-help   groups   and,   in   turn, campaign   for   the   recognition   and   alleviation   of   their   suffering   by   science   and   the   public (Kofahl   et   al.   2016 ).   On   the   other   hand,   we   are   already   reporting force   a   uniform   pattern.   Studies   on   autistic   people,   for   example,   show   that   they   benefit from   social   media   communication   because   they   are   protected   from   the   imponderables Print   media   about   new   and   vague   disease   categories   (Kroll-Smith   2003).   The connections   between   media   and   medicine   are   diverse   and   can   hardly   be   combined direct   social   interactions   are   somewhat   relieved.   Social   media   platforms

help   define   what   is   meant   by   autism,   and

Peters   2016).   So   it   is   also   questionable   whether   rebellion   is   still   the   central   one give   those   affected   previously   unknown   opportunities   for   expression   (Pinchevski/

practice   of   the   affected   laypeople   or   whether   the   laypeople's   practices   have   not changed   fundamentally   if   the   medical   and   social   recognition   of   their   illnesses   is a   central   motivation.

If   you   look   at   misophonia   from   the   perspective   of   medicalization   and popularization,   the   question   arises   whether   the   hatred   of   noises   should   be recognized   as   a   clinical   picture   or   not.   Rather,   the   media   practices   come   to   the fore   through   which   those   involved   postulate   a   medical   category,   locate   themselves within   it   and   fight   for   its  ecognition.   Such   emancipatory   communitization r processes   to   create   a   shared   category   of   people   are   more   common   in   social media,   but   particularly   in   the   case   of   rare   and   controversial   diseases.   In   the   case of   the   vague   diagnosis   of   'excessive   daytime   sleepiness' (Kroll-Smith   2003),   it becomes   clear   that   medical   authority   comes   under   pressure   due   to   the popularized   claims   of   those   affected.   In   these   cases,   'Making-up-people-online' is   operated   by   those   affected   themselves,   which   does   not   mean   that   medical expertise   is   irrelevant.   Medical   authority   remains   necessary   to   establish   the legitimacy   of   the   illness,   but   it   is   no   longer   the   primary   driver   for   establishing   the person   category.   The   groups   of   laypeople   and   experts   cannot   always   be   clearly distinguished.   Experts   from   health   professions   can   also   be   affected   or   work   online to   recognize   misophonia   and   support   those   affected.   Discourses   from   specialists and   those   affected   sometimes   overlap,   overlap,   reinforce   each   other   and   can thereby   accelerate   the   popularization   of   the   medical   category.

However,   the   shifts   in   the   relationship   between   experts   and   laypeople   in relation   to   disease   knowledge   point   to   the   specific   role   of   social   media.   In particular,   they   allow   those   affected   to   generate   and   maintain   attention.   They receive   attention   not   only   among   themselves,   but   also   in   the   medical   community and   among   relatives   and   friends.   At   the   same   time,   they   have   to   deal   with   critical opposing   voices.   The   fight   over   the   personal   category   'misophonic'   brings together   different   interests   and   people   who   formulate   heterogeneous   bodies   of knowledge   and   claims:   from   the   experiential   knowledge   of   those   affected   and their   history   of   suffering   to   the   medical   classification   and   description   of   the symptoms   to   the   incomprehension   of   the   opponents,   consider   misophonia   to   be an   invention   or   imagination   or   not   take   it   seriously   as   a   disease.   Misophonia   can also   be   counted   publicly   via   social   media   metrics:   in   forums,   posts,   likes   or retweets.   We   will   examine   in   more   detail   how   these   different   configurations   of knowledge   and   people,   experts   and   laypeople   interact   in   the   case   of   misophonia in   the   next   section.

## 4   Misophonia   in   the   Social   Web   -   An   Empirical   Approach

The   medical   exploration   of   noise   hatred   began   around   25   years   ago:   the American   ear   doctor   Marsha   Johnson   is   credited   with   the   early   description   of "selective   sound   sensitivity   syndrome   (4S)",   which   she   diagnosed   in   1997

## »Making   Up   Misophonic   People«

Fig.   1 Search   term   'misophonia'   in   the   Google   Ngram   Viewer.   Source:   Google   Ngram   Viewer,   own Creation,   English   corpus   2019,   as   of:   March   9,   2023

in   one   of   her   patients   and   diagnosed   it   hundreds   of   times   by   the   turn   of   the   millennium (Bernstein/Angell/Dehle   2013,   p.   2;   Ferrer-Torres/GimØnez- Llort   2022,

- p.   5).   The   label   'misophonia'   was   first   published   in   2001

Jastreboff   and   the   Professor   of   Ear,   Nose   and   Throat   Medicine   Pawel   Jastreboff:   In Newsletter   article   by   Margaret,   a   biologist   with   a   doctorate   in   tinnitus   research their   clinical   work   they   had   noticed   that   the   pathological   hypersensitivity   to   noise known   as   hyperacusis   and   the   fear   of   specific   noises   known   as   phonophobia occurred   in   some   of   their   patients   *innership

invented   the   specific   term   'misophonia': could   not   be   adequately   located,   which   is   why   they   are   responsible   for   the   outright   hatred   of   noises question.« (Jastreboff/Jastreboff   2001,   S.   1   f.) and   can   encompass   a   variety   of   negative   emotions   generated   by   the   sounds   in we   selected   the   term   ›misophonia‹   which   translates   into   ›strong   dislike   (hate) of   sound‹.   As   such   it   is   close   to   the   patients'   description   of   their   symptoms »After   reviewing   various   Latin   and   Greek   prefixes,   and   consulting   with   a   distinguished   expert   in   classic   Greek   and   Latin   from   Cambridge   University   UK,

Although   the   Jastreboffs   identified   an   urgent   need   for   research   in   their   small newsletter   article,   in   the   following   decade   only   a   few   scientists   were   interested   in   the new   medical   category.   Analyze   below

As   a   first   tep,   we   will   determine   when   a   more   intensive   discussion   of   the   hatred   of s noises   can   be   identified   in   the   scientific   discourse   and   which   ones before   we   take   a   closer   look   at   misophonia-related   online   practices. to   observe   social   and   natural   science   practices   in   the   sense   of   hacking The   popularization   of   the   medical   category   'misophonia',   that   much   can   be   said

anticipate   is   closely   related   to   the   development   of   social   media.

Fig.   2 Search   term   'misophonia'   in   the   Web   of   Science   Core   Collection.   Source:   Web   of   Science   Core Collection,   own   creation,   as   of   April   27,   2023

## 4.1   The   scientific   discourse   on   misophonia

The   Jastreboffs'   new   word   creation   in   2001   initially   generated   little   response   in science.   This   means   that   the   scientific   practices   described   by   Hacking   have   not yet   occurred   -   at   least   if   you   follow   a   corresponding   analysis   with   the   "Google Ngram   Viewer":   Using   data   mining,   the   "Google   Ngram   Viewer"   can   be   used   to view   the   text   corpora   of   a   digital   collection   of   different   Evaluate   books   printed   in languages   for   the   occurrence   of   specific   words.   The   curve   diagram   (see   Fig.   1) shows   the   relative   frequency   with   which   the   word   'misophonia'   can   be   found   in the   English-language   text   corpus   of   books   printed   between   2001   and   2019.   With reference   to   the   methodological   specifics   of   corresponding   big   data   analyzes (Pettit   2016),   the   data   generated   by   the   online   tool   used   are   interpreted   here   with all   caution   as   evidence   of   the   way   in   which   the   discourse   on   misophonia   develops. It   turns   out   that   the   term   appeared   for   the   first   time   in   2001,   but   was   only   found in   low   frequency,   which   remained   largely   the   case   for   a   whole   decade.   It   was only   from   2012   onwards   that   "misophonia"   was   mentioned   more   and   more frequently   in   English-language   books   -   the   curve   continued   to   rise   until   2019.

Even   though   the   text   corpus   analyzed   here   only   covers   the   period   up   to   2019, a   supplementary   analysis   suggests   that   publication   activity   on   misophonia continues   to   grow   today.   The   search   engine   "Google   Scholar",   designed   for scientific   literature   research,   refers   to   a   total   of   almost   two   thousand   scientific documents   after   entering   the   search   term   "misophonia".   Almost   half   of   these documents   date   from   2000   to   2019,   while   the   other   half   date   from   2020   to mid-2023.   This   means   that   there   are   as   many   scientific   documents   on 'misophonia'   linked   in   Google   Scholar   for   the   last   three   and   a   half   years   as   for the   previous   twenty   years.   Research   in   the   Web   Of   Science   shows   a   similar picture   with   a   total   of   217   documents   (see   Fig.   2).

the   recognition   of   misophonia   as   a   disease.   First   of   all   shows   up has.   These   surges   of   attention   within   the   professional   public   show   that On   this   empirical   basis   it   can   be   assumed   that   the   expert   discourse receives   attention. Establishing   the   category   is   not   linear   and   that's   not   all intensified   in   2012   and   has   increased   significantly   again   recently misophonia   began   around   the   turn   of   the   millennium,   at   the   latest   since just   that   the   new   medical   category   is   also   increasing   in   professional   discourse put   the   occurrence   of   misophonia   into   a   statistical   connection   with   sociodemographic characteristics   or   other   illnesses   (correlate,   cf. Claiming   the   responsibility   of   medicine   for   the   identified   disorder)   and Hatred   of   noises   should   be   highlighted. strive   for   quantifying   diagnostic   criteria   (quantification,   see   e.g.   Jast-reboff/Jastreboff 2002;   Remmert   et   al.   2022;   Swedo   et   al.   2022),   along   these   lines A   distinction   can   be   made   between   social   and   natural   science   practices.   Social   scientific practices   for   the   production   and   establishment   of   misophonia see   already   Jastreboff/Jastreboff   2001   with   the   term   'misophonia'   and   that to   establish   misophonia   as   a   category   are   generally   present   when   the   hatred Criteria   define   normal   ranges   (normalization,   see   e.g.   Schröder   et   al.   2013)   and Rouw/Erfanian   2018;   Schwemmle/Arens   2021)   if   they   are   carried   out   in   particular   through   tests if  neuro)biological   (biologizing,   see   e.g.   Schwemmle/Arens   2021)   or   genetic   causes ( (geneticizing,   see   e.g.   Sanchez/Silva   2018)   of sounds   are   predominantly   thought   of   in   medical   terms   (medicalizing, However,   Ian   Hacking   can   show,   as   detailed   above,   that   specific   scientific   practices can   contribute   to   the   establishment   of   new   categories, as   a   category   of   people,   for   example,   when   experts   research   the   frequency   of   occurrence of   misophonia   (counting,   see   e.g.   Jager   et   al.   2020; e.g.   Schröder   et   al.   2019;   Siepsiak   et   al.   2020).   Scientific   practices

the   practices   of   normalization,   bureaucratization   and   rebellion.   practices   of or   classified,   which   arises   in   the   case   of   dysfunctional   classifications as   well   as   the   reduction   of   anomic   attributions   to   others   and   to   oneself.   Practices   of bureaucratization   continue   to   aim   at   the   institutionalization   of   tests After   hacking,   as   also   explained   above,   social   connection   practices   are: and   diagnostic   criteria   as   well   as   the   allocation   of   public   research   funds.   With   the Normalization   consists   of   measures,   medication   and   coping   strategies   that   aim   to alleviate   the   suffering   caused   by   misophonia   and   to   achieve   a   cure turn   against   science   and   bureaucracy   'from   below'. Rebellion   ultimately   describes   hacking   as   a   specific   follow-up   practice   of   those   affected

of   'making   up   misophonic   people   online'   as   interest-driven   popularization initiated,   flanked,   advanced   and   helped   to   be   shaped   by   laypeople   on   the   social   web In   a  irst   step,   we   examine   to   what   extent   social   media   exchanges f become.   This   means   that   we   analyze   the   social   process   using   the   example   of   misophonia In   the   following,   we   assume   that   a   significant   proportion   of   the   above-mentioned scientific   and   connection   practices   now   take   place   online on   misophonia   variants   of   the   social   and   natural   sciences   described   by   Hacking a   medical   category.   We   proceed   analytically   in   two   steps:

scientific   practices   can   be   found.   In   a   second   step,   we   focus   on   social   connection practices   on   the   Internet,   assuming   that   the   practices   of   normalization, bureaucratization   and   rebellion   outlined   by   hacking   need   to   be   modified   or expanded   in   the   digital   age.

## 4.2   Social   and   natural   science   practices   online

Due   to   the   quantifying   logic   of   social   media,   the   social   scientific   practice   of counting,   which   aims   to   record   and   represent   those   who   have   been   classified,   is omnipresent   on   the   Internet.   Since   the   use   of   the   social   web   continually   leaves traces   of   data,   the   use   of   social   media   is   simultaneously   accompanied   by   the production   and   presentation   of   corresponding   numerical   material:   »[E]very   trace we   enter   into   the   digital   environment   of   social   media   platforms,   whether   direct   or indirect,   visible   or   invisible,   provides   information   about   us' (Casagrande   2022,   p. 153).   In   this   sense,   in   the   social   media   negotiation   of   specific   topics,   for   example the   number   of   posts,   the   number   of   likes,   the   number   of   followers,   friends   or members,   the   number   and   frequency   of   comments   or   even   the   extent   of   redirects in   the   context   of   the   corresponding   online   -Interpret   counting   practices.   Unlike the   standardized   surveys   of   empirical   social   research,   such   as   the   Kinsey   Report, this   data   was   not   specifically   collected,   does   not   follow   any   methodological system   and   does   not   claim   to   be   representative.   Rather,   this   'specifically   digital way   of   knowing' (Marres   2017,   p.   37)   has   explicit   distortions,   which   can   potentially also   be   turned   productively   (Marres   2017,   p.   123).   And   if   not   representative, those   affected   by   misophonia   and   their   families   at   least   gain   a   certain   level   of representation   and   visibility,   which   is   reflected   in   the   sheer   volume   of   agreement, comment   and   support.

Accordingly,   for   example,   the   website   "Misophonia   UK"   states   that   misophonia   is "one   of   the   first   fully-fledged   diagnoses   of   the   Internet   age":   While   the   disease was   previously   "invisible",   patients   were   not   taken   seriously   and   did   not   receive medical   attention   did   not   exist,   this   changed   with   the   exchange   and   mobilization of   those   affected   on   social   media. With   a   view   to   misophonia-related   online   counting   practices,   for   example,   the development   and   size   of   social   networks   on   the   topic   can   be   interpreted   as   a relevance   marker:   the   largest   English-speaking   Facebook   group   on   misophonia, for   example,   currently   has   25,000   members,   the   largest   German-speaking Facebook   group   now   has   over   3,000   members,   who   largely   are   likely   to   consist of   (self-)classified   people   and   their   social   environment.   It   can   be   assumed   that this   membership   strength   of   the   misophonia-related   networks   alone   contributes to   a   new   understanding   of   self   and   others   for   those   affected   in   the   sense   of   the   looping   effect

What   is   central   in   this   context   is   that   those   affected   learn   online   that   the   hatred of   noises   can   be   identified   with   a   technical   term   that   not   only   allows   for   selflocalization,   but   also   for   community   and   normalization:   »A   common   refrain   is   'I thought   I   was   the   only   one   in   the   world,   until   I   discovered   my   condition   had   a name.   I'm   so   glad   there   are   people   out   there

## »Making   Up   Misophonic   People«

who   understand   what   I   am   going   through‹«3 . Recognizing   that   they   are   not   alone,   that   their   suffering   has   a   name   and   that   there   are   other people   who   experience   a   similar   fate   is   therefore   quite   typical That   those   affected   exchange   information   online for   the   medical   histories   documented   on   the   Internet   (see   Goldstein   Jutel   2011   for medical   diagnoses   in   general).

A   well-received   TikTok   video   from   Connor   begins   with   this   in   mind being   is   obviously   perceived   as   unbearable.   After   a   short   conversation to   his   counterpart   an   urgent,   urgent   request:   'Don't   do   it! There's   not   enough   noise   in   this   room..."4   The   idea   of   being   exposed   to   the   licking   noises   of eating   ice   cream   without   background   music   or   similar   background   noise DeWolfe:   The   protagonist   looks   at   an   ice   cream   spoon   raised   to   his   mouth

Stories   of   illness,   reports   of   experiences   and   countless   communitarian   announcements   like those   from @whoskaroline.22: "I've   found   my   people." whereupon   the   astonished   answer   of   the   person   diagnosed   in   this   way   is:   'Oh,   there is   a name   for   that?".   In   the   more   than   ten   thousand   comments   on   the   video,   which   has   been shared   almost   thirty   thousand   times,   there   are   countless   self-   and   external   diagnoses,   short   ones you   have   such   a   strong   dislike   towards   sounds   like   that,   then   you   have   Misophonia!«, the   interlocutor,   who   was   prevented   from   eating   ice   cream,   records   in   the   19-second   video:   »If

The   case   of   misophonia   is   still   in   the   negotiation   process.   There   is   currently   no   medical definition   and   diagnosis   according   to   DSM-V   or   ICD-11   (Schwemmle/ The   criteria   according   to   which   membership   in   this   group   is   determined   is   unclear

Arens   2021,   p.   7).   An   example   of   an   online   variant   of   the   social   science   practice   of quantification,   that   is,   the   numerical   determination   of

British   misophonia   website.   Anyone   who   opens   the   »Misophonia   UK«   homepage Attribution   criteria   for   specific   categories,   however,   can   be   found   on   one comes   across   a   small   survey   entitled   'What   is   your   worst   trigger?'   As

Possible   answers   include   breathing   noises,   eating   noises,   repetitive   noises   and an   other   option   is   listed.   The   linked   analysis   of   the   over   14,000   answers   shows   that   a   good   60 percent   of   those   surveyed   heard   eating   noises   and   ten   percent   repetitive   ones

Noises,   almost   eight   percent   breathing   noises   and   the   remaining   20   percent   something see   something   else   as   the   worst   trigger.   Find   below   the   survey   results

There   are   almost   200   older   comments,   most   of   which   contain   your   own   trigger   noises be   explained   again   in   more   detail.   This   is   also   often   in   the   comments

The   relief   documented   by   misophonia   sufferers   on   their   first   visit the   website   because   by   reading   the   available   misophonia   information   they   learned   for   the   first time   that   others   feel   similar   things   and

Triggers   (including   breathing   noises)   are   revealed,   to   which   those   affected   can   then   relate, normalization   and   community experience.   By   identifying   both   the   most   common   triggers   (eating   noises)   and   the   variation   of   the initiated,   while   normalization   practices   in   the   sense   of   an   orientation   towards   average   values or   adherence   to   specific   limit   values   in   the   case   of   misophonia   are   (so   far)   less   observed. Interesting   to   illustrate

Correlating   practices   that   can   be   observed   online   are   still   the   work   of   experts

3 http://www.misophonia-uk.org.

https://www.tiktok.com/@connordewolfe/video/6973172078879067398. 4

also   aggregated   data,   for   example   on   the   connection   between   misophonia initiated   misophonia   platforms   such   as   the   online   presence   'Patients-like-me':   here and   indicate   age.   In   summary,   the   social   sciences not   just   an   opportunity   to   contact   and   exchange   ideas   with   other   affected   people,   but   also can   be   searched   for   people   with   a   similar   diagnosis.   Whoever   does   this   receives

Practices   of   counting,   quantifying   and   correlating   note   that   these   respectively play   a   central   role   in   misophonia   as   a   whole. can   be   observed   in   specific   online   variants   and   in   public   exchange

The   scientific   practices   (medicalization,   biologization,   geneticization)   that   serve   to establish   misophonia   as   a   category,   however,   take   place   in

Online   exchanges   provide   more   indirect   support.   The   naturalization   of   misophonia   is undoubtedly   in   the   interest   of   those   affected:   the   scientific   one

Proof   of   a   physiological   cause   makes   it   easier   to   recognize   misophonia   as   a   serious illness   and   legitimizes   the   suffering   of   those   affected.   The   social   media   exchange   on misophonia   is   often   characterized

- a   high   level   of   expertise:   scientific   theses,   for   example

of   geneticization   find   their   way   into   lay   discourse   and   in   particular referred.5   In   addition,   there   are   repeated   calls   from   those   affected   to   engage   more intensively   and   on   the   basis   of   scientific   findings Help   pages   are   often   updated   on   the   current   state   of   medical   research

More   recently,   social   media   exchange   on   the   topic   has   been   a   relevant   reference   point in   scientific   work   on   misophonia:   With   reference   to to   deal   with   the   disorder.   Conversely,   it   is   also   noticeable   that,   especially   in

The   studies   illustrate   the   everyday   problems   associated   with   misophonia   using discussion   contributions   in   online   forums   (Siepsiak/Dragan   2019 ).

checked   for   plausibility   (Brout   et   al.   2018,   p.   1)   as   well   as   respondents   in   social   networks 2018). Terms   common   on   social   media   to   describe   the   triggering   sounds also   recruited   materials   for   content   analysis   studies   (Rouw/Erfanian

All   in all,   it   hows   that   experts   as   well   as   (expert)   those   affected   demonstrate   social s and   scientific   practices   on   the   social   web, that   serve   the   misophonia-related   'making   up   people':   That's   how   they   exist is   therefore   largely   influenced   by   the   extensive   social   media   discourse   of   those   affected. increasingly   as   cooperative   practices   between   experts   and   laypeople   on   and carried   out   offline.   The   production   of   the   appropriate   category   of   people   will   be However,   scientific   practices   in   the   form   described   by   hacking   will   continue

Regarding   social   connection   practices,   we   assume

The   availability   of   the   social   web   is   even   more   consequential:   the   practices   of normalization,   bureaucratization   and   rebellion   themselves   are   changing.

## 4.3   Social   connection   practices   online

Parallel   to   the   establishment   of   a   new   category   of   people,   as   outlined   above,   social connection   practices   emerge   that   normalize   and   bureaucratize   hacking

https://www.self.com/story/misophonia-pandemic-tips. 5

and   rebellion   describes.   In   the   following,   we   will   use   the   example   of   misophobia   to   show that   and   how   these   practices   change   qualitatively   as   a   result   of   the   extensive   social media   exchange   between   those   affected.

## 4.3.1   From   normalizing   to   popularizing

prove   effective. understand   the   online   popularization   of   the   phenomenon.   This   means   that   while normalization   practices   previously   came   from   experts   and   included   suggestions   for measures,   medication   and   coping   strategies,   in   the   logic   of   the   social   web   it   is particularly   the   popularization   practices   that   come   from   those   affected, which   is   aimed   at   reducing   anomic   self-attributions   and   external   attributions The   normalization   of   misophonia   can   largely   be   seen   as   an   effect in   which   one   respondent   says   that   the Discovery   of   a   Facebook   group   on   misophonia   marked   a   breakthrough   in   dealing   with   it with   her   illness   represented: , Anecdotally,   one   of   the   well   over   one   hundred   interviews   from   the   'Misophonia Podcast'   can   be   cited   here6

these   pictures   and   introduced   myself.   And   the   response   was   overwhelming. ago   was   thinking,   ›Oh   my   gosh,   I   wonder   if   there   is   anything   on   Facebook‹ S6E5,   15:30). [...]   I didn't   look   too   much   into   like   what   the   group   was   about.   I   just   posted »I   don't   know   what   made   me   think   of   this,   but   the   big   breakthrough   five   years And   then   I   was   like,   ›Okay,   wow,   this   is   like,   this   is   my   world‹« (Jennifer   C.,

Twitter   user @The-AmberPicota also   gets   an   insight   into   this   unknown   world   when she   asks   on   the   social   network   whether   others   too always   got   mad   at   me   for   getting   mad   at   them   for   eating!«.8 Do   you   feel   rage   when   people   chew   food   in   videos/near   you?   I'm   trying   to   see and   our   own   'discovery   stories,'   such   as   those   of   Twitter   user @SusannahElyse, who answers   minutes   after   the   question:   'Yes   it's   a   real   thing! felt   attacked   by   eating   noises:   »Tell   me   the   truth,   I   can   handle   it. I  elt   so   vindicated   when   I   found   out   it   was   a   real   disorder,   take   that,   family   who f something«.7   This   is   followed   by   a   large   number   of   comments,   misophonia   diagnoses

countable   group   whose   online   presence   alone   creates   identity-forming   effects. Suffering   creates   a   new   self-image   and   external   image   of   those   affected,   a   visible   and relieved   and   confirmed   because   they   can   now   be   sure   that   they   are   suffering   from   a "real"   disorder,   that   their   anger   has   an   explainable   cause   and   that   it   is   happening This   means   that   the   misophonic   feeling   is   deprived   of   its   anomic   character   through Lack   of   understanding   of   the   social   environment   can   now   be   countered   by   a   scientific explanation.   In   the   spirit   of   hacking,   the   classification   of   your   own By   'discovering'   the   misophonia   classification,   those   affected   feel documented   dissemination   and   measured   attention   by   many.

https://www.misophoniapodcast.com/episodes/s6e5-jennifer-c. 6

7 https://twitter.com/TheAmberPicota/status/1596304387114405890.

https://twitter.com/SusannahElyse/status/1596306442268676097. 8

Not   being   crazy   and   not   alone,   as   well   as   having   a   nameable   illness,   creates   a   space   in   which   recognition of   one's   own   feelings   is   possible.

The   fact   that   this   knowledge   normalizes   one's   own   perception   is   also   exemplified   by   a   comment   on   the online   survey   explained   above,   in   which   the   user   Deidre   states:   »I   am   so   glad   that   I   finally   know   that   I am   not   insane   and   that   this   is   an   actual   issue   for   others   as   well   as   me«9   The   visibility   due   to   the popularization   of   the   category   therefore has   a   positive   effect   on   successful   self-diagnosis. .

However,   such   self-diagnoses   are   also   discussed   negatively,   especially   on   social   media.   In   the misophonia   group   on   Reddit,   for   example,   one   of   the   almost   60,000   group   members   complains   that   on the   social   network   Facebook,   many   people   make   low-level   claims   that   they   suffer   from   misophonia:

»Why   does   everyone   think   they   have   Misophonia??   As   a   misophoniac   who's   had   it   pretty   severe since   I   was   12,   I   can't   fucking   stand   it   when   I   see   articles   about   Misophonia   and   people   quote   it   by saying   ›Omg   I   definitely   have   this   haha‹.   Why?   Because   every   time   I   see   it   shared   as   an   article   on facebook   and   I   see   who   quoted   it   by   saying   that,   it's   someone   I've   met   irl   and   THEY'RE   PART   OF THE   PROBLEM.   This   cannot   just   be   me,   I   also   know   that   Misophonia   is   a   pretty   rare   neurological problem   and   don't   get   me   wrong,   meeting   people   who've   also   self   diagnosed   themselves   with   it for   years   is   pretty   extraordinary   because   it's   fairly   unheard   of,   but   every   time   without   fail   on Facebook   I'll   see   at   least   6   people   shared   the   same   article   about   it   and   quote   it   by   saying   ›I   just found   out   I   have   this   lol‹   but   most   of   them   are   irl's   that   I'm   like   nooooo   you   don't   buddy,   every   time I meet   you,   you   chew   on   your   nails   and   smack   your   gum   with   your   mouth   open   Kind   of   a   rant   post and   maybe   some   misophoniacs   can't   relate,   but   I   hope   some   people   get   what   I'm   trying   to explain.«10

Based   on   this   post   by   the   user pOcha , a   heated   discussion   is   developing   about   the   extent   to   which the   observation   is   correct   and   how,   if   necessary,   the   popularity   of   self-diagnosis   should   be   dealt   with. The   undesirable   popularity,   as   criticized   here,   can   also   be   understood   as   a   debate   about   reliable diagnostic   criteria   -   and   thus   ultimately   as   part   of   "making   up   people".

The   layperson's   normalization   practices   therefore   partially   coincide   with   those   of   the   experts:   avoidance strategies   and   therapy   options   are   exchanged   in   order   to   be   able   to   lead   as   normal   a   life   as   possible   with misophonia.

However,   through   popularization   on   social   media,   normalization   is   gaining   new   momentum.   The   communal experience   of   shared   suffering,   the   common   identification   under   #misophony,   creates   a   feeling   of belonging   to   a   specific   group.   The   popularization   via   social   media   forms   the   basis   for   the   layperson's normalization   of   misophonia   as   a   community-building   dialogue.

gnosis.

9 https://poll.fm/2934468/results.

https://www.reddit.com/r/misophonia/comments/9mt0nf/why_does_everyone_think_they_have_misophonia/. 10

## »Making   Up   Misophonic   People«

## 4.3.2   Bureaucratize   and   commercialize

the   implementation   of   normalizing   measures,   the   institutionalization   of   diagnostic criteria,   the   standardization   of   treatment   paths,   for   example The   social   connection   practices   of   bureaucratization   serve   in   Hacking's   concept

Allocation   of   research   funds.   Appropriate   experts   will   be   involved

Monetary   donations   are   called   for,   which   will   be   used,   among   other   things,   to   promote misophonia-related   research.12   The   self-help   organization   'soQuiet',   a   'nonprofit   built by   people   with   misophonia for people   with Bureaucratization   practices   supported   online,   for   example   when   complaining   about   the lack   of   recognized   classification   criteria   according   to   ICD   or   DSM   on   Reddit11   or   online serve   more   specifically   to   support   those   affected. misophonia«13,   calls   for   donations   that   go   beyond   supporting   science

supporting   Misophonia   research."   The   already   mentioned   organization   "soQuiet"   also offers   similar   products15.   To   what   extent   on   the   part   of   the   relevant of   Misophonia.   Plus,   it   lets   other   misophones   know   you're   one   of   them.   All   pro-ceeds go   toward   production   of   the   podcast,   promoting   it   to   a   wider   audience,   and Identification   with   the   corresponding   (self-)   diagnosis   as   well   as   support It   is difficult   to   determine   whether   providers   are   dominated   by   the   idea   of   support   or profit.   In   any   case,   the   misophonia-related   products   can   be   described   as   expressive is   outstanding,   those   affected   gain   (internet)   public   visibility   and   recognition   themselves -   not   least   through   commercialization   practices. Understanding   popularization.   That   is,   as   long   as   there   is   still   institutionalized recognition   of   misophonia   due   to   the   relatively   weak   bureaucratization   to   date For   example,   the   already   mentioned   'Misophonia   Podcasts'   sells   bags,   T-shirts   and socks   with   'Misophonia'   lettering,   which   serves   several   purposes dienen   sollte:   »Wearing   the   logo   supports   the   podcast   and   helps   raise   awareness In   addition   to   these   donation   options,   a   kind   of   misophonia   merchandising   can   be found   on   several   platforms.   By   2022,   14   were   on   the   website   of   the

Social   media   exchange   between   those   affected,   which   also   expands   the   content Commercialization   and   popularization   of   misophonia   comes   primarily   from This   is   how   the   increase   in   relevance   of   social   media   strengthens   the   position   of   laypeople:   The

The   bureaucratization   and   normalization   carried   out   are   interlinked   with   the commercialization   and   popularization   practices   of   the   lay   people.   Ultimately   changed of   social   connection   practices.   That   is,   the   dominance   of   experts the   relationship   between   the   two   groups   as   a   whole,   which   will   be   explained   in conclusion.

https://www.reddit.com/r/misophonia/comments/10iiytu/is_misophonia_a_disorder_or_a_symptom/. 11

12 https://misophonia-association.org/donate-today/.

https://www.soquiet.org/. 13

https://web.archive.org/web/20221030034719/https://www.misophoniapodcast.com/. 14

https://www.soquiet.org/shop. 15

Fig.   3 Search   term   'misophonia'   in   Google   Trends.   Source:   Google   Trends,   own   creation,   worldwide,   as of:   11/14/22

## 4.3.3   From   rebellion   to   alliance   formation

In   Hacking's   conception,   the   resistant   practice   of   "rebellion"   represents   the   central follow-up   practice   on   the   part   of   those   affected:   the   assumption   is   that   laypeople will   rebel   against   the   responsible   experts   in   the   event   of   inadequate categorizations.   However,   against   the   background   of   our   exemplary   analysis   of social   media   exchanges   on   misophonia,   we   would   like   to   claim   that   rebellion   no longer   adequately   describes   the   common   connection   practices   of   those   affected. Instead   of   a   confrontational   relationship,   it   can   be   observed   that   alliances   of   lay people   and   experts   are   forming   in   order   to   jointly   promote   the   creation   and establishment   of   a   new   category   of   people.

In   this   sense,   we   compare   the   above   presentation   of   the   scientific   misophonia discourse   with   an   analysis   of   the   (internet)   public   exchange   on   the   topic.   It   turns out   that   the   popularization   practices   on   the   social   web   fuel   the   scientific   discourse on   misophonia.   An   evaluation   using   the   analysis   tool   Google   Trends   provides   a first   impression   of   the   (internet)   public   interest   in   the   topic   of   misophonia.   Since 2004,   Google   Trends   has   been   able   to   show   how   the   weekly   volume   of   search queries   in   the   Google   search   engine   for   the   term   'misophonia'   relates   to   the   total volume   of   corresponding   Google   searches,   so   that   the   popularity   of   the   search query   can   be   seen   over   time .   Public   interest   in   "misophonia"   was   therefore   very subdued   until   the   middle   of   2011,   but   then   rose   sharply   at   the   end   of   September 2011   -   and   has   remained   at   least   at   this   level   to   this   day   (see   Fig.   3) .

The   fact   that   the   number   of   Google   searches   on   the   subject   of   misophonia suddenly   increased   massively   in   September   2011   can   most   likely   be   explained by   an   article   published   in   the   New   York   Times   on   September   5th,   2011.   This article   was   entitled   'When   a   chomp   or   a   slurp   is   a   trigger   for   outrage' (Cohen 2011),   put   the   topic   of   misophonia   on   the   media   agenda   and   quickly   spread, especially   in   the   USA.   Marsha   Johnson,   mentioned   above,   is   mentioned   as   an expert   in   the   New   York   Times   article,   not   only   mentioning   her   pioneering   medical work,   but   also   her   founding   of   the   Yahoo   group   'soundsensitivity,'   which   was already   used   by   1,700   people   at   the   time .   So   it   is   an   expert   who   is   responsible for   networking   those   affected   with   one   another

## »Making   Up   Misophonic   People«

public   misophonia   debate,   but   ultimately   it   is   social   media   that   has   led   to   a significant   increase   in   attention   to   the   condition   since   the   end   of   2011   at   the   latest relevant.   The   New   York   Times   article   may   have   served   as   the   initial   spark 2011   increasing   (internet)   public   popularity   of   misophonia   also   from   2012 have   contributed.   With   this   in   mind,   we   now   assume   that   from   the   end has   forced.   Accordingly,   it   is   less   a   rebellion   by   the   (self-)classified   than growing   scientific   publication   activity   on   the   topic   (see   Fig.   1   &amp;   2) more   exists,   social   media   exchange   about   misophonia   is   still   high rather,   to   observe   an   alliance   formation   between   experts   and   laypeople. started   at   an   early   point   in   time   (2005).   Even   if   this   online   group   isn't  oday t of   scientific   knowledge   could   also   be   precisely   what   has   given   impetus   to   the   public debate   on   misophonia.   A   current   overview   article gaps' (Ferrer-Torres/Gimenez-Llort   2022,   p.   18).   This   incompleteness Nevertheless,   misophonia   is   still   reported   in   a   recent   review   study als   eine   »little-known   and   poorly   studied   disorder,   which   still   has   many   information

(Schwemmle/Arens   2021,   p.   6).   The   expert   and   lay   discourse   on   misophonia   is therefore   closely   interwoven,   the   scientific   and   the   media Misophonia   forums   may   be   so   present   because   the   exchange   of In   any   case,   Misophonia   states   that   there   is   an   'imbalance   between   popular   media Internet   entries   and   scientific   literature.'   Above   all and   medical   discussion   and   therapy   on   this   topic   are   rather   rare." Those   affected   always   play   a   major   role   when   the   scientific Agendas   strengthen   each   other,   and   in   some   cases   the   social   media   debate   even precedes   science.

## 5   Conclusion

The   internet-driven   popularization   of   misophonia   as   a   medical   condition   has   been observed   for   over   a   decade.   The   diagnosis   has   now   also   become   known   beyond the   Internet,   with   the   awarding   of   the   so-called   Ig   Nobel   Prize   representing   a current   high   point   in   public   visibility.   'Ignobel'   means   'unworthy'   in   English. Accordingly,   since   1991,   the   'Anti-Nobel   Prize'   has   been   awarded   year   after   year in   a   eremony   at   Harvard   University   for   research   work   that   at   first   glance   might c seem   somewhat   ridiculous.

However,   upon   closer   inspection   they   can   prove   to   be   highly   relevant.   The   price   will According   to   the   self-description,   it   was   awarded   'for   achievements   that   first   make people   LAUGH   then   make   them   THINK'.   In   2020,   the   Ig   Medical   Nobel   Prize   went to   a Belgian-Dutch   research   team.   The   award   went   to   Nienke   Vulink,   Damiaan Denys   and   Arnoud   van   Loon   'for   diagnosing   a   long-unrecognized   medical   condition: Misophonia,   the   distress   at   hearing   other   people make   chewing   sounds«16.   One   of   the   honorees,   Damiaan   Denys,   admitted   that   the I was   a   little   irritated   by   the   award   at   first:   »Yet   we   accepted   it   because   we   think   it   is

https://improbable.com/ig/winners/. 16

to   gain   further   attention. Although   the   award   did   not   go   unquestioned,   the   nominees   obviously   understood it as   a   value   in   itself,   the   category   of   misophonia   in   public important   that   this   condition   gets   the   attention«.17   Even   if   the   scientific   one

However,   on   the   whole   it   is   less   the   experts,   but   rather   primarily   affected laypeople   who   are   responsible   for   popularizing   the can   put.   The   medical   experts   typically   bring which   ultimately   holds   the   prospect   of   institutionalizing   financing   and   therapy have.   Especially   for   relatively   new   and   indefinite   medical   categories,   it   can   be   seen   that We   believe   that   the   present   analysis   shows   that   people   hate   noise (cf.   Fleck   1980).   Accordingly,   we   are   establishing   misophonia   as   a   new   one that   those   affected   have   just   as   much,   if   not   greater,   interest   than   the   experts   in recognizing   a   condition   as   a   scientific   fact This   means   that   when   it   comes   to   misophonia,   there   is   less   a   powerful   assertion Social   Web   back.   The   popularization   on   social   media   thus   at   least   partially paves   the   way   for   professional   access   by   medicine.   The   one   there Self-classification   of   those   affected   awaits,   so   to   speak,   legitimation   and   certifying confirmation   by   the   classic   gatekeepers   of   the   health   system, Category   of   people   primarily   aims   at   popularizing   their   own   experiences

Practices   of   laypeople   and   those   of   experts   stabilize   each   other that   they   bring   the   popularizing   potential   of   social   media   into   play.   The the   social   capital   of   the   profession,   while   for   the   laypeople   concerned, to   observe   the   self-promoted   production   and   popularization   of   misophonia   as   a personal   category.   In   the   process   of   popularization,   they   become   intertwined of   professional   interpretation   and   expertise   than   it   is   of   affected   lay   people and   ultimately   create   a   functioning   category   of   people.

Funding Funded   by   the   German   Research   Foundation   (DFG)   -   Project   number   438577023   SFB   1472.

Funding Open   Access   funding   enabled   and   organized   by   Projekt   DEAL.

were   made. Open   Access This   article   is   published   under   the   Creative   Commons   Attribution   4.0   International   License, which   permits   use,   copying,   processing,   distribution   and   reproduction   in in   any   medium   or   format,   provided   you   give   proper   credit   to   the   original   author(s)   and   source,   include   a link   to   the   Creative   Commons   License,   and   indicate   if   changes   were   made

Obtain   the   consent   of   the   respective   rights   holder   for   the   use   of   the   material. The   images   and   other   third   party   material   contained   in   this   article   are   also   subject   to   the   above Creative   Commons   license,   unless   otherwise   stated   in   the   figure   legend.   Unless   the   material   in   question is   under   the   stated   Creative   Commons   license   and   the   action   in   question is   not   permitted   according   to   legal   regulations,   is   for   the   further   uses   listed   above

Further   details   about   the   license   can   be   found   in   the   license   information   at   http://creativecommons.org/ licenses/by/4.0/deed.de.

17 https://nltimes.nl/2020/09/18/amsterdam-research-misophonia-wins-ig-nobel-prize.

## literature

Bennani,   Hannah/Müller,   Marion   (2018):   'Making   up   people'   globally.   The   institutionalization   of   global   categories   of people   using   the   example   of   indigenous   peoples   and   people   with   disabilities.   In: Journal   of   Sociology 47(5), pp.   306-331.

Bernstein,   Rosemary   E./Angell   Karyn   L./Dehle   Crystal   M.   (2013):   A   brief   course   of   cognitive   behavioural   therapy   for the   treatment   of   misophonia:   A   case   example.   In: The   Cognitive   Behaviour   Therapist 6(10),   S.   1-13.

Brout,   Jennifer   J./Edelstein,   Miren/Erfanian,   Mercede/Mannino,   Michael/Miller,   Lucy   J./Rouw,   Romke/   Kumar, Sukhbinder/Rosenthal,   M.   Zachary   (2018):   Investigating   Misophonia:   A   Review   of   the   Empi-rical   Literature, Clinical   Implications,   and   a   Research   Agenda.   In: Frontiers   in   Neuroscience,   Section   Auditory   Cognitive Neuroscience, 12:36,   S.   1-12.

Casagrande,   Gaia   (2022):   Visible   and   Invisible   Traces:   Managing   the   Self   on   Social   Media   Platforms.   In:   Francesca Comunello,   Fabrizio   Martire,   Lorenzo   Sabetta   (Hg.): What   People   Leave   Behind.   Marks,   Traces,   Footprints and   their   Relevance   to   Knowledge   Society. Springer:   Cham,   S.   141-156.

Cohen,   Joyce   (2011):   When   a   Chomp   or   a   Slurp   is   a   Trigger   for   Outrage.   The   New   York   Times,   5   Septem-ber   2011 (http://www.nytimes.com/2011/09/06/health/06annoy.html?_r=1&amp;).

Conrad,   Peter   (2007):   The   Medicalization   of   Society.   On   the   Transformation   of   Human   Conditions   into   Treatable Disorders.   Baltimore:   Johns   Hopkins   University   Press.

Conrad,   Peter/Potter,   Deborah   (2000):   From   Hyperactive   Children   to   ADHD   Adults.   Observations   on   the   Expansion of   Medical   Categories.   In: Social   Problems 47(4),   S.   559-582.

Döring,   Jörg/Werber,   Niels/Albrecht-Birkner,   Veronika/Gerlitz,   Carolin/Hecken,   Thomas/Paßmann,   Jo-hannes/ Schäfer,   Jörgen/Schubert,   Cornelius/Stein,   Daniel/Venus,   Jochen   (2021):   What   for   many   receives   attention. On   the   transformations   of   the   popular.   In: Cultural   Studies   Journal, Vol.

6,   S.   1-24.

Durkheim,   Emile/Mauss,   Marcel   (1987):   On   some   primitive   forms   of   classification.   A   contribution   to   the   study   of collective   ideas.   In:   Hans   Joas   (ed.): Emile   Durkheim.   Writings   on   the   sociology   of   knowledge. Frankfurt   am Main:   Suhrkamp,   pp.   169-256.

Espeland,   Wendy   N./Stevens   Mitchell   L.   (2008):   A   Sociology   of   Quantification.   In: European   Journal   of   Sociology 49 (3),   S.   401-436.

Ferrer-Torres,   Antonia/GimØnez- Llort,   Lydia   (2022):   Misophonia:   A   Systematic   Review   of   Current   and   Future   Trends in   This   Emerging   Clinical   Field.   In: International   Journal   of   Environmental   Research   and   Public   Health 19, 6790,   S.   1-26.

Fleck,   Ludwik   (1980): Origin   and   development   of   a   scientific   fact. Frankfurt   a.   M.:

## Suhrkamp.

Goldstein   Jutel,   Annemarie   (2011): Putting   a   Name   to   It.   Diagnosis   in   Contemporary   Society. Baltimore: Goffman,   Erving   (1994): Interaction   and   Gender. Frankfurt   a.   M.:   Campus.

Johns   Hopkins   University   Press.

Hacking,   Ian   (1986):   Making   up   People.   In:   Thomas   C.   Heller/Morton   Sosna/David   E.   Wellbery   (Hg.):

Reconstructing   Individualism. Stanford:   Stanford   University   Press,   S.   222-236.

Hacking,   Ian   (2006):   Making   Up   People.   In: London   Review   of   Books 28   (16).

Hacking,   Ian   (2007):   Kinds   of   People:   Moving   Targets.   In: Proceedings   of   the   British   Academy 151, S.   285-318.

Hardey,   Michael   (1999):   Doctor   in   the   house.   The   Internet   as   a   source   of   lay   health   knowledge   and   the challenge   to   expertise.   In: Sociology   of   Health   and   Illness, Jg.   21,   S.   820-835.

Jager,   Inge/de   Koning,   Pelle/Bost,   Tim /Denys,   Damiaan/Vulink,   Nienke   (2020):   Misophonia:   Phenome-nology, comorbidity   and   demographics   in   a   large   sample.   In:

PLoS   ONE

15:e0231390,   S.   1-16.

sis,   misophonia,   phonophobia.   ITHS   News   Letter   2,   S.   5-7. Jastreboff,   Margaret   M./Jastreboff,   Pawel   J.   (2001):   Components   of   decreased   sound   tolerance:   hyperacu-

Jastreboff,   Margaret   M./   Jastreboff,   Pawel   J.   (2002):   Decreased   sound   tolerance   and   tinnitus   retraining   therapy (TRT).   In: Australian   and   New   Zealand   Journal   of   Audiology 24,   S,   74-84.

support   in   Germany. Münster:   Lit   Verlag. Kofahl,   Christopher/Schulz-Nieswandt,   Frank/Dierks,   Marie-Luise   (eds.)   (2016): Self-help   and   self-help

Kroll-Smith,   Steve   (2003):   Popular   media   and   »excessive   daytime   sleepiness«.   A   study   of   rhetorical   aut-hority   in medical   sociology.   In: Sociology   of   Health   and   Illness, Jg.   25,   S.   625-643.

Lenz,   Thomas/MagShamhrÆin,  achel   (2012):   Inventing   Diseases:   Kleptomania,   Agoraphobia   and   Resist-ance   to R Modernity.   In: Society 49,   S.   279-283.

Link,   Jürgen   (2014):   Normalization   between   spontaneity   and   adjustment.   With   a   look   at   the   'demographic crisis'.   In:   Tobias   Conradi/Gisela   Ecker/Norbert   Otto   Eke/Florian   Muhle   (eds.): Schemas   and   practices. Paderborn:   Fink,   pp.   65-82.

Pettit,   Michael   (2016):   Historical   time   in   the   age   of   big   data:   Cultural   psychology,   historical   change,   and   the Google   Books   Ngram   Viewer.   In: History   of   Psychology, 19(2),   S.   141-153. Marres,   Noortje.   (2017): Digital   Sociology:   The   Reinvention   of   Social   Research. Cambridge:   Polity   Press.

Pinchevski,   Amit/Peters,   John   D.   (2016):   Autism   and   new   media:   Disability   between   technology   and   society.   In: New   Media   &amp;   Society, 18,   S.   2507-2523.

Remmert,   Nico/Jebens,   Antonia/Gruzman,   Rebecca/Gregory,   Jane/Vitoratou,   Silia   (2022):   A   nomological network   for   misophonia   in   two   German   samples   using   the   S-Five   model   for   misophonia.   In: Frontiers in   Psychology,   Section   Auditory   Cognitive   Neuroscience, 13:902807,   S.   1-25.

Rouw,   Romke/Erfanian,   Mercede   (2018):   A   Large-Scale   Study   of   Misophonia.   In: Journal   of   clinical psychology, 74,   S.   453-479.

Sanchez,   Tanit   G./Da   Silva,   Fœlvia  .   (2018):   Familial   misophonia   or   selective   sound   sensitivity   syn-drome. E Evidence   for   autosomal   dominant   inheritance?   In: Brazilian   journal   of   otorhinolaryngology, 84,   S.   553559.

chiatric   Disorder.   In: PLoS   ONE 8(1):   e54706,   S.   1-5. Schröder   Arjan/Vulink   Nienke/Denys   Damiaan   (2013):   Misophonia:   Diagnostic   Criteria   for   a   New   Psycho-

Schröder,   Arjan /van   Wingen,   Guido/Eijsker,   Nadine/San   Giorgi,   RenØe/ Vulink,   Nienke   C./Turbyne,   Col-lin/ Denys,   Damiaan   (2019):   Misophonia   is   associated   with   altered   brain   activity   in   the   auditory   cortex   and salience   network.   In: Scientific   Reports 9:7542,   S.   1-9.

Siepsiak,   Marta/Dragan,   Wojciech   ÿ.   (2019):   Misophonia   -   a   review   of   research   results   and   theoretical Schwemmle,   Cornelia/Arens,   Christoph   (2021):   »Wut   im   Ohr«:   Misophony.   In: HNO 2022   70,   pp.   3-13. concepts.   In: Psychiatria   Polska 2019,   53(2);   pp.   447-458.

Siepsiak,   Marta/Sobczak,   Anna   M./Bohaterewicz,   Bartosz/Cichocki,   ÿukasz/Dragan,   Wojciech   ÿ.   (2020): Prevalence   of   misophonia   and   correlates   of   its   symptoms   among   inpatients   with   depression.   In: International   Journal   of   Environmental   Research   and   Public   Health 17:5464,   pp.   1-10.

(2022):   Consensus   Definition   of   Misophonia:   A   Delphi   Study.   In: Frontiers   in   Neuroscience,   Section Auditive   Cognitive   Neuroscience, 16:841816,   S.   1-16. Swedo,   Susan   E./Baguley,   David   M./Denys,   Damiaan/Dixon,   Laura   J./Erfanian,   Mercede/Fioretti   Alessandra/Jastreboff,   Pawel   J./Kumar,   Sukhbinder/Rosenthal,   M.   Zachary/Rouw,   Romke /Schiller,   Daniela/ Simner,   Julia/Storch,   Eric   A./Taylor   Steven/Werff,   Kathy   V./Altimus,   Cara   M./Raver,   Sylvina   M.

Zifonun,   Dariuš   (2018):   Interpreting   and   acting,   category   and   group,   categorization,   classification   and typification.   In:   Nicole   Burzan/Ronald   Hitzler   (eds.): Typological   constructions. Wiesbaden:   Springer VS,   pp.   79-91.

Note   from   the   publisher The   publisher   remains   neutral   with   regard   to   geographical   assignments   and area   designations   in   published   maps   and   institute   addresses.