For any issues with this document, please contact your library.

____________________________________________________________________________________

Title: Psychoanalysis, self and context.

ArticleTitle: For Whom the Bell Tolls: Misophonia as a complex experience of hope and dread in self- with-other regulation

ArticleAuthor: Sharp, Dayna

Date: 2024

Pages: 1-16

OCLC - 946943047; ISSN - 24720038; LCN - 2016200476;

Publisher: Philadelphia, PA : Routledge, Taylor &amp; Francis Group; 2024-04-01

Source: LibKeyNomad

Copyright: CCG

____________________________________________________________________________________

## NOTICE CONCERNING COPYRIGHT RESTRICTIONS:

The copyright law of the United States [Title 17, United StatesCode] governs the making of photocopies or other reproductions of copyrighted materials.

Under certain conditions specified in the law, libraries and archives are authorized to furnish a photocopy or other reproduction. One of these specific conditions is that the photocopy is not to be "used for any purpose other than private study, scholarship, or research." If a user makes a request for, or later uses, a photocopy or reproduction for purposes in excess of "fair use," that user may be liable for copyright infringement.

This institution reserves the right to refuse to accept a copying order if, in its judgment, fulfillment of that order would involve violation of copyright law.

## Psychoanalysis, Self and Context

ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/hpsp21

## For Whom the Bell Tolls: Misophonia as a complex experience of hope and dread in self-with-other regulation

## Dayna Sharp

To cite this article: Dayna Sharp (01 Apr 2024): For Whom the Bell Tolls: Misophonia as a complex experience of hope and dread in self-with-other regulation, Psychoanalysis, Self and Context, DOI: 10.1080/24720038.2024.2332240

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/24720038.2024.2332240

Published online: 01 Apr 2024.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 93

View related articles

View Crossmark data

## For Whom the Bell Tolls: Misophonia as a complex experience of hope and dread in self-with-other regulation

Dayna Sharp, LCSW

Institute for the Psychoanalytic Study of Subjectivity

## ABSTRACT

## KEYWORDS

Misophonia  is  a  condition  in  which  everyday  sounds  evoke  pain  and reactive aversion. The etiology of misophonia is largely unknown, with discordant conceptualizations of its roots, ranging from psychiatric, to neurological, to a combination of auditory processing and neurobiological dysfunction. Common protocols are focused on symptom reduction  and  management,  though  have  not  been  proven  to  be  clinically effective. For these reasons, it is generally considered to be difficult to treat. In this paper, I re-consider misophonia as a complex interweaving of auditory, neurobiological and relational experience. Reflecting upon a  clinical  case,  I  present  misophonia  in  the  context  of  self-with-other regulation  from  a  developmental  lens,  traverse  the  landscape  of  misophonic self states, explore the complex toll of dissociation and intergenerational trauma in relational space, and consider ways in which the painful  somatic-auditory  bell  of  misophonia  concretizes  self  and  relational  'hope'  and  'dread'.  Finally,  I  will  offer  some  thoughts  on  how psychoanalytic psychotherapy can create new relationalneurobiological pathways out of the misophonic experience.

Affect regulation; dissociative identification; intersubjectivity; misophonia; sadomasochistic systems; surrender; trauma

Now this bell tolling softly for another, says to me, Thou must die. -John Donne, 1623

'For  Whom  the  Bell  Tolls'  is  the  powerful  opening  to  John  Donne's  '17th  Meditation', invoking in the reader a sense of foreboding, if not looming, death (1923, p. 1). Donne, a poet and cleric, penned his meditations during a severe, painful and progressive illness of unknown origin-his own death in the foreground of his experience and mind. Not uncommon for the era, Donne made sense of his illness as 'internal', caused by 'sin that infects his soul' (Belling, Mar 13, Belling, 2002, para. 3). Donne's religiosity organized his understanding of that which felt so wrong inside of him. His relationship with religion also propelled his belief that 'all mankind is of one author, and is one volume . . . ' (para. 1), a connectedness he saw as the vital pathway to something 'more'. In the phrase, 'For Whom the Bell Tolls', Donne vivifies the funeral bells of the church, and in doing so, elicits an awareness of both the limits and edges of human life, as well as a felt reverberation and connectedness between individuals-a web of relationality and interpersonal impact. As Donne proclaims, 'Now this bell tolling softly for another, says to me, Thou must die', he suggests that everything human-love, connectedness, sin and especially death belongs to us all.

CONTACT

Dayna Sharp

Subjectivity, New York 08033, USA

In  1940,  Ernest  Hemingway  borrowed  Donne's  landscape  of  life,  death,  morality  and connectedness in his novel 'For Whom the Bell Tolls', bringing these themes closer to his own socio-political context, the Spanish Civil War. Finally, Donna Orange (2006) brings us a  psychoanalytic  use  of  the  phrase  in  her  paper  'For  Whom  the  Bell  Tolls:  Context, Complexity,  and  Compassion  in  Psychoanalysis',  in  which  she  expands  themes  of  love with  compassion,  death  with  suffering  and  morality  with  ethics  in  the  realm  of  psychoanalytic theory and practice. From this expansive historical-cultural web, the poetics of the line, 'For Whom the Bell Tolls' and the literary themes embedded within, can contribute important subsymbolic imagery and texture in order to think and feel into misophonia-the foreboding and overpowering experience of sound that elicits a kind of felt psycho-somatic death,  along  with  relational  reverberations  feverishly  pulling  between  love,  loss  and morality.

Misophonia in  its  literal  sense  refers  to  the  hatred  of  sounds.  In  neuro-psychological language, it is described as an intense, negative emotional reaction often associated with bodily  sounds like  chewing,  breathing,  and  foot  tapping  (Edelstein  et  al.,  2013,  p.  1).  Its etiology is yet unknown (Dozier, 2017, p. 431). Some have conceptualized misophonia as psychiatric  in  nature  (Schröder  et  al.,  2013),  while  others  dismiss  any  such  correlation (Palumbo et al., 2018, p. 2). More contemporary researchers view misophonia as a condition with multidimensional roots-a combination of organic neurobiological differences linked with auditory processing impairment, tied with enhanced limbic and autonomic reactivity, sometimes  co-mingled  with  psychiatric  dis-order  and/or  neurodivergence  (Norris  et  al., 2022).

In  experience-near  language,  sufferers  describe  sensations  of  unbearable  physical  and emotional pain, almost a kind of felt death, if not murder. Sounds that others hear softly and with  a  sense  of  'going-on-being'  (Winnicott,  1960,  p.  586),  seem  to  evoke  a  kind  of 'primitive  agony'  (Winnicott,  1974,  p.  104),  along  with  an  intense  'rupture'  (Tronick, 1989) or even full break in any kind of holding container.

Misophonia is thought to be a 'recently recognized' condition (Dozier, 2017, p. 431). Perhaps an outcome of its newness, or because of its association to the neurobiological, or maybe as part of an unconscious enactment of extreme aversion, my search for 'misophonia'  in the  database  of  psychoanalytic  literature,  'Pepweb',  confronted  me  with a remarkable 'no results found'. There seems to be a complete absence of psychoanalytic recognition, theory, or clinical case examples of this human experience. From this place, I write this paper with a consideration that absence is both 'an emptiness from which one can  begin'  (Winnicott,  1974,  p.  106)  and  importantly,  as  an  empathic  bridge  (Ornstein, 2020,  Ch.  9)-perhaps  a  first  sense  into  a  sufferer's  experience  of  absence  and  nonresponsiveness  in  the  face  of  something  that  feels  so  wrong,  along  with  an  expectation that no hope for understanding or compassion exists. This is the relational background of misophonia, and this paper is a start towards something new.

Turning away from the 'isolated mind' (Stolorow &amp; Atwood, 1994, Ch. 17), I present misophonia in the context of 'self-with-other' regulation from a developmental lens (Stern, 1984, pp. 74, 181-182), traverse the landscape of misophonic self states, explore the complex toll of dissociation and intergenerational trauma in relational space, and consider ways in which  the  painful  somatic-auditory  bell  of  misophonia  concretizes  self  and  relational 'hope'  and  'dread'  (Mitchell,  1993).  Finally,  I  will  offer  some  thoughts  on  how

psychoanalytic  psychotherapy  can  create  new  relational-neurobiological  pathways  out  of the misophonic experience.

## A clinical case: Misophonia in the developmental context of self-with-otherregulation

Steve was 40 years old, in his second marriage and recently had a newborn baby. In our first phone call, he asked me if I could help him with 'anger' and especially, 'misophonia'. He emphasized,  'It's  the  only  thing  in  my  life  I  don't  have  control  of',  citing  a  variety  of treatments and interventions he had attempted, all with little relief. His misophonia was in the forefront of his experience and he began our work together by sharing the details of his sensations, feelings and thoughts during these painful times.

Steve described a range of physical sensations: 'it's like someone's putting a pin through my eardrum', 'my middle ear is full of water', 'my nose or the corner of my eye begins to ache'; then, 'my ear, jaw, eye and nose all start to throb', 'I feel an icy dread in my chest'; finally,  'it  feels  like  my  eardrum is about to burst!' and 'there's an ice pick stabbing me between my eyes!'.

Steve's pain becomes visible by way of his facial expressions and body language, and I am aware of my own body tensing. I notice my somatic resonance, as well as Steve's choice to begin with his felt sensory-somatic experience, marking the potential significance that the somatic  dimension  (Bucci,  2007,  p.  244)  will  have  in  our  work.  I  also  notice  in  his description an escalation of affective intensity. When I ask him more about it, he tells me:

'It starts with agitation', 'anticipatory anxiety' and 'anger-my heart beats quickly, and my breath shallows'. This leads to a 'search' or hyperfocus for the 'source' and an attempt to determine whether 'the source should be able to control the sound' - that is-'if they are at fault for making the terrible sound'. This evokes 'more agitation' and 'angry and even violent thoughts'. 'Now I'm nearing panic and rage', which looks like 'trying not to mimic the sound', a 'desperate attempt to make the sound less alien and horrifying', as well as 'trying not to punch myself', 'flee the vicinity' or 'shout' at the source.

Inquiry into the intensity of his sensory-somatic experience opens up Steve's affective world, and illuminates a sense of progression and sequence. From the very beginning of our work, through the relational context of empathic immersion, Steve and I organically began linking  connections  between  multiple  dimensions  of  his  self  experience  (Bion,  1967; McDougall, 1980, p. 342).

This process of linking naturally led to an unfolding and meaning-making process, in which Steve explored his cognitive world. He described his escalating thoughts, leading up to and through the misophonia.

Initially, Steve recognizes his physiological-affective-somatic sensations, senses that the misophonia is near and fears that he 'won't have control' over the sound, the pain and/or his reactions, that he won't 'know how to get out of the situation', and that 'everything' and in particular, his 'relationship will be ruined forever'.

As we began to more fully understand Steve's felt experience, I became more tuned into a  deep  sense  of  how  fraught  with  violence,  fragility,  pain  and  fear  his  relationship  with himself and others could be. As we tried to make sense of when the misophonia was present -or not-he began to tell me more about the sounds that activated the misophonia. This ranged from people 'eating and chewing', which he evaluated as low on his reactivity scale,

D. SHARP

to his wife singing 'out of tune' to their baby, which he described as 'painfully high'. Steve believed that his wife's 'voice changed' after having their baby, which set off his misophonia with 'extreme intensity and pain'. I silently noted the association between the emergence of misophonia in the context of his wife's evolving identity as a mother, and invited him to explore early memories of misophonia. He immediately associated to his mother's smoker's cough, and also recalled experiencing misophonia in reaction to his father 'groaning' in pain.  Steve  described  a  sense  of  'revulsion'  he  experienced  as  he  shared  these  early moments with me. I considered Mary Douglas' (1966) anthropological work on revulsion as a need to purify oneself, to evacuate something impure, and wondered if and how this might  open  later.  But  at  this  time,  I  focused  on  a  potential  connection  between  the misophonia and the context of  parenting,  mothering,  nurturing  and/or  early  childhood, but this did not resonate:

'No-I didn't have misophonia with my first wife, and we had kids', matter of factly adding, 'she wasn't a threat'. Although I'd tuned into the relational surround in which the most painful misophonia inhabited, I'd missed what felt most experience-near to Steve-the perception of threat. I wondered then about this important difference-what was it that made someone a threat? What was it about Steve's new wife that felt threatening that he hadn't experienced with his ex? 'It's just her voice, nothing else. Since she became a mother, she has more phlegm in her throat'. 'Her vocal chords have changed', and 'now the tone of her  voice  is  deeply  fucking  unpleasant'.  'That's  it'.  Any  contextual  link  between  Steve's revulsive memory of his own mother's phlegm, and his current sense that his wife's voice was distorted by 'phlegm' since becoming a mother, or even that each sound/reception of the sound activated Steve's misophonia along with its sensory-somatic-affective-cognitive configurations that he'd already described, was refused. Steve was adamant with an air of anger in these moments, dismissing my attempts at exploration, and recounted what felt like an 'absolutism' - 'a radical decontextualization serving vital restorative and defensive functions', that was 'not open for discussion' (Atwood, quoted in Stolorow, 1999, pp. 466467). He simply reiterated his sense of 'revulsion' for his wife's 'out of tune'-ness while 'singing to the baby', seemingly desperate for me to understand. He felt 'infuriated by her voice', and chronically 'enraged' that she 'would not stop humming or singing' to their newborn. In the air of contemptuous and rageful affect, I found it hard to breathe, much less think. I felt a chasm between our subjectivities, all while attempting to maintain a stance of humility and a 'hermeneutic of trust' (Orange, 2006, p. 31). Yet, the contempt, rage and revulsion for his wife-his baby's mother-along with his extreme ideas on parenting and mothering  specifically,  were  nearly  impossible  for  me  to  digest.  In  these  moments, I  experienced Steve as icy cold and even annihilating. I felt blown away, outraged, angry, profoundly averse and  sometimes frozen  in  his  presence.  In  the  most  intense  moments, I struggled with a fantasy and powerful bodily urge to either 'shout' at him or to 'flee the vicinity' - in the same way that Steve described reacting to his most intense experiences of misophonia.  As  I  recognized  these  feelings  as  empathic  to  his  own  self  and  relational experience, I became more able to contain and digest these disorganizing affects, enabling me to hold onto Orange's stance of 'trust' and the sense of Steve as a whole person. I hoped that through a focus on his self-development and growth, he could become more able to hold, contain and digest these painful affects himself (Grossmark, 2012, pp. 643-4). I also imagined that as Steve felt more understood through our empathic connection, he would no longer need to 'clench' away from an 'endangered psychic reality', thereby becoming more

able  to  flexibly  open  up  these  absolutisms  into  dialogue  between  us  (Atwood,  quoted  in Stolorow, 1999, pp. 466-467).

Held  by  my  psychoanalytic  ancestors,  I  was  able  to  freely  wonder  about  Steve's experience  and  to  muse  about  the  connections  between  misophonia  and  threat,  pain and revulsion, as well as affect and attachment-with both parents, and most specifically with  a  maternal  figure.  Had  his  wife's  transition  into  motherhood  re-activated  early relational  experiences  with  that  of  his  own  mother?  Was  there  a  sense  of  envy  underlying  Steve's  wish/demand  for  his  wife  to  stop  singing  to  their  baby?  Did  Steve  fear losing her to the baby? Did Steve long for her love and care, imagining that there wasn't enough for both of them? Was his affective flooding a response to an early childhood experience of a wished-for and needed love and attachment in the face of a felt rejection -a sense of having been 'dropped'? (Green, 1986, p.149). Was the misophonia and this particular  sound  cue-Linda's  singing  'out  of  tune'  -  a  concretization  of  an  early surround  of  maternal  'out  of  tune-ness',  or  misattunement?  These  were  questions that  couldn't  be  asked  explicitly,  but  were  held  in  my  mind  as  we  moved  forward together.

## Relational configurations, procedural memory and self-with-other organization

As  I  learned  more  about  Steve's  relational  history  and  the  here  and  now  dynamics between the two of us, the air of the intersubjective field began to take on a recognizable texture  and  more  visible  form.  Steve's  most  intense  and  overwhelming  experiences  of misophonia seemed to be tied  with relational  configurations  consisting  of  an  intrusive and  abandoning  other,  linked  to  a  correlated  self  experience  encoded  with  affectivesomatic  pain,  aversiveness,  powerlessness  and  narcissistic  rage.  Steve  felt  his  mom's cough  and  his  father's  groaning  as  an  intrusive  'thing'  he  desperately  needed  to-but could not-get out. His automatic, self-preservative revulsion and aversiveness was met with withdrawal and anger, rather than protection and comfort. This, in turn, invoked a rage-both a desperate call for help, as well as a self-protective shield. Over time, this repetitive  sequence  culminated  in  deep  wounds  in  Steve's  sense  of  self  and  in  his expectations  with  others.  Stolorow,  Orange  and  Atwood  note,  'Experiences  of  self  and world are inextricably  bound up with one another, in that any dramatic change in the one necessarily entails corresponding changes in the other' (Atwood et al., 2002, p. 285). For Steve, this bi-directionality is charged with progressive relational misunderstanding and  pain,  leading  to  a  repeated  sense  of  unformulate-able  and  unregulatable  affect (Beebee, Cohen and Lachmann, 2016, pp. 12, 168). In such a relational surround, each participant impacts the other, escalating the other affectively and behaviorally, until the point  of  disruption  without  repair  (Tronick,  1989).  In  childhood,  this  is  a  picture  of disorganized attachment (Beebee, Cohen and Lachmann, 2016, pp. 195-230). Steve came to  learn  that  important  others  would  either  overpower  his  subjectivity,  or  withdraw completely, and this expectation was repeatedly re-experienced and re-confirmed in his interactions  with  his  wife.  This  disorganizing  relational  context  echoes  Beebee,  Cohen and Lachmann's 'Illustrations of Expectancies'':

6

D. SHARP

I know that when I feel upset, you won't be helping me . . . Sometimes you smile at me when I am distressed. I don't want to look at you when you do that . . . I feel alone . . . Where are you? I feel helpless to influence you. I feel frantic'. (p. 212)

## And:

When I get upset, you get upset. You might get angry at me. You might threaten me with terrible, scary faces. And you won't even recognize that I'm upset . . . What can I do? I still need you. I still want you to love me. (p. 228)

From a self psychological, intersubjective and attachment-based lens, this is the sound of the relational expectancies in which misophonia thrives.

Further,  Steve  reminds  me  that  his  misophonia  and  pain  are  most  intense  when  he perceives  the  out-of-tune-other  as intentionally choosing  to  cause  him  harm.  From a developmental perspective, I consider the potential collision between a child's temperamental  somatic-sensory-motor-affective-cognitive  capacities  and  the  normative  omnipotence children imagine both in themselves and their needed others (Ornstein, 1984, p. 360). Just as a child believes that the magic of a mother's kiss on a booboo takes away the pain, the child who experiences auditory or sensory processing difficulties may similarly believe that mother  is  magically  and  intentionally  causing  the  pain.  In  other  words,  as  the  body discomfort,  misattunement,  dysregulation  and  mind-body  pain  repeat,  an  all-powerful 'bad  mother'  is  born-psychically  and  relationally  represented.  She  is  the  mother  for whom the child must always search, both  from a  need  for  self-protection  from  her  and because she feels like home.

I  could  more  clearly  hear  how  his  wife's  maternal  'out  of  tune'  voice,  mirroring  an imprinted experience and expectation of something wrong, impure and painful, reverberating in Steve's ears, body, self and relational air, evokes further dysregulation, flooding and pain,  ultimately  unfolding  to  anger,  aggression,  rage  and/or  (hostile)  aversion.  This sequence  re-enacts  Steve's  early,  repetitive  pain  of  finding  his  desperately  needed  other, only to discover her intrusiveness, absence, incongruence, anger, withdrawal, rejection and general 'bad mother-ness', as well as echoes of Beebee, Cohen and Lachmann's 'I still want you to love me!' .

Steve describes this sequence as 'annihilating'. We sit, with shared tears, and from a this place of profound pain, I experienced a moving sense of the 'intersubjective catastrophe in which  psychologically  sustaining  relations  to  others  have  broken  down  at  their  most fundamental  level'  (Atwood,  Orange  and  Stolorow,  2002,  p.  288).  I  could  more  fully understand that for Steve, this 'breaking' was 'the loss of affirming, validating connections to  others  and  the  shattering  of  the  subjective  world  by  impingement  and  usurpation' (p. 288).

I  reflected  on  the  ways  in  which  this  catastrophic  breaking  lived  in  the  relationship between Steve and I, recalling my attempts to link experience and his protective, absolute negations. I-we-came so close to fully re-enacting a core part of Steve's misophonia and its relational context: the abandonment and felt loss of the other, as I fantasized of fleeing (' Where  are  you? '),  the  sense  of  having  been  overpowered,  overtaken,  annihilated-as I  became fixed in my own subjectivity, effectively overpowering his own (' I'm frantic !'), the sense that something bad inside that needs to get out-the revulsion and fury we both felt, culminating with aggressive thoughts and actions ('Stop singing to the baby!' and for me, shouting at him or reactively referring him out). This trailing edge, bidirectional cycle is

repetitive and rigid; for Steve, the pain, self-wounds and sense of powerlessness are so great that he can not bear to reflect, understand, or imagine any other way of being with himself or in relationships. We lived together in a world of unmovable absolutisms, foreclosing the possibility  for  mentalization  or  dialogue.  Hence,  this  frozen  self-with-other  experience continued to live as a powerful and enduring procedural memory, encoded into the mind and body of the child, imprinted into the adult self (Stern, 1984, pp. 181-2). His self harm behaviors  like  hitting  or  punching  himself  are  part  of  this  'theater'  (McDougall,  1980, p.  420).  He  turns  his  aggression  upon  himself,  a  desperate  attempt  for  regulation-a replacing  of  cognitive-affective  pain  with  temporary  somatic  pain,  and/or  searching  for the bounds and limits of his body in effort to feel some kind of containment and cohesiveness (Ferguson, personal communication, March 21, 2023). Of course, these attempts aren't fully effective, ultimately re-affirming Steve's deep sense of shame about his ability to 'be reasonable' and, derailing any sense of agency or mastery within his own sense of self.

## Potential for 'something more': Relational safety and psychotherapeutic change

As we have been able to survive these disorganizing self-with-other relational configurations in the here and now of our work, our relationship has become a kind of 'secure base' (Ainsworth, 1963, p. 932). This sense of self-with-other safety has been relationally transformative  for  Steve,  opening  his  capacity  to  relate  to  me  in  increasingly  vulnerable  and authentic  ways  that  were  previously  inaccessible.  He  frequently  sobs  through  sessions, telling  me  how  'alone'  and  'panicked'  he  feels,  his  sense  of  himself  as  'lost,  without a  map'.  I  invite  him  into  a  'therapeutic  dissociation'  (Davies,  1996,  p.  567),  through which he tells me how much he cares for me, wishing I could 'wrap him in a blanket'. I  have  become  a  good  mother-an  important  other  who  receives  him  with  care  and tenderness, someone with whom he experiences a needed sense of security. He is moved to tears as he sings to me, sharing his baby's favorite lullaby. In these moments, I'm struck with his expanding capacity to feel empathic and deeply connected with his self-needs and with those of his own children. I pick up these openings-Steve's healthy developmental strivings-and hold them, nurture them, and in my imagination, wrap them up in a baby blanket.

As we relate in this way, I feel a sense of 'something more' to our symbolized communication and an emergence of something new. I consider Beebe, Cohen and Lachmann's conception of nonverbal, cross-modal correspondence (2016, p. 32), sensing that through these real and imaginative 'micromoments', Steve and I had been able to 'feel-what-hasbeen-perceived-in-the-other' (Stern et al., 1985, p. 263), co-creating a relational experience in  which Steve felt  in-tune,  understood  and relationally  effective.  As  Steve became  more connected to 'good' internal objects, he began to feel a more cohesive, consistent sense of self,  becoming  more  able  to  share,  bear  and  integrate  'bad'  objects  and  his  repetitive, trailing  edge  relational  experiences.  In  recognizing  my  potential  participation  in  Steve's dreaded self-with-other relational world, yet committing to the possibility for 'something more'  and  something  new,  I  was  able  to  nurture  Steve's  strivings  for  relational  safety, playful  forward  development  and  transformative  change  (Boston  Change  Process  Study Group, 2005).

## Misophonia and relational warfare: The landscape of self states

As Steve and I have been more able to link dimensions of his experience, and get to know his painful self-with-other experience in the context of our good enough therapeutic relationship, we have become able to understand more of Steve's inner world. In the beginning of our  work,  Steve's  self  states  alternated  between  lonely,  powerless  and  fragmenting  to impenetrable, icy cold and aggressive. As Steve came to feel a greater sense of cohesion, we became more able to recognize a variety of fluctuating, spontaneous-yet connectedself  states  (Bromberg,  1996, p.  514).  I  hoped  that  this  expansion  in  Steve's  experience  of himself would open a path out of 'self-invalidation' and 'annihilation' into the possibility for 'creativity' (Bromberg, 2000, p. 688). Perhaps another example of cross-modal correspondence, it was at this time that my own sense of creativity and openness led me to reverie about Hemingway's 'For Whom the Bell Tolls' (Hemingway, 1940).

The novel offers a thematic tapestry of love and death, invincibility and vulnerability, heroism and sacrifice that lends ripe metaphor for Steve's internal world. Set in the context of the Spanish Civil War, Hemingway evokes images of violence and murderous aggression, profound internal divisions and splits, alliances and dehumanizing objectifications, as well as an overall sense of the implosion of a whole into parts. The Spanish War was supported by the German Nazi party and is thought to be a prelude to WWII; in this way, the war could  be  thought  of  as  a  series  of  violent  splits  that  unfolded  into  a  near  full  European collapse  of  cohesion  under  the  rise  of  authoritarian,  subjugating  and  annihilating leadership.

Its  main  character,  Jordan  was  a  dutiful  soldier,  ordered  to  infiltrate  enemy  lines  and blow up a bridge-a strategic war effort. Jordan falls in love in this landscape of catastrophe, his partner a survivor of rape and parental murder. Jordan completes his errand, detonating the bomb, but is injured in a retaliatory attack. Severely wounded and facing his imminent death, he sacrifices his own life to save his love, ultimately dying in agonizing pain.

Steve grew up in a kind of war. He experienced his parents as contemptuous and hostile to one another, his mother 'full of rage' and his father unavailable. He often felt rejected and  unwanted,  bringing  to  mind  Ferenczi's  'Unwelcome  Child'  (Ferenczi,  1929).  Steve made the ultimate sacrifice: he accommodated, fitting into edges of the scene, fulfilling the role of his character-experiencing himself as the 'bad', 'difficult' kid, invoking the idea of a Fairbainian moral dilemma (Fairbairn, 1943, p. 65).

Adding  to  Steve's  sense  of  out-of-tuneness,  about  a  year  into  our  work,  he  was diagnosed  on  the  Autism  Spectrum.  This  reinforced  his  sense  of  himself  as  'a  pain in  the  ass'  and  'difficult'.  From  my  perspective,  his  diagnosis  lended  further possibilities  for  empathic  understanding. I leaned toward the 'Intense World' theory of  mind-illuminating  a  child's  neurobiological  wiring  for  'hyper-perception,  hyperattention,  hyper-memory  and  hyper-emotionality'  (Markram  &amp;  Markram,  2010, p.  1).  I  came  to  understand  the  overwhelm  to  which  young  Steve  was  neurobiologically  vulnerable,  as  well  as  the  ways  in  which  absence  and  aggression  in  his relational  surround  could  tragically  and  powerfully  collide  with  his  constitutional vulnerability  to  anxiety,  fear,  and  affective  disorganization,  all  while  leaving  Steve unprotected,  alone,  and  at  times  annihilated  by  flooding  affect.  I  imagined  Steve  as a  young  child  with  little  sense  of  differentiation,  containment,  or  cohesiveness,  akin to  the  Kleinian  or  Bionian  child's  experience  of  painful  fragmented  affect  moving  in

and  out,  attacking  parts,  back  and  forth.  Ogden  (1989)  views  'autistic'  vulnerability as  a  potential  for  'collapse'  into  what  seems  to  be  a  terrifying,  'tyrannizing  imprisonment in a closed system of bodily sensations' (p. 137). Tustin (1990) adds  to the sense  of  terror,  writing,  'These  perseverative  . . .  activities  mean  that  they  feel trapped  in  an  isolated  idiosyncratic  world  of  bodily  sensations  that  are  not  shared with other persons and from which there seems to be no escape' (p. 14). I reverie to the  terror  associated  with  the  collapse  of  a  nation,  of  its  neighbors,  of  a  continentthe  bullets,  bombs,  and  fragments  burning  down  buildings,  homes,  skin.  Olin  (1975) adds,  'The  autistic  child's  identity  problem  is  one  of  feeling  so  small  and  insignificant  that  he  hardly  exists.  So  he  defends  against  feelings  of  non-existence  by  using all  his  strength  and  ability  to  try  to  be  a  shell  of  indestructible  power'  (quoted  in Tustin,  1990,  p.  5). 1 Young Steve, caught in a war, lacking a protective skin (Ogden, 1989,  p.  128),  was  left  to  frantically  search  for  some  kind  of  self-map,  borders, territories,  edges  and  extreme  defense.  War  creates  chaotic  states  of  terror  and terrorizing,  murdered  and  murder,  existence  and  non-existence,  defeat  and  triumph. As  Steve's  inner  world  molded  to  this  landscape,  disorganized  states  of  loving, splitting,  sacrifice,  psycho-somatic-affective  and  relational  death,  murder  and  invincibility  seemed  to  be  atmospheric.

It is a similar kind of war that Steve inhabits with his wife and new baby-the terror of the bombs of his wife's lullaby from a distance incomprehensible, yet experienced by Steve as  very  real  and  fundamentally  threatening.  Relational  warfare  seems  to  be  a  shadow, a procedural relational memory of a system that continues to haunt his sense of self and his marriage. He refers to Linda as a 'Nazi', telling me that he feels he 'doesn't matter' to her,  and  that  his  needs  'can't  be  met'.  Steve  frequently  dreams  of  being  attacked,  and attacking back, repeatedly awakening to an experience of himself 'punching into the air'. These attacks ring like the misophonic sounds perpetrated against his auditory, limbic and autonomic  system.  Steve's  early  war-like  experience  was  internalized  and  unformulated, inhabiting his nervous system and body, evacuated like a bomb (Grossmark, 2012, p. 641) into the air of his relationships, perpetuating and re-enacting the war. This is the 'Dread to Repeat' (Ornstein, 1991).

He tells me that his wife experiences him as an 'impenetrable wall', and how good it feels to be 'invincible'. But this shield isn't fully protective against his feelings of not-mattering, not existing, so he attacks himself to harden it up, by way of attack-punching himself or depriving himself of any form of nourishment-all desperate attempts to regulate the pain.

Much like Hemingway's main character, Steve feels deeply wounded, struggling in this internal war within his own body-mind. His wounds are psychically embodied with shame, disgust and revulsion. His injuries, the shadow of warfare and internal civil war at once set him  up  for  a  reactive  aggression  (Kohut,  1972,  p.  380)  and  aversion  (Lichtenberg, Lachmann and Fosshage, 2011, p. 16)-a quest for detonation and invincibility. We also came to recognize a self state of sacrifice, sometimes escalating to thoughts of suicide-a strategy to protect his family-'At least they would have the insurance money'. But we are

1 Olin's  quote  offers  imagistic,  phenomenologically valuable insight into  potential self experience of  a child  on  the autism spectrum.  At the same time, the language of the paper's title reflects the social-cultural diagnostic framework of his time, which,  from  this  author's  point  of  view,  is  one  that  privileges  an  authoritative,  other-centered,  intrapsychic  model  of thinking  that  forecloses  possibility  for  empathy  and/or  meaning-making,  while  perpetuating  the  othering  of  vulnerable children.

also able to recognize a self state that is alive and vital, developed from enlivened strivings for tenderness with and care for others. This state allows Steve to feel more safe within his self, to feel a sense of justice for his family and the world at large, 'doing what I can to make the world a better place'. Steve can 'stand in the spaces' (Bromberg, 1996), moving from state to state with increased sense of flexibility and agency. These states of love, aggression and invincibility, threat of death and sacrifice, can be thought of as the landscape of out-oftuneness that bi-directionally connects to the toll of the bell-Steve's misophonia.

## The complex toll of intergenerational trauma

No man is an island, entire of itself; every man is a piece of the continent, a part of the main . . . any man's death diminishes me, because I am involved in mankind, and therefore never send to know for whom the bell tolls; it tolls for thee.

-Donne, Meditation 17, Devotions, p.1

Steve is not an island; he, like all of us, is deeply connected to the past, present and future. He is born of his parents, grandparents and ancestors, and has given life to children of his own. They are all intertwined. Steve intuitively understands this, telling me that he is fearful of the impact of his anger on his children, yet also feels 'guilty' that he parents differently than his  own  mother,  whom he describes as 'abusive'. In  these  moments, we  recognize together how very much Steve strives to be separate from, but also still feels very attached to and identified with, his mother. I'm reminded of Fairbairn's contribution (Fairbairn, 1943) to an analytic understanding of the powerful attachments to 'bad' abusive objects.

Importantly,  Steve  became  aware  that  he  experiences  an  overwhelming  misophonic reaction when he senses the voice of his mother inside of himself. Crying, Steve shared, 'I was alone in my room so much of the time, punished for weeks. She was so angry. I was so scared of her'. I'd offer, 'You needed her to help contain you, to hold you together, to help you feel safe, but instead, you were left alone and terrified'. Like a snap of a finger, Steve's body repositioned, and he responded with a sense of contempt, a sneer, a self-negation, 'I was a pain in the ass. I'm glad my parents didn't give me anything, otherwise I'd be weak'. In these moments, all the air left the room; his words and affect landed upon me in a way that made it hard to breathe. Steve's 'impenetrable wall' was up, I couldn't access what felt like 'him' or even a sense of connectedness with our 'going on being' relationship for the rest of the session-or weeks of sessions. During these times, I felt powerless to reach him, learning  that  Steve  felt  equally  powerless  to  find  himself.  Sands  refers  to  this  kind  of experience  as  a  'disjunctive  self  state',  developed  from  'relational  trauma  from  the  past and which has its own affective 'truth,' behavior, sensations, knowledge, and transference' (2009,  p.  123).  Steve  and  I  began  to  tune  in  to  these  state  shifts,  and  to  try  to  better understand this now disjunctive state.

On another occasion as I  held  back  a  sneeze,  Steve  suddenly  shifted  into  cold  anger, accusing me of 'mocking' and 'belittling' him. We recognized this state shift in real time, and Steve realized that in these moments his misophonia was 'painfully loud'. We came to understand that sometimes Steve's misophonia cues the threat of his identification with and 'possession' by his bad mother-object (Fairbairn, 1943, p. 67). He tells me that in these moments, 'I can't even feel myself', 'it's like I'm watching myself from the outside'. I hear the  terror  of  these  moments  as  he  describes  this  dissociative  process-what  could  be

thought  of  as  a  protective  'severing'  of  'connections'  in  a  desperate  attempt  for  safety (Davies and Frawley, 1994, p. 62). Yet at the same time, his experience also reminds me of a  kind  of  hypnoidal,  dissociative  state  in  which  he  becomes one  with an object of terror (Ferenczi, 1985, p. 203) that occurs through automatic mimicry (Howell, 2014, p. 49). The embodiment of this frightening, aggressive and disorganizing object re-enacts earlier relational  configurations  where  Steve  is  powerlessly  intruded  upon,  his  self  abandoned  or rejected  or  disappeared,  his  misophonia  activated  and  his  rage  and  aversion  unleashed upon whomever he-with-his mother is speaking. This is the texture of their tie: her falling apart,  intrusive  rage  and  psychic  collapse  or  dissociative  death  confused  with  Steve's subjective death or murder, his terror and sense of falling apart, and his reactive rage and intrusive,  self-murdering  identification  with  the  terrorizing,  terrifying  and  aggressive mother. The intergenerational transmission of this texture of attachment (Salberg, 2015) lives  through  Steve's  terrible  fear  of  his  subjective  death-being  overpowered  and disappeared by an intrusive bad mother-and of his own felt capacity to metaphorically murder his children as his dissociated identification with his maternal object of terror is activated in relationship with his kids.

Steve's misophonia could be likened to Apprey's 'urgent errand' (Apprey, 2014, p. 21), a desperate tie and self sacrifice designed to at once punish his mother who lives so painfully within him, yet also to protect her by becoming affectively and behaviorally just what she needed him to be-self depriving and self sacrificing-an attempt to 'save' her. Steve had to meet  her  needs,  to  be  almost  non-human  in  order  to  do  so.  He  told  me  once  he  often thought of himself as a 'knife' - strong, invincible, needless, (as his mom needed him to be), a weapon to hurt (how he felt his mom and sometimes himself to be), a weapon to protect and rescue (a childhood wish to save mom and his self), as well as an objectified thing to be used ('She used me for her benefit'). In many ways, Steve could not be human in relation to his mother-'She always said that I had one temper tantrum as a child-just one'. Steve's younger self had to banish all of his unwelcomed, unwanted emotion and needs into exilesome of which seemed to explode into fragments via the realm of sensory-somatic misophonia. This civil war within himself, once an adaptive attempt to protect himself and his early  attachments,  continues  the  war  of  his  parent's  world,  of  his  grandparents'  military days,  and  Steve's  fears  in  relation  to  his  own  children.  In  the  face  of  Steve's  dissociated, unsymbolized  embodiment  of  his  bad  mother,  the  present  becomes  'little  more  than a  medium through which this unprocessed past may be known' (Bromberg, 1991, pp. 405-406). At the same time, Steve loves his children and delights in them so much he is often moved to tears. He expresses deep responsibility to protect them and longs to 'break the cycle'. These are the leading edges of Steve that create the possibility for 'something more'  -  the  interruption  of  the  transmission  of  trauma  and  potential  for  meaningful intergenerational change.

## Misophonia: A concretization of hope and dread

In  his  book  'Hope  and  Dread  in  Psychoanalysis',  Stephen  Mitchell  (1993)  speaks  to  an innate, human relationality mired in tensions and reconciliations around our wishes and needs (abs.). For Steve, hope in relationship evokes a dread of terrifying threat, pain, force and psycho-somatic death, from his earliest years. Steve's innate neurological vulnerabilities created  a  powerful  connection  between  his  limbic  system  and  sensory-and  especially

auditory-systems,  creating  a  foundation  for  the  development  of  an  affectively-reactive misophonia. In this way, Steve's misophonia can be thought of as an automatic expression of fear and a hope that this expression can be seen and made sense of by an important other. Tragically, this had never been understood for Steve, and therefore had never been able to be regulated. Bucci notes, 'A person who experiences overwhelming affect, whose source cannot be acknowledged, will try to provide some meaning for this and regulate emotion in this way' (Bucci, 2007, p. 63). This is how I have come to understand Steve's explanations for  the  sources  of  his  misophonia,  wrapped  up  in  his  psychic  world  and  self-with-other organizing  principles.  In  these  ways,  I  understand  misophonia  as  a  terribly  painful,  yet potentially self-preservative use of an organic limbic-auditory sensitivity as a kind of subsymbolic  shorthand  for  'something's  wrong!'.  The  wrong,  the  dreads,  the  threats  in relationship, toll the unbearable bell. For Steve, the misophonia seems to have developed into a kind of sensory-auditory-somatic-autonomic nervous system 'alarm' - here, I think of  Sheldon  Bach's  'narcissistic  immune  system'  (Bach,  2011,  p.  39)  and  Harry  Stack Sullivan's 'self operating security system' (Stack Sullivan, 1953, p. 191). Such an alarm is the  bell  that  tolls  for  a  death  of  the  other and the self in  a  desperately  needed  relational surround; it is a bell that tolls for the coughing mother, drowning in phlegm, and also for the psychic-somatic death of a child flooded and disorganized by unregulated, unformulated affect.

Further, I argue that misophonia can be thought of as a representation of disguised desire for  surrender (Ghent, 1990). From this critical lens, misophonia is not only an alarm or a bell tolling for the death of a disorganizing other or for one's self, but rather for the death of an out-of-tune, sadomasochistic system. Steve says the misophonia is a 'Stop it!', and more  to  the  affective  point,  an  'I'm  dying  here!  Stop!'.  I  interpret  this  as  a  call  for responsiveness, recognition, empathy and for mutual regulation. This is the hope embedded in the misophonia-the desire and need for a new texture of relational space, one in which the possibility for self liberation through the ability to express one's needs, states and affects can exist.

## Psychoanalysis as a pathway for creating (something new)

It is my orientation that the most important part of any psychoanalytically-based treatment is a stance of empathic immersion-an attempt to progressively and expansively understand one's  psychic  world  (Kohut,  1959).  With  patients  who  experience  misophonia,  this  is especially  important,  contrasting  with  a  learned  expectation  of  misunderstanding  and misattunement  they  often  experience  in  relationship  with  important  others.  Donna Orange, influenced by Donne, invites us to work even beyond empathy into the'process and attitude' of 'compassion' (Orange, 2006, p. Abstract, 7). She suggests that we '. . . make sense of the patient's emotional predicament within the relational system that we experience together, and gradually this shared world changes by means of a personal reorganization of experience (of both participants) (Orange, 2006, p. 15). Steve invited me into his relational world  of  domination  and  subjugation  by  way  of  his  icy  cold  identification  with  his terrorizing  and  terrifying  mother,  leading  our  way  into  extreme  ideas  about  parenting and  mothering.  In  this  atmosphere,  there  seemed  to  be  little  capacity  for  empathy  and a  persistent  and  rigid  sense  of  profound  contempt,  disdain  and  aggression.  But  through empathic  understanding  of  Steve's  experience  and  my  own  commitment  to  understand,

digest,  and  even  find  compassion  for  intense,  disorganizing  affects  and  self-with-other schemas, we were able to create a new way of relating together.

The  sturdiness  of  our  expanding  intersubjective  connectedness  offered  Steve  a  new pathway  out  of  old  ways  of  relating  by  way  of  subjugation  and  domination  and  into something new. With this emerging capacity to feel a sense of freedom and choice in his most current relationships, Steve experiences his misophonia to be much less intrusive in his day to day life. He is often struck by his newfound abilities to survive and shift out both the pain of the misophonia and of his icy cold states.

Donne tells us that 'we must fetch in more from the next house, in taking upon us the misery  of  our  neighbors  . . .  for  affliction  is  a  treasure  . . .  this  bell  that  tells  me  of  his affliction, digs out, and applies that gold to me: if by this consideration of another's danger, I take mine own into contemplation, and so secure myself' (1623, p. 2). Through our work together, I had to breathe in the icy cold in Steve's relational air-along with the pain and urgency  of  his  misophonia.  I  had  to  witness  it,  feel  it-as  Avgi  Saketopoulou  asserts,  to 'bend our will and resist the impulse to look away' (Saketopoulou, 2023, p. 16). Yet we can not simply join into sadomasochistic worlds and remain there, within the confines of love tied to aggression, invincibility, death and sacrifice. The treasure is found in surviving the challenge-holding, containing and digesting our own feelings, expanding our own borders and territories, alarms and systems, making room to hold the pain, so that we ourselves can hold in mind new possibilities and emerging ways of relating and experiencing (Winnicott, 1969).

Hecker emphasizes that 'This intensive emotional work of sorting out and arranging is made possible because it is also being borne and shared . . . ' (Hecker, 1993, p. 91). Donne understands this sharing as 'something more' that he imagined could exist through a bidirectional, permeable connection with God. For psychoanalysts, this sharing is the 'something more' of the intersubjective field. As I gain more access to my own self-with-other relational,  socio-cultural  and  intergenerational  history-my  own  experience  in  relational systems of subjugation and domination and the terror they can evoke-the pain of misophonia and its demand for something new seems much less aggressive, terrifying, or just plain far away. Through this sense of connectedness, Steve's experience of misophonia with all of its intensity and extremity was able to be transformed into something authentically understandable  for  both  of  us-truly  as  though  'for  whom  the  bell  tolls'  is  for  all  of humanity-for 'thee', and for me.

## Disclosure statement

No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).

## Notes on Contributor

Dayna  Sharp is  a  Licensed  Clinical  Social  Worker  in  private  practice  in  Haddonfield,  NJ.  She  is a psychoanalytic candidate with the Institute for the Psychoanalytic Study of Subjectivity in New York City and teaches in the Fellowship Program for the Psychoanalytic Center of Philadelphia.

## References

Ainsworth, M. D. (1963). Infant mother attachment. American Psychologist , 34 (10), 932-937. https:// doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.34.10.932

- Apprey, M. (2014). A pluperfect errand: A turbulent return to beginnings in the transgenerational transmission  of  destructive  aggression. Free  Associations , 15 ,  16-29.  https://doi.org/10.4324/ 9781003389026-9
- Atwood,  G.  E.,  Orange,  D.  M.,  &amp;  Stolorow,  R.  D.  (2002).  Shattered  worlds/psychotic  states:  A post-cartesian view of the experience of personal annihilation. Psychoanalytic Psychology , 19 (2), 281-306. https://doi.org/10.1037/0736-9735.19.2.281

Bach, S. (2011). Chimeras: Immunity, interpenetration, and the true self. The Psychoanalytic Review , 98 (1), 39-56. https://doi.org/10.1521/prev.2011.98.1.39

Beebee, Cohen and Lachmann. (2016).

The mother-infant interaction picture book

. W.W. Norton.

Belling, C. (2002, March 13).

Devotions upon emergent occasions

.  NYU Langone Health, Literature,

Arts, Medicine Database. Retrieved August 7, 2023, from https://medhum.med.nyu.edu/view/1128 Bion, W. R. (1967). Second thoughts . William Heinemann Medical Books Ltd.

Boston  Change  Process  Study  Group.  (2005).  The  something  more  than  interpretation  revisited: Sloppiness and co-creativity in the psychoanalytic encounter. Journal of American Psychoanalytic Association , 53 (3), 693-729. https://doi.org/10.1177/00030651050530030401

Bromberg,  P.  M.  (1991).  On  knowing  one's  patient  inside  out:  The  aesthetics  of  unconscious communication. Psychoanalytic Dialogues , 1 (4), 399-422. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 10481889109538911

- Bromberg,  P.  M.  (1996).  Standing  in  the  spaces:  The  multiplicity  of  self  and  the  psychoanalytic relationship. Contemporary  Psychoanalysis , 32 (4),  509-535.  https://doi.org/10.1080/00107530. 1996.10746334
- Bromberg,  P.  M.  (2000).  Bringing  in  the  dreamer:  Some  reflections  on  dreamwork,  surprise,  and analytic process. Contemporary Psychoanalysis , 36 (4), 685-705. https://doi.org/10.1080/00107530. 2000.10745795

Bucci, W. (2007). The role of bodily experience in emotional organization: New perspectives on the multiple  code  theory.  In  S.  Anderson  (Ed.), Bodies  in  treatment:  The  unspoken  dimension (pp. 51-76). The Analytic Press.

- Davies and Frawley. (1994). Treating the adult survivors of childhood sexual abuse: A psychoanalytic perspective . Basic Books.
- Davies, J. M. (1996). Linking the 'pre-analytic' with the postclassical: Integration, dissociation, and the multiplicity of unconscious process. Contemporary Psychoanalysis , 32 (4), 553-576. https://doi. org/10.1080/00107530.1996.10746336

Donne, J. 1572-1631. (1923). Devotions upon emergent occasions . The University press.

- Douglas, M. (1966). Purity and danger . Routledge.
- Dozier,  M.  (2017).  Phenomenology  of  misophonia:  Initial  physical  and  emotional  responses. American Journal of Psychology , 130 (4), 431-438. https://doi.org/10.5406/amerjpsyc.130.4.0431

Edelstein,  M.,  Brang,  D.,  Rouw,  R.,  &amp;  Ramachandran,  V.  S.  (2013,  June  25).  Misophonia: Physiological  investigations  and  case  descriptions. Frontiers  in  Human  Neuroscience , 7 ,  296. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2013.00296

Fairbairn, W. R. D. (1943). The repression and the return of bad objects (with special reference to the 'war neuroses'). British Journal of Medical Psychology , 19 (3-4), 327-341. https://doi.org/10.1111/j. 2044-8341.1943.tb00328.x

Ferenczi,  S.  (1929).  The  unwelcome  child  and  his  death-instinct. International  Journal  of  PsychoAnalysis , 10 , 125-129. https://doi.org/10.4324/9780429474750-9

- Ferenczi, S. (1985). The clinical diary of Sandor Ferenczi . Harvard University Press.
- Ghent,  E.  (1990).  Masochism,  submission,  surrender-masochism  as  a  perversion  of  surrender. Contemporary Psychoanalysis , 26 (1), 108-136. https://doi.org/10.1080/00107530.1990.10746643 Green, A. (1986). On private madness . Routledge.
- Grossmark, R. (2012). The unobtrusive relational analyst. Psychoanalytic Dialogues , 22 (6), 629-646. https://doi.org/10.1080/10481885.2012.737693

Hecker,  M.  (1993).  Family  reconstruction  in  Germany:  An  attempt  to  confront  the  past.  In Heimannsberg, &amp; Schmidt (Eds.), The collective silence: German identity and the legacy of shame . (Ch. 5, pp. 73-94). Jossey-Bass Publishers.

Hemingway, E. (1940). For whom the bell tolls . Arrow Publications.

- Howell, E. F. (2014). Ferenczi's concept of identification with the aggressor: Understanding dissociative  structure  with  interacting  victim  and  abuser  self-states. The  American  Journal  of Psychoanalysis , 74 (1), 48-59. https://doi.org/10.1057/ajp.2013.40

Kohut,  H.  (1959).  Introspection,  empathy,  and  psychoanalysis:  An  examination  of  the  relation between  mode  of  observation  and  theory.  In  Paul  Ornstein  (Ed.), The  search  for  the  self (pp. 205-232). University Press.

- Kohut, H. (1972). Thoughts on narcissism and narcissistic rage. The Psychoanalytic Study of the Child , 27 (1), 360-400. https://doi.org/10.1080/00797308.1972.11822721
- Lichtenberg, Lachmann and Fosshage. (2011). Psychoanalysis and motivational systems: A new look . Routledge.
- Markram, K., &amp; Markram, H. (2010). The intense world theory - a unifying theory of the neurobiology of autism. Frontiers  of  Human Neuroscience , 21 (December). https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum. 2010.00224
- McDougall, J. (1980). A child is being eaten-I: Psychosomatic states, anxiety neurosis and hysteriaa  theoretical  approach  II:  The  abysmal  mother  and  the  cork  child-a  clinical  illustration. Contemporary Psychoanalysis , 16 (4), 417-459. https://doi.org/10.1080/00107530.1980.10745634 Mitchell, S. A. (1993). Hope and dread in psychoanalysis . Basic Books.
- Norris, J., Kimball, S., Nemri, D., &amp; Ethridge, L. (2022). Toward a multidimensional understanding of misophonia using cluster-based phenotyping. Frontiers in Neuroscience , 16 , 16. https://doi.org/10. 3389/fnins.2022.832516
- Ogden,  T.  (1989).  On  the  concept  of  an  autistic-contiguous  position. International  Journal  of Psychoanalysis , 70 (Pt 1), 127-140.
- Olin,  R.  (1975).  Differentiating  the  psychotic  child  from  the  mentally  retarded  child. Minnesota Medicine , 58 , 489-492.
- Orange,  D.  M.  (2006).  For  whom  the  bell  tolls:  Context,  complexity,  and  compassion  in psychoanalysis. International Journal of Psychoanalytic Self Psychology , 1 , 5-21.
- Ornstein,  A.  (1984).  The  function  of  play  in  the  process  of  child  psychotherapy:  A  contemporary perspective. The Annual of Psychoanalysis , 12 , 349-366.
- Ornstein, A. (1991). The dread to repeat: Comments on the working-through process in psychoanalysis. Journal  of  the  American  Psychoanalytic  Association , 39 (2),  377-398.  https://doi.org/10. 1177/000306519103900204
- Ornstein, A. (2020). Child-centered family treatment: Conceptual framework and clinical implications. In Rass, Eva (Ed.), Toward a theory of child-centered psychodynamic family treatment: The Anna Ornstein reader . (Ch. 9, pp. 142-151). Routledge.
- Palumbo, D. B., Alsalman, O., De Ridder, D., Song, J. J., &amp; Vanneste, S. (2018, June 29). Misophonia and potential underlying mechanisms: A perspective. Frontiers in Psychology , 9 ,  953. https://doi. org/10.3389/fpsyg.2018.00953
- Saketopoulou, A. (2023). Sexuality beyond consent: Risk, race, traumatophilia . New York University Press.
- Salberg, J. (2015). The texture of traumatic attachment: Presence and ghostly absence in transgenerational transmission. The Psychoanalytic Quarterly , 134 (1),  21-46. https://doi.org/10.1002/j.21674086.2015.00002.x
- Sands,  S.  (2009).  The  concept  of  multiple  self  states:  Clinical  advantages. International  Journal  of Psychoanalytic Self Psychology , 4 (1), 122-124. https://doi.org/10.1080/15551020802639913

Schröder,  A.,  Vulink,  N.,  Denys,  D.,  &amp;  Fontenelle,  L.  (2013).  Misophonia:  Diagnostic  criteria  for

- a new psychiatric disorder. PLoS, 8 (1), e54706. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0054706 Stack Sullivan, H. (1953). The interpersonal theory of psychiatry . W.W. Norton.

Stern, D. (1984). The interpersonal world of the infant . Basic Books.

- Stern,  D.,  Hofer,  L.,  Haft,  W.,  &amp;  Dore,  J.  (1985).  Affect  attunement:  The  sharing  of  feeling  states between mother and infant by means of intermodal fluency. In T.J. Field, &amp; N.A Fox (Eds.), Social perception in early infancy (pp. 249-268). Ablex.
- Stolorow,  R.  D.  (1999).  The  phenomenology  of  trauma  and  the  absolutisms  of  everyday  life: A  personal  journey. Psychoanalytic  Psychology , 16 (3),  464-468.  https://doi.org/10.1037/07369735.16.3.464

Stolorow, R. D., &amp; Atwood, G. E. (1994). Ch. 17: The myth of the isolated mind. Progress in SelfPsychology , 10 , 233-250. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315803418-9

- Tronick, E. (1989). Emotions and emotional communication in infants. American Psychologist , 44 (2), 112-119. https://doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.44.2.112
- Tustin, F. (1990). The protective shell in children and adults . Routledge.
- Winnicott,  D.  W.  (1960).  The  theory  of  the  parent-infant  relationship. International  Journal  of Psychoanalysis , 41 , 585-595. https://doi.org/10.4324/9780429482410-3
- Winnicott,  D.  W.  (1969).  The  use  of  an  object. International  Journal  of  Psychoanalysis , 50 (4), 711-716.
- Winnicott, D. W. (1974). Fear of breakdown. International Review of Psychoanalysis , 1 (1-2), 103-107. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781351262880-11