Foranyissueswiththisdocument, pleasecontactyourlibrary.
____________________________________________________________________________________
Title:Journalofcontextual behavioral science.
ArticleTitle: Mindfulness andcognitive emotionregulation inpediatric misophonia
ArticleAuthor: Spencer
Date:2023
OCLC-921229685; ISSN-22121447; LCN-2013250547;
Publisher: Amsterdam :Elsevier,2012-
Source:LibKeyNomad
Copyright: CCG
____________________________________________________________________________________
NOTICE CONCERNING COPYRIGHT RESTRICTIONS:
Thecopyright lawoftheUnitedStates[Title17,UnitedStatesCode] governsthemakingofphotocopies
orotherreproductions ofcopyrighted materials.
Undercertainconditions specified inthelaw,librariesandarchivesareauthorized tofurnisha
photocopy orotherreproduction. Oneofthesespecificconditions isthatthephotocopy isnottobe
"usedforanypurposeotherthanprivatestudy,scholarship, orresearch." Ifausermakesarequestfor,or
lateruses,aphotocopy orreproduction forpurposes inexcessof"fairuse,"thatusermaybeliablefor
copyright infringement.
Thisinstitution reservestherighttorefusetoacceptacopyingorderif,initsjudgment, fulfillment of
thatorderwouldinvolveviolation ofcopyright law.

Journal Pre-proof
Mindfulness and cognitive emotion regulation in pediatric misophonia
Samuel D. Spencer, Andrew G. Guzick, Matti Cervin, Eric A. Storch
PII: S2212-1447(23)00091-1
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcbs.2023.07.005
Reference: JCBS 686
To appear in: Journal of Contextual Behavioral Science
Received Date: 24 January 2023
Revised Date: 4 July 2023
Accepted Date: 14 July 2023
Please cite this article as: Spencer S.D., Guzick A.G., Cervin M. & Storch E.A., Mindfulness and
cognitive emotion regulation in pediatric misophonia, Journal of Contextual Behavioral Science  (2023),
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcbs.2023.07.005 .
This is a PDF file of an article that has undergone enhancements after acceptance, such as the addition
of a cover page and metadata, and formatting for readability, but it is not yet the definitive version of
record. This version will undergo additional copyediting, typesetting and review before it is published
in its final form, but we are providing this version to give early visibility of the article. Please note that,
during the production process, errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal
disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
© 2023 Published by Elsevier Inc. on behalf of Association for Contextual Behavioral Science.

PEDIATRIC MISOPHONIA   1 
Running Head: PEDIATRIC MISOPHONIA  
 
 
 
 
Mindfulness  and cognitive emotion regulation  in pediatric misophonia  
 
Samuel D. Spencer, M.A.a*, Andrew G. Guzick, Ph.D.a, Matti Cervin, Ph.D.a, b, & Eric A. 
Storch, Ph.D .a 
aDepartment of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, 
USA; bDepartment of Clinical Sciences Lund, Lund University, Lund Sweden  
 
 
Author Note  
 Correspondence regarding this manuscript should be sent to Samuel D. Spencer, M.A., 
Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Baylor College of Medicine, 1977 Butler 
Boulevard, Houston, TX, 77054, Email: samuel.spencer@bcm.edu  
Research reported in this publication was supported by a grant from the Ream 
Foundation, as well as the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health & Human 
Development of the National Institutes of Health under Award Numbers 1R01HD080096 and 
P50HD103555 for use of the Clinical and Translational Core facilities. The content is solely the 
responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National 
Institutes of Health.  We also acknowledge the contributions  of Jane Clinger, Catie Rast, Minjee 
Kook, Sophie Schneider,  Eleanor Smith, Isabel Draper, Wayne Goodman, Marijn Lijffijt, and 
Journal Pre-proof

PEDIATRIC MISOPHONIA   2 
Nicholas Murphy . Data used in analyses in the present study is available upon reasonable 
request.  
 
Journal Pre-proof

PEDIATRIC MISOPHONIA   1 
Abstract  
Misophonia is characterized by decreased tolerance of ordinary human -generated trigger sounds 
and associated visual stimuli (e.g., chewing, sniffing, lip smacking), coupled with intense 
affective reactions. The disorder often begins during childhood or ado lescence and is associated 
with impairment and distress in numerous life domains. Research has begun to examine the 
underlying psychological mechanisms of misophonia in adults, but studies  in youth are limited.  
Trait m indfulness  (i.e., nonjudgmental and no navoidant present -moment awareness)  and 
cognitive emotion regulation  (i.e., cognitive process ing, or respon ding to, emotionally arousing 
situations)  are two proposed  mechanisms that may underpin  pediatric misophonia  and associated 
functional impairment . In the present exploratory cross -sectional study , we examined  trait 
mindfulness and cognitive emotion regulation and their relations with misophonia features and 
adaptive functioning in 102 youth  with misophonia ( Mage = 13.7;  SD = 2.5; range = 8 – 17). 
More severe m isophonia  was significantly associated with decreased levels of trait mindfulness  
and adaptive functioning  across domains , in addition to  deficits in certain  facets of cognitive 
emotion regulation, particularly self-blame. Neither trait mindfulness  nor facets of cognitive 
emotion regulation  moderate d the association between misophonia  severity  and adaptive 
functioning  across domains , with the notable exception that difficulties with adaptive functioning 
in peer relationships  was attenuated  in those high in mindfulness . Findings suggest that trait 
mindfulness – and to a lesser extent cognitive emotion regulation – may be potentially relevant 
process es in pediatric misophonia . However,  more research is needed to uncover the precise 
nature of these process es to aid future characterization and  intervention efforts , especially in light 
of equivocal findings in the present study . 
Keywords.  Misophonia; youth; mindfulness; cognitive emotion regulation; mi sophonia  
assessment questionnaire (MAQ).   
Journal Pre-proof

PEDIATRIC MISOPHONIA   2 
Mindf ulness and cognitive emotion regulation in pediatric misophonia  
 Misophonia is  characterized by decreased tolerance of  ordinary human -generated sounds  
and associated visual stimuli  (e.g., chewing, sniffing , lip smacking) , coupled with  intense 
affective reactions  to triggers  ranging from annoyance and frustration to  heightened  anger  
(Swedo et al., 202 2). Misophonia  often begins during childhood or adolescence and is associated 
with significant impairment and distress in numerous life domains , including  associations with 
elevated internalizing and externalizing disorders (Guzick et al., 2023; Remmert et al., 2022 ), 
reduced  life satisfaction (Rinaldi et al., 2022), and diminished q uality of life ( Jager et al., 2020; 
Möllmann  et al., 2023 ; Williams et al., 2022) . Although literature  on the characterization  of 
misophonia is growing , research has only just  begun to examine the underlying psychological 
mechanisms  of the condition in adults  (Brout et al., 2018; Cowan et al., 2022) , with 
corresponding studies  in youth remaining  relatively limite d. A more precise understanding of 
potential misophonia mechanisms during childhood and adolescence could offer valuable  
insights into its etiology and prognostic factors. Furthermore, identifying p sychological factors  
underpinning misophonia , including attentional, cognitive , and affective processes, is especially 
likely to aid the development of psychosocial interventions that specifically target candidate 
mechanisms.  
Mindfulness  
 Mindfulness is a construct that may potentially be relevant for understanding  pediatric 
misophonia, particularly in regard to attentional and cognitive components of the condition . 
While conceptualizations of mindfulness are historically diverse  (Chiesa, 2 013), within the 
behavioral health literature, mindfulness is most frequently  defined as either a phenomenological 
state, dispositional trait  (i.e., generalized tendency ), or a set of skills to be targeted/instantiated 
Journal Pre-proof

PEDIATRIC MISOPHONIA   3 
(Bishop et al., 2017; Brown & Ryan, 2 003; Van Dam et al., 2018).  A trait -based 
conceptualization of mindfulness is commonly used in clinical science research and has been 
shown to be amenable to development of psychometrically sound  self-report measure s of the 
construct (Baer, 2019).  
 From this perspective , mindfulness is defined as a multifaceted construct in volving  
flexible noticing  of present -moment experiences, acting with awareness of one’s current 
behavior, and embracing a non -reactive and non -judgmental stance to internal and external  
phenomena  (Baer et al., 2006 , 2008 ). Particularly relevant to the present study, t his definition of 
mindfulness has been adapted for youth in the context of psychometric development of the Child 
and Adolescent Mindfulness Measure (CAMM; Greco et al., 2011 ). Here, Greco et al.  concluded 
that mindfulness may be best conceptualized in youth as a unidimensional construct, due to a 
data-driven argument  that the multiple facets of mindfulness described ab ove are less distinct  
and not fully developed  in youth com pared to adults.  
 As mindfulness is predicated on the process of paying attention to one’s environment in a 
particular way (i.e., nonjudgmental, curious, and flexible ; Kabat -Zinn, 1990 ), the literature on 
attentional processes in misophonia further support the argument  that mindfulness  is a relevant 
process in  pediatric misophonia. Conceptual models of misophonia posit that heightened 
sensitivity to particular sounds results in behavior al avoidance of potentially triggering 
situations, along with hypervigilance and attentional fixation toward triggers (Brout et al., 2018; 
Jastreboff & Jastreboff, 2014). Neurophysiological research also indicate s that individuals with 
misophonia possess a lterations in generalized (i.e., trait -like) attentional processes irrespective  of 
exposure to trigger situations (Frank et al., 2020; Schröder et al., 201 4). Of particular note are 
recent findings which suggest that individuals with misophonia tend to exh ibit m ore rigid and 
Journal Pre-proof

PEDIATRIC MISOPHONIA   4 
inflexible attentional  and cognitive  processes  compared to controls  (Eijsker et al., 2021; Simner 
et al., 2021). While mindfulness has been  specifically discussed in the context of  a case study 
articulating an acceptance - and mindfulnes s-based intervention for an adolescent with 
misophonia (Schneider & Arch, 2017), to date we are unaware of any research  that examines 
trait mindfulness and its associations with other constructs relevant to pediatric misophonia  in a 
larger sample . Such research could be especially helpful for furthering our understanding of 
misophonia and informing treatment development efforts.  
Emotion Regulation  
From a behavioral perspective , longstanding patterns of negatively reinforced avoidance 
behavior s in respons e to misophonia triggers  necessarily mean  that afflicted individuals  are 
deprived of opportunities to learn  and practice adaptive  strategies for regulating emotions  in 
response to such triggers  (Cowan et al., 2022; Frank  & McKay, 20 19). Indeed, recent cross -
sectional research in adults reveals  that difficulties in emotion regulation  are associated  with 
misophonia symptom severity (Cassiello -Robbins et al., 2020 ) and intensity of reactions to 
misophoni a triggers (Guetta et al., 2022). Further evidence of the relevance of emotion 
regulation for understanding  misophonia is provided from uncontrolled case stud y research  
describing psychological treatments for the condition , which often promote  emotion regul ation 
skills  for youth with misophonia  (Dover & McGuire, 2023 ; Lewin et al., 2022; Zarotti et al., 
2022).   
Certain maladaptive  cognitive  emotion regulation strategies may also directly impact the 
development and maintenance  of misophonia (e.g., a pattern of hostile attributions such as 
blaming others for making trigger noises could plausibly maintain anger responses).  However, 
most of the research to date on emotion regulation in misophonia has focused on  behavioral 
Journal Pre-proof

PEDIATRIC MISOPHONIA   5 
affective regulation processes  (e.g., Guetta et al., 2022) , and relatively less so on cognitive 
aspects. Cognitive emotion regulation may be especially germane to study in misophonia, as 
reactions to misophonia triggers have been shown to be mediated by higher -order interpretations 
of a particular sound in a given context  (e.g., a family member chewing loudly) , rather than by 
the acoustical properties of the sound, per se (Neacsiu et al., 202 2)  
Similar to the complexities described above related to diverse conceptualizations of 
mindfulness, emotion regulation has been extensively studied using a range of frameworks 
(Braunstein et al., 2017; McRae & Gross, 2020). Consensus seems to have emerge d, however,  
concerning the multifaceted nature of emotion regulation  (Gratz & Roemer, 200 4). Despite some 
developmental considerations , emotion regulation – broadly considered – has been similarly 
conceptualized as a multifaceted construct in youth  (Silvers, 2022) .  
Relevant to the present study , cognitive emotion regulation in youth has been 
conceptualized via the framework of a set of distinct adaptive and maladaptive processes 
(Garnefski et al., 2005). When measured th is way, deficits in cognitive emotion regulation 
strategies  have demonstrated associations  with greater  psychopathology  (Mayer et al., 2022 ; van 
den Heuvel et al., 2020 ) and decreased  adaptive functioning (Mihalca & Tarnavska, 2013)  in 
youth . While relatively less studied in pediatric misophonia compared to other conditions, it is 
tenable  that such cognitive emotion regulation def icits are also pervasive in misophonia  and may 
contribute to impairment in adaptive functioning across numerous life domains (Möllmann et al., 
2023; Williams et al., 2022).  Furthermore, since childhood and adolescence is a critical period 
for development o f emotion regulation abilities  (Silver, 2022) , and also coincides  with the most 
common onset of misophonia (Guzick et al., 2023), emotion regulation represents  an important 
process to examine within pediatric misophonia.  
Journal Pre-proof

PEDIATRIC MISOPHONIA   6 
Mindfulness and Emotion Regulation  
The constructs of mindfulness and emotion regulation also share some degree of 
conceptual overlap and distinction that bear mention. More specifically, mindfulness and 
emotion regulation have been shown to have differential statistical associations with re levant 
psychosocial outcomes, with such relations often manifesting at the facet level for mindfulness 
(Baer et al., 2008; Iani et al., 2019 ; Stevenson et al., 2019 ). In the realm of clinical intervention, 
mindfulness has been conceptualized as an adaptive  process of regulating attention and emotions 
(Chambers et al., 2009 ; Kabat -Zinn, 1990 ), further suggesting  the interrelated nature of these two 
constructs. However, d ue to challenges in extrapolating findings from the adult literature in these 
areas to ch ildren and adolescents  (e.g., mindfulness defined as a unidimensional construct in 
youth; Greco et al., 2011) , along with the paucity of research to date concerning  mindfulness and 
emotion regulation in pediatric misophonia, in the  present study we chose  to examine the unique 
(i.e., distinct ) associations between trait mindfulness and cognitive emotion regulation  facets , 
respectively, and misophoni a. 
Current Study  
The foregoing literature review reveals  that mindfulness and cognitive emotion regulation 
are worthwhile processes to investigate within the context of pediatric misophonia. While some 
research in this area exists for adults, the extent to which these processes are associated with  
pediatric  misophonia has yet to be  examined. The present exploratory cross -sectional study seeks 
to address this gap in the literature.   
First, statistical  associations among  trait mindfulness , cognitive emotion regulation  
facets , domains of adaptive functioning , and misophonia  features  were examined . Based on past  
cross -sectional (Cassiello -Robbins et al., 2020; Guetta et al., 2022) and intervention  (Lewin et 
Journal Pre-proof

PEDIATRIC MISOPHONIA   7 
al., 2022 ; Schneider & Arch, 2017 ) research suggesting the relevance of  attentional, cognitive, 
and affective processes within  misophonia  and the salutary nature of mindfulness and emotion 
regulation , we hypothesized that trait mindfulness and adaptive cognitive emotion regulation  
facets  would generally demonstrate  inverse associations with misophonia  features . Due to a lack 
of extant literature on the subject,  no formal hypotheses were proffered  regarding the differential 
magnitude of specific associations among  trait mindfulness , cognitive emotion regulation  facets , 
and misophonia features ; in that regard, these analyses were considered exploratory in nature .  
Subsequently , we explored whether trait mindfulness  and adaptive cognitive emotion 
regulation  facets moderated the association between misophonia  severity  and diminished 
adaptive functioning  across domains . Aligned with past literature suggesting the salience of 
mindfulness and emotion regulation as transdiagnostic mechanisms underlying psychopathology 
in youth (Trosper et al., 2009; Zack et al., 2014), we generally predicted that  trait mindfulness 
and adaptive cognitive emotion regulation facets  would function to attenuate (i.e., moderate) 
inverse psychopathological associations between elevated misophonia features and diminished 
adaptive functioning  across domains . Again , due to the paucity of extant literature on the topic, 
no precise hypotheses were offered regarding the specificity  of moderation  for trait mindfulness 
and cognitive emotion regulation facets , and such moderation analyses were also  considered 
exploratory in nature .  
Method  
Participants  
Data  utilized in the present study were gathered as part of a larger project  conducted at a 
private university hospital in the south ern U.S.A. pursuing  an in-depth  phenotypic 
characterization of pediatric misophonia  (see Guzick et al., 2023 for more details regarding study 
Journal Pre-proof

PEDIATRIC MISOPHONIA   8 
procedures and characterization of the sample  used for the present study ). Potential participants 
were recruited via a multimedia advertising campaign that included mainstream ( e.g., flyers , TV 
interviews, community presentations) and electronic ( e.g., Listserves, social media) media, 
referrals from allied healthcare professionals , and public service announcements.  Inclusion 
criteria were:  between 8 to 17 years old, and  experienc ing clinically significant misophonia 
symptoms defined as a score ≥10 on the Amsterdam Misophonia Scale (A -MISO -S; Schröder et 
al., 2013 ), which corresponds with clinically significant  symptoms.  Clinically significant 
misophonia in participants was further  confirmed through the use of a semi -structured 
misophonia diagnostic interview (Misophonia Assessment Interview; Lewin et al., 2022) and 
through consultation with licensed psychologists  involved with the study . Exclusion criteria 
were: lifetime diagnosis of schizophrenia, other psychotic disorder, organic brain syndrome, or 
cognitive impairment; suicidality  in need of immediate clinical attention ; or inability to speak 
English. As depicted in Table 1, the average age of the 102 participants  in the sample  was 13.7 
years old ( SD = 2.5; range = 8 – 17), and  the majority identified their gender as female (67.6%) 
and race as White (87.3%).  Of the 79% of participants who met diagnostic criteria for a 
comorbid psychiatric disorder, 45% experience d a current anxi ety or obsessive -compulsive 
disorder , and 47% experienced a past or current major depressive episode. As shown in Table 1, 
other common comorbidities included attention -deficit/hyperactivity disorder and chronic tic 
disorders.  The most common primary (non -misophonia) psychiatric diagnoses  were major 
depressive disorder (29.4%), generalized anxiety disorder (16.7%), and attention deficit 
hyperactivity disorder (9.8%).  
Procedure  
Journal Pre-proof

PEDIATRIC MISOPHONIA   9 
The present study received approv al from  the Institutional Review Board at the authors ’ 
affiliated university. Potential participants (and their caregiver/legal guardian) were prescreened 
via telephon e. Informed consent was obtained from caregiver /legal guardians (along with assent 
from youth) of all interested potential participants who met  eligibility requirements . Youth and 
caregiver s then completed  a synchronous virtual assessment session with a research assistant  via 
a secure telehealth platform and completed child - and caregiver -report measure s via a secure 
Internet  platform  (see subsections of the Measures section for details of which measures were 
child - and caregiver -report) . Participants received $100 compensation ($50 parent and $50 child) 
for participation.  
Measures  
Demographic information.  Participants completed  a demographic form that contained 
questions regarding gender, age, and race.  Gender categories included male, female, and other. 
Race categories included black /African -American, Asian, White, or Other.  The Mini 
International Neuropsy chiatric Interview  for Children and Adolescents  (MINI -KID; Sheehan et 
al., 2010 ) was administered to participants by a trained research assistant and was used to assess 
for the presence of psychiatric disorders among study participants. For the purposes of  the 
present study, only primary psychiatric diagnoses  were reported . 
Misophonia features . Misophonia was assessed with  two related, yet distinct, youth -
completed self -report questionnaires . The Amsterdam Misophonia Scale (A -MISO -S; Schröder et 
al., 2013)  is a six -item instrument u tilizing  a 5-point Likert scale designed to assess misophonia 
severity and impairment.  Scores are summed, and higher scores indicate greater misophonia 
symptom severity.  Item 4 of the A -MISO -S (“How much effort do you make to resist thoughts 
about the misophonic triggers?”) was not included in the calculation of sum scores in the present 
Journal Pre-proof

PEDIATRIC MISOPHONIA   10 
study, as this item has demonstrated sub-optimal  psychometric properties in past resea rch (XXX -
MASKED , under review). The A -MISO -S has demonstrated preliminary evidence of adequate 
psychometric properties in previous research (Naylor et al., 2021) . Cronbach’s alpha in the 
present study was α = . 76. 
The Misophonia Assessment Questionnaire (M AQ; Johnson, 2014)  is a 21 -item 
instrument  utilizing a 4 -point Likert scale that is designed to assess various aspects of 
misophonia, including distress, recognition of difficulties, and interference . Scores are summed, 
and higher scores indicate greater m isophonia acuity  (1-21 = mild, 22 -42 = moderate, 43 -64 = 
severe; Dozier, 2015) . Although t he MAQ was originally developed within the context of 
clinical practice rather than via a  rigorous  empirical  process,  it has recently been 
psychometrically evaluated . More specifically, the MAQ  preliminarily demonstrated evidence of 
acceptable  psychometric properties  in a youth sample , including construct validity pertaining to  
four sub -factors  (pessimism, distress, interference, and non -recognition)  with one higher -order 
factor ( XXX -MASKED , under review) . Cronbach’s alpha for the higher -order factor in the 
present study was α = .94.  
Mindfulness. The Child and Adolescent Mindfulness Measure (CAMM; Greco et al., 
2011)  is a 10 -item youth -report question naire  utilizing a 5 -point Likert scale that is designed to 
capture the construct of trait mindfulness based on the tenets of mindfulness -based stress 
reduction (MBSR; Kabat -Zinn, 1990) and dialectical behavior therapy (DBT; Linehan, 1993) , as 
adapted to be  developmentally appropriate for youth . For the CAMM in particular, 
unidimensional mindfulness is conceptualized with a focus on present -moment awareness, along 
with non -judgmental and non -avoidant responses to feelings and thoughts.  Items are reverse -
scored and summed, such that higher scores indicate greater trait mindfulness. The CAMM has 
Journal Pre-proof

PEDIATRIC MISOPHONIA   11 
demonstrated excellent psychometric properties in previous research (de Bruin et al., 2014; 
Greco et al.). Cronbach’s alpha in the present study was α = .86.  
Cognitive Emotion Regulation . The Cognitive Emotion Regulation Questionnaire , child 
version  (CERQ -k; Garnefski et al., 2007 ) is a 36-item youth -report questionnaire  utilizing a 5 -
point Likert scale that is designed to assess nine separate adaptive and maladaptive  facets of 
cognitive emotion regulation  in response to particular stressful life events . Scores are summed  
within each  individual subscale  (4 items per subscale) , and higher scores indicate either adaptive 
(i.e., positive refocusing, planning , positive reap praisal, putting into perspective) or maladaptive 
(i.e., acceptance, self-blame, rumination, catastrophizing, other -blame)  cognitive emotion 
regulation . The CERQ  has demonstrated robust  psychometric properties in previous research 
(Betegon et al., 2022; Garnefski et al. ). Cronbach’s alpha  across the nine subscales  in the present 
study ranged from  α = .70 to .94 . 
Adaptive functioning . Selected subscales from the larger package of the Patient 
Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System  Pediatric Parent  Proxy (PROMIS -P-P; 
Varni et al., 2012)  were utilized to assess youth  adaptive functioning across three separate 
domains, including : (a) peer relationships (PROMIS -P-P-PR), (b) family relationships 
(PROMIS -P-P-FR), and (c) life satisfaction (PROMIS -P-P-LS). These 8-item (7 items for the 
PROMIS -P-P-PR) parent -report questionnaire s utilize a 5-point Likert scale ; scores are summed 
within each domain separately, and higher scores indicate greater adaptive functioning . The 
PROMIS parent proxy scales  have demonstrated evidence of robust psychometric properties in 
previous research ( Brandon et al., 2017; Varni  et al.). Cronbach’s alpha across the  three  
subscales in the present study ranged from α = .88 to .95.  
Data Analytic Plan  
Journal Pre-proof

PEDIATRIC MISOPHONIA   12 
Due to the largely exploratory nature of the present study  and the moderate sample  size, 
no family -wise error correction s were performed  and an alpha of .05 was used as an indicator of 
statistical significance . Skewness and kurtosis values for all measures were ± 1, suggesti ng 
adequate univariate normal distributions . Additionally,  a lack of variance inflation factor (VIF) 
values greater than 5 among study variables  suggested that concerns with multicollinearity were 
not present . Pairwise comparisons were utilized for all analyses, and missingness was negligible  
(i.e., ranged from 0 -5 missing cases per variable).  
To address study aims, we first examined  zero-order correlations among all study 
variables . Second, b ased on the se correlational findings, we ran two separate linear  regression  
models  to explore  the unique associations  between candidate processes  (i.e., mindfulness and 
facets of emotion regulation)  and misophonia features (separate models for MAQ and A -MISO -S 
as dependent variables) . Age, gender (dummy coded as 1 = non -female, 2 = female) , and  primary  
comorbid psychiatric diagnosis (dummy coded as 1 = no diagnosis, 2 = any diagnosis)  were 
entered as covariates. All candidate process  variables demonstrat ing statist ically significant 
correlations with misophonia features  were entered as predictors in both regression models.  This 
step was conducted to examine which variables had the clearest associations with misophonia. 
Findings from the two separate regression models were compared to determine which of the two 
misophonia measure s demonstrated more  robust findings for use in subsequent exploratory 
moderation analyses.  
Third , candidate process  variables that  were uniquely associated with  misophonia  
features  in the aforementioned regression models were subsequently  examined as potential 
moderators of the relations between misophonia severity  and domains of adaptive functioning.  
To do so, Model 1 in PROCESS macro  for SPSS  (A. F. Hayes, 202 2) was employed to test for  
Journal Pre-proof

PEDIATRIC MISOPHONIA   13 
possible  two-way interactio n effects . PROCESS macro was used to estimate interaction effects 
for each model using a bootstrapping approach  utilizing  5,000 samples  (A. F. Hayes) . With  each 
of the three domains of adaptive functioning  (i.e., PROMIS -P-P-PR, PROMIS -P-P-FR, 
PROMIS -P-P-LS) as the dependent variable, a series of six separate linear regression models  
were run with the best -performing misophonia measure  as the independent variable, a given 
candidate process  variable  as the potential moderator, and age, gender, and psychiatric diagnosis 
status  entered as covariate s. Statistically significant interaction effects were further probed via 
examination of simple slopes of the conditional effect. This permitted estimation of  the 
differential effect of a given moderator variable  (i.e., M ± 1 SD) on the relationship between 
misophonia  severity  and a given domain of adaptive functioning.  
Results  
Bivariate Associations  
Correlations coefficients among  study variables (see Table 2) indicated that the MAQ 
was significantly  and positively  correlated with all measured  maladaptive facets of cognitive 
emotion regulation, including self -blame,  acceptance,  rumination, catastrophizing, and other -
blame ( rs = .2 2 to .62); significant associations were less consistent with the A -MISO -S (rs = .06 
to .22).  Misophonia features were generally not associated with adaptive  cognitive emotion 
regulation facets . Misophonia features were also significantly inversely correlated with trait 
mindfulness ( rs = - .24, - .60) and all three domains of adaptive functioning ( rs = - .18 to - .40). 
Across all correlational analyses , the MAQ generally demonstrated relations in greater 
magnitude compared to the A -MISO -S, and thus was used as the primary dependent variable in 
subsequent multivaria ble analyses . 
Linear  Regression Analyses  
Journal Pre-proof

PEDIATRIC MISOPHONIA   14 
Two separate  linear regression models  were run  with candidate process variables  that 
correlat ed significantly with either the MAQ or A-MISO -S. As such, trait mindfulness  and all 
five maladaptive facets of cognitive emotion regulation  (i.e., self -blame, acceptance, rumination, 
catastrophizing, and other -blame)  were entered as predictors, along with  age, gender , and  current 
psychiatric diagnosis  entered as covariates.  VIF values for variables within the regression model 
ranged from 1.02 – 2.49, suggesting that multicollinearity was not a concern.   
Only the regression model with MAQ as the criterion v ariable was statistically 
significant . Within this model, which explained approximately 43% of the variance in MAQ 
scores , only trait mindfulness ( β = - .28, p = .02), and cognitive emotion regulation -self-blame (β 
= .32, p = .01) were statistically significant predictors (see Table 3) . Thus, both trait mindfulness 
and cognitive emotion regulation -self-blame were selected as potential moderator variables  for 
subsequent moderation analyse s. 
Moderation Analyses  
Six sets of linear regression analys es were conducted to explore whether trait mindfulness 
and cognitive emotion regulation -self-blame, respectively, moderated the relationship between 
misophonia symptomology  (measured by the MAQ)  and each of the three domains  of adaptive 
functioning, respectively  (see Table 4) . Only one of the six models, with trait mindfulness as a 
moderator and adaptive functioning in peer relationships  as a criterion , yielded  a significant 
interaction term. Results revealed that this  model accounted for 2 1% of the variance in peer 
relationship functioning , F (6, 95) = 5 .68, p < .001. Within this model, the interaction between 
misophonia symptomology  and trait mindfulness w as significant, B = 0.0 2, SE = .01, p = .001, 
and explained 6.6% of unique variance above and beyond main effects in the model.  
Journal Pre-proof

PEDIATRIC MISOPHONIA   15 
A visual depiction of the slope analyses  for the interaction between misophonia  
symptomology  and trait mindfulness on peer relationship functioning  is provided in Figure 1 . 
The conditional effects of misophonia symptomology  on peer relationship functioning  were - .37 
(SE =  .07, t = -5.01, p < .001) when the trait mindfulness score was 1 SD below the mean, - .24 
(SE = 0.05, t = -4.65, p < .001) at the mean, and - .11 (SE = .05, t = -1.98, p = .05 ) 1 SD above 
the mean. A simple slope analysis also revealed  that the strength of the effect of misophonia 
symptomology  on peer relationship functioning  was attenuated when the level of trait 
mindfulness was high. That is, a difference test between the simple slopes indicated  a statistically 
significant difference between the slopes of the regression line at low and high levels of 
mindfulness ( t = 2.85, p = .004). Thus, the degree of the  negative relationship between 
misophon ia symptomology  and peer relationship  functioning  was attenuated when mindfulness 
levels were higher.  
Discussion  
Psychological processes underlying misophonia  remain unclear, particularly in youth . 
The present exploratory cross -sectional study sought to address this by examining the relations 
among misophonia features, domains of adaptive functioning, and proposed process variables of 
trait mindfulness and cognitive emotion regulation facets in a well-characterized sample of youth 
with misophonia. Findings revealed  that misophonia  severity  was generally positively associated 
with maladaptive facets of cognitive emotion regulation and negatively associated with trait 
mindfulness  and domains of adaptive functioning . Of these relations, trait mindfulness a nd 
cognitive emotion regulation -self-blame were  most robustly associated with misophonia  severity  
measured by the MAQ. Furthermore, trait mindfulness  moderated the inverse association 
between misophonia  severity , measured by the MAQ,  and adaptive functioning in peer 
Journal Pre-proof

PEDIATRIC MISOPHONIA   16 
relationships , such that the aforementioned association  was attenuated in participants high in trait 
mindfulness.  However, none of the other proposed moderator models yielded significant 
interaction effects.   
Findings conc erning the roles of m indfulness and cognitive emotion regulation -self-
blame are consistent with previous conceptualizations of misophonia, which highlight the salient 
roles of alerting/attentional processes and higher -order cognitive functioning  (Brout et al., 2018; 
Neacsiu et al., 2022) . At least in the context of the present study, it may be  that rigid attentional 
fixation on misophonia triggers  and a lack of nonjudgmental, flexible  awareness of present -
moment experiences (i.e., deficits in min dfulness) , along with  challenges in regulating emotions  
related to a negative  or overly critical  view of oneself  (i.e., self -blame)  function  to maintain 
misophonia symptomology  in youth . Moreover , our findings highlighting the role of trait-based 
attentional and cognitive  processes in misophonia comport with recent neurophysiological and 
neuropsychological research in adult misophonia, which indicate that individuals with 
misophonia tend to  possess detrimental alterations in  attentional processes ( Eijsker et al., 2021; 
Frank et al., 2020; Simner et al., 2021).  While findings from the present study, along with 
preliminary inclusion of mindfulness and other attention -focused  intervention kernels  in 
treatments  for youth with misophonia  hold promise  (Lewin et al., 2022; Schneider & Arch, 
2017), more work is needed to mechanistically understand the role of mindfulness within 
misophonia. Fortunately, the framework of the above -mentioned neurophysiological studies on 
attention provides a useful model for su ch research.  
Moderating Effect of Mindfulness  
The present exploratory study found preliminary evidence of a  moderating effect of trait 
mindfulness on the relation between misophonia  severity  and adaptive functioning in peer 
Journal Pre-proof

PEDIATRIC MISOPHONIA   17 
relationships. More specifically, the interactive effect of trait mindfulness and misophonia 
severity  on adaptive functioning in peer relationships was such that for participants high in trait 
mindfulness (i.e., 1 SD above the mean), the inverse association between misop honia severity  
and deficits in adaptive functioning  in peer relationships  was no longer statistically significant  (p 
= .05) . This suggests that mindfulness may serve as a protective, or buffering, factor in pediatric 
misophonia, such that when mindfulness is bolstered, youth may be better  able to maintain 
adaptive functioning in peer relationships despite the presence of misophonia symptomology . 
Given that recent research suggests that approximately half of youth with misophonia report that 
this condition s ignificantly interferes with their social relationships  (Guzick et al., 202 3), this 
finding highlights the potential critical role of mindfulness in this population .  
Findings from the present study concerning the moderating effect of mindfulness in 
pediatric misophonia are  consistent with the decoupling effect  as a mechanism of change in 
mindfulness , in which  mindfulness has been found to attenuate, or decouple,  the link between 
mental health vulnerability factors and maladaptive behavioral outcomes (Levin et al., 2015). 
This suggests that mindfulness  represents  a promising technique  for promoting adaptive 
functioning in the context of misophonia, where symptoms may be more  intractable, less 
amenable to habituation via exposure, and thus complete remission less likely  compared to other 
conditions  (Frank & McKay, 2019).  Specific aspects of mindfulness related to the 
nonjudgmental quality of attention and the ability to flexibly shift/direct attention  (e.g., Kabat -
Zinn , 1990; Masuda & Wilson, 2009)  may be especially applicable to misophonia (Schneider & 
Arch, 2017), as hypervigilant, rigid fixation on triggers, along with maladaptive negative 
interpretations regarding trigger situations have been shown to perpetuate symptomology (Brout 
et al., 2018 ; Neacsiu et al., 2022 ). 
Journal Pre-proof

PEDIATRIC MISOPHONIA   18 
Emotion Regulation in Misophonia  
Intuitively, it might be expected that a propensity to blame others  would be more strongly 
related to misophonia severity than a tendency to blame oneself, as youth with misophonia often 
react aggressively to others making trigger noises. Despite the frequency of verbal aggression in 
misophonia, however, the robust  associ ation with self -blame in the present study (rather than 
other -blame) appears to speak to a multifaceted and more internalizing (rather than externalizing) 
nature of misophonia psychopathology (Guzick et al., 2023). While our results  concerning the 
role of cognitive emotion regulation facets in pediatric misophonia were notably equivocal, the 
limited findings that did emerge remain  consistent with past research positing difficulties in 
emotion regulation as a key process within misophonia (Cassiello -Robbins,  2020; Guetta et al., 
2022).   
 As mentioned , of all the facets of cognitive emotion regulation examined in the present 
study, only self -blame emerged as a reliable statistical predictor of misophonia features 
measured by the MAQ ; correlations between cogni tive emotion regulation facets and misophonia 
features also varied widely. Additionally , this self -blame facet did not exert a moderating effect 
on any of the relationships between misophonia severity  and impairment in adaptive functioning. 
While the design of the present study did not allow us to empirically examine reasons for these 
equivocal findings concerning cognitive emotion regulation, several possible explanations for 
such findings emerge that warrant further investigation. More specifically, the focus on cognitive 
emotion regulation over behavioral and affective components in the present study may have 
contributed to the lack of associations found. Past research on emotion regulation in adult 
misophonia populations that found  more robust associations between misophonia symptomology 
and emotion regulation difficulties (Cassiello -Robbins et al., 2020; Guetta et al., 2022) utilized 
Journal Pre-proof

PEDIATRIC MISOPHONIA   19 
measures such as the Difficulties in Emotion Regulation Scale (DERS ; Gratz & Roemer, 2004), 
which tap into the behavioral and affective components of emotion regulation. This raises the 
possibility that cognitive emotion regulation processes may be less relevant in pediatric 
misophonia than originally thought, which is co nsistent with the notable affective  and 
internalizing  responses often observed in response to misophonia triggers  among youth  (Guzick 
et al., 2023).  
 Furthermore , sub -optimal measurement of cognitive emotion regulation may have also 
contributed to our equivocal findings. More specifically, the CERQ -k asks youth to respond to 
items in consideration of when they are “experiencing strong threatening or stressful life events.” 
As the precise  (and perhaps idiosyncratic)  manner in  which youth interpreted th is prompt  is 
unknown, the variability that this instruction  may have introduce d into participant responding 
may have manifested as measurement error  in the present study.  
A final question concerns the differential magnitude of relations among misophonia 
features and adaptive and maladaptive facets of cognitive emotion regulation found in the 
present study. That is, mainly maladaptive – but not adaptive – facets of cognitive emotion 
regulation were significantly associated  with misophonia features. Of these maladaptive facets, 
only self -blame was uniquely associated with misophonia symptomology. Such findings are 
consistent with cognitive and affective reactions of youth with misophon ia described in 
published case studies (e.g., Johnson et al., 2013; Lewin et al., 2022; Schneider & Arch, 2017) 
that highlight  experiences of hopelessness, perceived lack of control, and self -critical thoughts. 
Nevertheless , more work is needed to better u nderstand the differential strength of cognitive 
emotional regulation processes in pediatric misophonia, as these repertoires may be more 
malleable and amenable to intervention efforts compared to engrained neurological -based 
Journal Pre-proof

PEDIATRIC MISOPHONIA   20 
sensory processing systems (Pa lumbo et al., 2018; Schneider & Arch, 2015). This parallels  many 
contextual behavioral science -based intervention approaches (e.g., acceptance and commitment 
therapy; S.C. Hayes et al., 2012) that target reactions to internal events, rather than the intern al 
events themselves, which may be less amenable to modification.  
Measurement Issues and other Caveats  
Interpretations of findings concerning trait mindfulness and cognitive emotion regulation -
self-blame as candidate mechanisms in pediatric misophonia require caution in light of the 
exploratory nature of the present study, as well as the numerous  analyses conducted that yielded 
nonsignificant results  (i.e., possibility of Type -I error s). These nonsignificant findings  point to 
future  research questions, such as why  the moderating effect of mindfulness was only found on 
adaptive functioning in peer relationships, but not family ones or overall life satisfaction. We 
speculate that  the salient role of family accommodation in perpetuating misophonia 
symptom ology  in youth (Dover & McGuire, 202 3; Johnson et al., 2013; Storch et al.,  under 
review ) may contribute to  an underestimation of deficits in adaptive functioning in familial 
relationships . However,  more research is needed to understand the differential moderating effects 
of mindfulness  in misophonia to better match patients to intervention kernels  (S.C. Hayes et al., 
2021).  
The measurement of misophonia features in the present  study , along with differential 
magnitude of findings from  these measures,  also merits attention. More specifically, misophonia 
features were measured using  the A-MISO -S (Schröder et al., 2013) and the MAQ (Johnson, 
2014).  While the correlation of 0.55 bet ween the MAQ and A -MISO -S does suggest some 
overlap, it also raises the possibility that the two measures may be capturing unique features of 
misophonia – an assertion supported by recent psychometric research on these measures (XXX -
Journal Pre-proof

PEDIATRIC MISOPHONIA   21 
MASKED,  under review).  More specifically, e xamination  of items from these questionnaires  
(i.e., content validity) suggest s that the A -MISO -S captures  misophonia symptom severity and 
impairment , while  the MAQ  appears to focus more on broader aspects of the impact of 
misophonia  on a respondent’s life context . Interestingly,  many of the MAQ items focus on the 
emotional impact of misophonia , as well as interference in social domains.  Furthermore, the 
aforementioned  psychometric evaluation of the MAQ in youth with misophonia  (XXX -
MASKED)  found that it includes subscales tapping into pessimism about getting better as well 
as other people not recognizing the impact of the misophonia symptoms . This raises the 
possibility of some conceptual overlap between misophonia impairment measured by the MAQ 
and cognitive emotion regulation facets and domains of adaptive function ing, which may 
partially explain our more robust findings concerning  the MAQ compared to the A -MISO -S. 
Additionally, t o the extent that mindfulness may also be cons idered a process of adaptive 
emotion regulation (Chambers et al., 2009; Kabat -Zinn, 1990; Linehan, 1993), the relatively 
stronger  correlation between mindfulness measured by the CAMM and MAQ scores compared 
to A-MISO -S ones is not entirely surprising.  
Finally, the potentially questionable  psychometric properties of the measures of 
misophonia used in the present study require consideration, as  sub-optimal measurement 
ultimately reduces the confidence of inferences drawn from a given study’s results  (Haynes et 
al., 2019). More specifically, the A -MISO -S conceptualizes and measures misophonia from the 
framework of obsessive -compulsive disorder ( Schröder et al., 2013) . However, recent research 
has begun to cast doubt on the classification status of mis ophonia as an OCRD (McKay et al., 
2018), which  entails  the A -MISO -S may lack content validity. While recent research has 
emerged suggesting that the A -MISO -S and MAQ do indeed possess evidence of adequate 
Journal Pre-proof

PEDIATRIC MISOPHONIA   22 
psychometric properties in terms of reliability and  construct (i.e., convergent and divergent) 
validity in a sample of youth with misophonia ( XXX -MASKED,  under review), more work is 
sorely needed both in terms of classification and measurement of misophonia.  
Limitations and Conclusion  
The present study req uires interpretation in light of several limitations. First, the cross -
sectional design  preclude s inferences about causal relationships. Second, a large number of 
statistical tests were run without correction for Type 1 error s in order to facilitate preliminary, 
exploratory research, though this raises  the possibility of false positives – a possibility that may 
be especially salient within the context of six separate moderation models . Third, while one of 
the strengths of the pre sent study is the use of multiple informants (i.e., caregiver and child), all 
variables were measured via retrospective self - or other -report questionnaires, suggesting the 
possibility of shared method variance (Haynes et al., 2019). Fourth , while our samp le was well -
characterized in terms of assessment  of psychiatric diagnoses , study participants were mostly 
White and female, which  limits the generalization of findings to diverse populations. Fifth, while 
the use of  multiple methods of assessment in terms of verification of misophonia in study 
participants  lends some confidence in the characterization of the sample , to date, there exists  no 
formally agreed -upon consensus for the diagnostic classification of misophoni a (Taylor, 2017) . 
Thus, the lack of clarity in terms of diagnosis and conceptual boundaries of misophonia may 
have contributed to  excessive heterogeneity of presenting concerns and introduced measurement 
error. Finally, the percentage of total variance in misophonia symptomology explained by 
independent variables in the present study ranged from 20 -40%, which means that more work is 
needed to understand additional explanatory process variables within pediatric misophonia.  
Journal Pre-proof

PEDIATRIC MISOPHONIA   23 
With these limitations in mind , the present study contributes to the pediatric misophonia 
literature by increasing our understanding of psychological processes underlying impairment in 
functioning due to misophonia symptoms, including mindfulness and emotion regulation. 
Findings from the pr esent study also align with  past intervention development studies  for 
pediatric misophonia  (Dover & McGuire, 2023 ; Lewin et al., 2022; Schneider & Arch, 2017) 
positing mindfulness and emotion regulation as p romising  treatment targe ts. More research is 
needed to confirm exploratory findings from the present study and further elucidate salient, 
manipulable processes of change in misophonia that can be functionally targeted by empirically 
supported principles  (S.C. Hayes & Hofmann, 20 20). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Journal Pre-proof

PEDIATRIC MISOPHONIA   24 
References  
Adrian, M., Jenness, J. L., Kuehn, K. S., Smith, M. R., & McLaughlin, K. A. (2019). Emotion 
regulation processes linking peer victimization to anxiety and depression symptoms in 
adolescence. Developmental Psychopathology, 31 (3), 999 – 1009. 
doi:10.1017/S0954579419000543.  
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders  
(5th ed.). Washington, DC: Author.  
Baer, R. A. (2019). Assessment of mindfulness by self -report. Current Opinion in Psychology, 
28, 42 – 48. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.copsyc.2018.10.015  
Baer, R. A., Smith, G. T., Hopkins, J., Krietemeyer, J., & Toney, L. (2006). Using Self -Report 
Assessment Methods to Explore Facets of Mindfulness. Assessment, 13 (1), 27 -45. 
doi:10.1177/1073191105283504  
Baer, R. A., Smith, G. T., Lykins, E., Button, D., Krietemeyer, J., Sauer, S., . . . Williams, J. M. 
G. (2008). Construct Validity of the Five Facet Mindfulness Questionnaire in Meditating 
and Nonmeditating Samples. Assessment, 15 (3), 329 -342. 
doi:10.1177 /1073191107313003  
Betegon, E., Rodriguez -Medina, J., Del -Valle, M., & Irurtia, M. J. (2022). Emotion regulation in 
adolescents: Evidence of the validity and factor structure of the cognitive emotion 
regulation questionnaire (CERQ). International Journal of  Environmental Research and 
Public Health, 19 (6), 3602. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph19063602  
Bishop, S. R., Lau, M., Shapiro, S., Carlson, L., Anderson, N. D., Carmody, J., Segal, Z. V., 
Abbey, S., Speca, M., Velting, D., & Devins, G. (2017). Mindfulness : A proposed 
Journal Pre-proof

PEDIATRIC MISOPHONIA   25 
operational definition.  In B. A. Gaudiano (Ed.), Major themes in mental health. 
Mindfulness: The roots of mindfulness: History, philosophy, and definitions  (p. 384 –400). 
Routledge/Taylor & Francis Group.  
Brandon, T. G., Becker, B. D., Bevans, K. B., & Weiss, P. F. (2017). Patient -reported outcomes 
measurement information system tools for collecting patient -reported outcomes in 
children with juvenile arthritis. Arthritis Care and Research, 69 (3), 393 – 402. doi: 
10.1002/acr.22937.  
Braunstein, L.  M., Gross, J. J., & Ochsner, K. N. (2017). Explicit and implicit emotion 
regulation: A multi -level framework. Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 
12(10), 1545 – 1557. doi: 10.1093/scan/nsx096.  
Brout, J. J., Edelstein, M., Erfanian, M., Mannino, M ., Miller, L. J., Rouw, R., Kumar, S., & 
Rosenthal, M. Z. (2018). Investigating misophonia: A review of the empirical literature, 
clinical implications, and a research agenda. Frontiers in Neuroscience, doi: 
10.3389/fnins.2018.00036  
Brown, K. W., & Ryan, R. M. (2004). Perils and promise in defining and measuring 
mindfulness: Observations from experience. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 
11, 242 – 248.  
Cassiello -Robbins, C., Anand, D., McMahon, K., Guetta, R., Trumbell, J., Kelley, L., & 
Rosenthal, M. Z. (2020). The mediating role of emotion regulation within the relationship 
between neuroticism and misophonia: A preliminary investigation. Frontiers in 
Psychiatry. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyt.2020.00847  
XXX -MASKED  
Journal Pre-proof

PEDIATRIC MISOPHONIA   26 
Chambers, R., Gullone, E., & Allen, N. B. (2009). Mindful emotion regulation: An integrative 
review. Clinical Psychology Review, 29, 560 – 572. doi:10.1016/j.cpr.2009.06.005  
Chiesa, A. (2013). The difficulty of defining mindfulness: Current thought and critical issu es. 
Mindfulness, 4 , 255 – 268. DOI 10.1007/s12671 -012-0123 -4 
Cowan, E. N., Marks, D. R., & Pinto, A. (2022). Misophonia: A psychological model and 
proposed treatment. Journal of Obsessive -compulsive and Related Disorders, 32. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jocrd.2021.100691  
de Bruin, E. I., Zijlstra, B. J. H., & Bogels, S. M. (2014). The meaning of mindfulness in 
children and adolescents: Further validation of the child and adolescent mindfulness 
measure (CAMM) in two independent sa mples from The Netherlands. Mindfulness, 5 (4), 
442 – 430. DOI 10.1007/s12671 -013-0196 -8 
Dozier, T. H. (2015). Treating the initial physical reflex of misophonia with the neural 
repatterning technique: A counterconditioning procedure. Psychological Thought 8, 189–
210. doi: 10.5964/psyct.v8i2.138  
Dover, N., & McGuire, J. F. (202 3). Family -Based Cognitive Behavioral Therapy for Youth with 
Misophonia: A Case Report. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice . 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cbpra.2021.05.005  
Eijsker, N., Schr öder, A., Smit, D. J., van Wingen, G., & Denys, D. (2021). Structural and 
functional brain abnormalities in misophonia.  European Neuropsychopharmacology,  52, 
62 – 71. doi: 10.1016/j.euroneuro.2021.05.013  
Frank, B., & McKay, D. (2019). The suitability of an inhibitory learning approach in exposure 
when habituation fails: A clinical application to misophonia. Cognitive and Behavioral 
Practice, 26, 130 – 142. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cbpra.2018.04.003  
Journal Pre-proof

PEDIATRIC MISOPHONIA   27 
Frank,  B., Roszyk, M., Hurley, L., Drejaj, L., & McKay, D. (2020). Inattention in misophonia: 
Difficulties achieving and maintaining alertness.  Journal of Clinical and Experimental 
Neuropsychology, 42 (1), 66 –75. https://doi.org/10.1080/13803395.2019.1666801  
Garn efski, N., Kraaij, V., & van Etten, M. (2005). Specificity of relations between adolescents’ 
cognitive emotion regulation strategies and internalizing and externalizing 
psychopathology. Journal of Adolescence, 28 (5), 619 – 631. doi: 
10.1016/j.adolescence.2 004.12.009  
Garnefski, N., Rieffe, C., Jellesma, F., Meerum Terwogt, M., & Kraaij, V. (2007). Cognitive 
emotion regulation strategies and emotional problems in early adolescents: The 
development of an instrument.  European Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 16,  1-9. 
Gratz, K. L., & Roemer, L. (2004). Multidimensional assessment of emotion regulation and 
dysregulation: Development, factor structure, and initial validation of the difficulties in 
emotion regulation scale.  Journal of Psychopathology and Behavioral As sessment, 26 (1), 
41–54. https://doi.org/10.1023/B:JOBA.0000007455.08539.94  
Greco, L. A., Baer, R. A., & Smith, G. T. (2011). Assessing mindfulness in children and 
adolescents: Development and validation of the child and adolescent mindfulness 
measure (CAMM). Psychological Assessment, 23 (3), 606 – 614. DOI: 10.1037/a0022819  
Guetta , R. E., Cassiello -Robbins, C., Trumbull, J., Anand, D., & Rosenthal, M. Z. (2022). 
Examining emotional functioning in misophonia: The role of affective instability and 
difficulties with emotion regulation. PLoS One  17(2): e0263230. 
https://doi.org/10.1371 /journal.pone.0263230  
Guzick, A. G., Cervin, M., Smith, E. E. A., Clinger, J., Draper, I., Goodman, W. K., Lijffijt, M., 
… & Storch, E. A. (2023). Clinical characteristics, impairment, and psychiatric morbidity 
Journal Pre-proof

PEDIATRIC MISOPHONIA   28 
in 102 youth with misophonia. Journal of Affe ctive Disorders, 1 , 395 – 402. doi: 
10.1016/j.jad.2022.12.083  
Hayes, A. F. (2022). Introduction to mediation, moderation, and conditional process analysis: A 
regression -based approach (Third Edition) . Guilford .  
Hayes, S. C., & Hofmann, S. G. (Eds.). (2020). Beyond the DSM: Toward a process -based 
alternative for diagnosis and mental health treatment . New Harbinger Publications.  
Hayes, S. C., Merwin, R. M., McHugh, L., Sandoz, E. K., A -Tjak, J. G. L., Ruiz, F. J., Barnes -
Holmes, D., … , & McCracken, L. M. (2021). Report of the ACBS Task Force on the 
strategies and tactics of contextual behavioral science research. Journal of Contextual 
Behavioral Science , 20, 172 –183. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcbs.2021.03.007   
Haye s, S. C., Strosahl, K. D., & Wilson, K. G. (2012). Acceptance and commitment therapy: The 
process and practice of mindful change (2nd ed.) . Guilford Press.  
Haynes, S. N., Smith, G., & Hunsley, J. R. (2019 ). Scientific foundations of clinical assessment 
(2nd ed.). Taylor and Francis/Routledge.  
Iani, L., Lauriola, M., Chiesa, A., & Cafaro, V. (2019). Associations between mindfulness and 
emotion regulation: The key role of describing and nonreactivity.  Mindfulness, 10 (2), 
366–375. https://doi.org/10.1007/s126 71-018-0981 -5 
Jager, I. J., de Koning, P., Bost, T., Denys, D., & Vulink, N. (2020). Misophonia: 
Phenomenology, comorbidity, and demographics in a large sample. PLoS ONE, 15 (4), 
e0231390. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0231390  
Journal Pre-proof

PEDIATRIC MISOPHONIA   29 
Jastreboff, P. J., & Ja streboff, M. M. (2014). Treatments for decreased sound tolerance 
(hyperacusis and misophonia). Seminars in Hearing, 35 (2), 105 – 120. DOI: 10.1055/s -
0034 -1372527  
Johnson, M. (2014). 50 cases of Misophonia using the MMP. Paper presented at the Misophonia 
Conference of the Tinnitus Practitioners Association  (Atlanta, GA) . 
Johnson, P. L., Webber, T. A., Wu, M. S., Lewin, A. B., Murphy, T. K., & Storch, E. A. (2013). 
When selective audiovisual stimuli become unbearable: A case series on pediatric 
misophonia. Neuropsychiatry, 3 (6), 569 – 575. DOI: 10.2217/NPY.13.70.  
Kabat -Zinn, J. (1990). Full catastrophe living: Using the wisdom of your body and mind to face 
stress, pain, and illness. Delacorte.  
Levin, M. E., Luoma, J. B., & Haeger, J. A. (2015). Decoupling as  a mechanism of change in 
mindfulness and acceptance: A literature review.  Behavior Modification, 39 (6), 870 –
911. https://doi.org/10.1177/0145445515603707  
Lewin, A. B., Dickinson, S., Kudryk, K., Karlovich, A. R., Harmon, S. L., Phillips, D. A., 
Tonarely, N. A., … Ehrenreich -May, J. (2022). Transdiagnostic cognitive behavioral 
therapy for misophonia in youth: Methods for a clinical trial and four pilot cases. Journal 
of Affective Disorders, 291, 300 – 408. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jad.2021.04.027  
Linehan, M. M. (1993). Cognitive -behavioral treatment of borderline personality disorder. New 
York, NY: Guilford Press.  
Masuda, A., & Wilson, K. G. (2009). Mindfulness: Being mindful in psychotherapy. In W. 
O’Donohue & S. Graybar (Eds.). Handbook of contemporary psychotherapy: Toward an 
improved understanding of effective psychotherapy  (pp. 249 -268). Sage Publications.  
Journal Pre-proof

PEDIATRIC MISOPHONIA   30 
Mayer, J. S., Brandt, G. A., Medda, J., Basten, U., Grimm, O., Reif, A., & Freitag, C. M. (2022). 
Depressive symptoms in youth with ADHD: The role of impairments in cognitive 
emotion regulation. European Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience, 272, 
793 – 806. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00406 -022-01382 -z 
McKay, D., Kim, S., Mancusi, L., Storch, E. A., & Spankovich, C. (2018). Profile analysis of 
psychological symptoms associated with misophonia: A community sample . Behavior 
Therapy, 49 (2), 286 – 294. doi: 10.1016/j.beth.2017.07.002 McRae, K., & Gross, J. J. 
(2020). Emotion regulation.  Emotion, 20 (1), 1 - 9. https://doi.org/10.1037/emo0000703  
Mihalca, A. M., & Tarnavska, Y. (2013). Cognitive emotion regulation strategies and social 
functioning in adolescents. Procedia – Social and Behavioral Sciences, 82  574 – 579. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2013.06.312  
Möllmann, A., Heinrichs, N., Illies , L., Potthast, N., & Kley, H. (2023). The central role of 
symptom severity and associated characteristics for functional impairment in 
misophonia.  Frontiers in Psychiatry,  14, 1112472. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2023.1112472  
Naylor, J., Caimino, C., Scutt, P., Ho are, D. J., & Baguley, D. M. (2021). The prevalence and 
severity of misophonia in a UK undergraduate medical student population and validation 
of the Amsterdam Misophonia Scale. Psychiatric Quarterly, 92, 609 – 619. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11126 -020-09825 -3 
Neacsiu, A. D., Szymkiewicz, V., Galla, J. T., Li, B., Kulkarni, Y., & Spector, C. W. (2022). The 
neurobiology of misophonia and implications for novel, neuroscience -driven 
interventions. Frontiers in Neuroscience , 16:893903. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2022.893903  
Journal Pre-proof

PEDIATRIC MISOPHONIA   31 
Remmert, N., Jebens, A., Gruzman, R., Gregory, J., & Vitoratou, S. (2022). A nomological 
network for misophonia in two German samples using the S -Five model for 
misophonia.  Frontiers in Psychology,  13, 902807.  doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.902807  
Rinaldi, L. J., Smees, R., Ward, J., & Simner, J. (2022). Poorer well -being in children with 
misophonia: Evidence from the Sussex Misophonia Scale for adolescents.  Frontiers in 
Psychology,  13, 808379. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.80 8379  
Schneider, R. L., & Arch, J. J. (2015). Case study: A novel application of mindfulness - and 
acceptance -based components to treat misophonia. General Hospital Psychiatry, 37 (4), 
370 – 371. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcbs.2017.04.003  
Schneider, R. L., & Arch, J. J. (2017). Letter to the editor: Potential treatment targets for 
misophonia . Journal of Contextual Behavioral Science, 6 (2), 221 – 225. doi: 
10.1016/j.genhosppsych.2015.03.020.  
Schröder, A., van Diepen, R., Mazaheri, A., Petropoulos -Petalas, D., Soto de Amesti, V., Vulink, 
N., & Denys, D. (2014). Diminished n1 auditory evoked potentials to oddball stimuli in 
misophonia pati ents. Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience, 8,  123. doi: 
10.3389/fnbeh.2014.00123  
Schröder, A., Vulink, N., & Denys, D. (2013). Misophonia: Diagnostic criteria for a new 
psychiatric disorder. PLoS One 8(1): e54706. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0054706  
Sheehan, D. V., Sheehan, K. H., Shytle, R. D., Janavs, J., Bannon, Y., Rogers, J. E., Milo, K. M., 
Stock, S. L., & Wilkinson, B. (2010). Reliability and validity of the Mini International 
Neuropsychiatric Interview for Children and Adolescents (MINI -KID). The Journal of 
Clinical Psychiatry , 71(3), 313 -326. https://doi.org/10.4088/JCP.09m05305whi  
Journal Pre-proof

PEDIATRIC MISOPHONIA   32 
Simner, J., Koursarou, S., Rinaldi, L. J., & Ward, J. (2021). Attention, flexibility, and imagery in 
misophonia: Does attention exacerbate everyday disliking of sound?.  Journal of Clinical 
and Experimental Neuropsychology,  43(10), 1006 – 1017.  
https://doi.org/10.1080/13803395.2022.2056581  
Silvers, J. A. (2022). Adolescence as a pivotal period for emoti on regulation development. 
Current Opinion in Psychology, 44, 258 – 263. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.copsyc.2021.09.023  
Stevenson, J. C., Millings, A., & Emerson, L. -M. (2019). Psychological well -being and coping: 
The predictive value of adult attachment, di spositional mindfulness, and emotion 
regulation.  Mindfulness, 10 (2), 256 –271. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12671 -018-0970 -8 
Storch, E. A., Guzick, A. G., D’Souza, J., Clinger, J., Cervin, M., Rork, C., Smith, E., …, & 
Goodman, W. K. (under review). Family acco mmodation in children and adolescents 
with misophonia.  
Swedo, S. E., Baguley, D. M., Denys, D., Dixon, L. J., Erfanian, M., Fioretti, A., Jastreboff, P. J., 
Kumar, S., … & Raver, S. M. (2022). Consensus definition of misophonia: A Delphi 
study. Frontiers i n Neuroscience, 16, 1 – 16. 841816. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2022.841816  
Taylor, S. (2017). Misophonia: A new mental disorder? Medical Hypotheses, 103, 109 – 117. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.mehy.2017.05.003  
Trosper, S. E., Buzzella, B. A., Bennett, S. M., & Ehrenreich, J. T. (2009). Emotion regulation in 
youth with emotional disorders: Implications for a unified treatment approach. Clinical 
Child and Family Psychol ogy Review, 12, 234 – 254. DOI 10.1007/s10567 -009-0043 -6 
Journal Pre-proof

PEDIATRIC MISOPHONIA   33 
Van Dam, N. T., van Vugt, M. K., Vago, D. R., Schmalzl, L., Saron, C. D., Olendzki, A., 
Meissner, T., … & Meyer, D. E. (2018). Mind the hype: A critical evaluation and 
prescriptive agenda for researc h on mindfulness and meditation. Perspectives on 
Psychological Science, 13 (1), 36 – 61. doi: 10.1177/1745691617709589  
van den Heuvel, M., Stikkelbroek, Y. A. J., Bodden, D. H. M., & van Baar, A. L. (2020). Coping 
with stressful life events: Cognitive emotion regulation profiles and depressive symptoms 
in adolescents. Development and Psychopathology, 32 (3), 985 – 995. doi:  
10.1017/S0954579419000920.  
Varni, J. W., Thissen, D., Stucky, B. D., Liu, Y., Gorder, H., Irwin, D. E., DeWitt, E. M., & … 
DeWalt, D. A. (2012). PROMIS parent proxy report scales: An item response theory 
analysis of the parent proxy report item banks. Quality of Life Research, 21 (7), 1223 – 
1240. doi: 10.1007/s11136 -011-0025 -2. 
Williams, Z. J., Cascio, C. J., & Woynaroski, T. G. (2022). Psychometric validation of a brief 
self-report measure of misophonia symptoms and impairment: The Duke -Vanderbilt 
misopho nia screening questionnaire.  Frontiers in Psychology , 13, 897901. doi: 
10.3389/fpsyg.2022.897901  
Zack, S., Saekow, J., Kelly, M., & Radke, A. (2014). Mindfulness based interventions for youth. 
Journal of Rational -Emotive Cognitive -Behavioral Therapy, 32, 44 – 56. DOI 
10.1007/s10942 -014-0179 -2 
Zarotti, N., Tuthill, A., & Fisher, P. (2022). Online emotion regulation for an adolescent with 
misophonia: A case study. Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy, doi: 10.1891/JCP -2021 -
0015.  
 
Journal Pre-proof

PEDIATRIC MISOPHONIA   34 
Figure 1 . Interaction plot of the association between misophonia symptomology and PROMIS -
peer relationships at different levels of mindfulness  
 
 
Note. The low and high mindfulness slopes represent levels of mindfulness at – 1 and +1 
standard deviations (SD) relative to the mean.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 05101520253035
Low Misophonia symptomology High Misophonia symptomologyPROMIS -Peer Relationships
Low Mindfulness High Mindfulness
Journal Pre-proof

PEDIATRIC MISOPHONIA   35 
Table 1. Sample characteristics and demographic variables  
Characteristic     Total ( n = 102)  
                                        
M M              SD 
Age 13.7 2.5 
  Percent  n 
Gender  •• ** 
 Male  28.4 29 
 Female  67.6 69 
 Other  3.9 4 
   
Race    
 Black or African American 
American  2.9 3 
 Asian  3.9 4 
 White  87.3 89 
 Other  2.0 2 
 Missing  3.9 4 
   
Primary  comorbid  psychiatric diagnosis    
 Major depressive disorder  29.4 30 
 Bipolar disorder  2.0 2 
 Social anxiety disorder  6.9 7 
 Specific phobia  4.9 5 
 Obsessive -compulsive disorder  4.9 5 
 Tourette’s or tic disorder  5.0 5 
 ADHD  9.8 10 
 Generalized anxiety disorder  16.7 17 
 No diagnosis  20.5 21 
 
 
Journal Pre-proof

PEDIATRIC MISOPHONIA   36 
Table 2. Correlations and descriptive statistics for study variables  
Variables  1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 
1 MAQ  -               
2 A-MISO -S -.55** -              
3 CERQ -k-self-blame  -.62** -.22* -             
4 CERQ -k-acceptance  -.32** -.21* -.32** -            
5 CERQ -k-rumination  -.47** .06 -.64** -.24* -           
6 CERQ -k-positive 
refocusing  -.08 -.15 -.13 .08 .01 -          
7 CERQ -k-planning  -.03 -.09 .19 .07 -.27**  -.34** -         
8 CERQ -k-positive 
reappraisal  -.02 .004 .03 .10 .16 - .33** -.48** -        
9 CERQ -k-perspective  .07 .05 .07 .21* .14 - .46** .22* -.50** -       
10 CERQ -k-
catastrophizing  -.47**    .20 -.54**  .32** .48** -.15    .04 -.07 -.08 -      
11 CERQ -k-other blame  .22* .11    .09 -.36**   .15 -.11 .10  .03 -.02 -.29** -     
12 CAMM  -.60** -.24* -.65** -.41** -.63** -.02 -.09 -.13 -.08 -.45** -.22* -    
13 PROMIS -P-P-PR -.32**   -.18  -.11 --.02  -.06   -.14  .17 - .23* -.22* .002 -.07 .06 -   
14 PROMIS -P-P-FR -.27**  -.26** -.26**    .07  -.20* - .28**  .06  .10 -.21*   -.17 -.01 .17 -.33** -  
15 PROMIS -P-P-LS -.40** -.18 -.35** -.14 -.28**  -.16  .05  .08   -.16 -.24* -.11 .16 -.50** -.49** - 
 Mean  36.63  15.11  7.12 8.63 7.90 6.86 8.35 6.74 8.86 6.24 4.86 23.21  25.84  31.57  27.11  
 SD 14.15  2.81 4.49 3.15 4.58 3.57 3.04 3.61 3.68 3.56 3.65 8.03 6.20 4.64 6.66 
Note : * p < .05, ** p < .01 ; MAQ = Misophonia Assessment Questionnaire; A -MISO -S = Amsterdam Misophonia Scale; CERQ -k = Cognitive Emotion 
Regulation Questionnaire , child version ; CAMM = Child and Adolescent Mindfulness Measure; PROMIS -P-P-PR = PROMIS Pediatric Parent Proxy Peer 
Relationships Measure; PROMIS -P-P-FR = PROMIS Pediatric Parent Proxy Family Relationships Measure; PROMIS -P-P-LS = PROMIS Pediatric Parent Proxy 
Life Satisfaction Measure.  
  
Journal Pre-proof

PEDIATRIC MISOPHONIA   37 
Table 3. Linear  regression models of candidate mechanisms predicting  misophonia symptomology  
 MAQ as criterion   A-MISO -S as criterion  
 R2 = 0.427; F(9, 96) = 8.956 , p = <0.001  R2 = 0.042; F(9, 96) = 1.463, p = 0.175 
Model variables  β t p  β t p 
Constant  - 2.614 0.011  - 6.000  < 0.001  
Age 0.012 0.134 0.893  -0.046 -0.402 0.689 
Gender  0.103 1.228 0.223  -0.095 -0.877 0.383 
Psychiatric diagnosis  -0.038 -0.442  0.660  -0.117 -1.068 0.289 
CAMM  -0.280 -2.368 0.020  -0.171 -1.119 0.266 
CERQ -k-self-blame  0.324 2.659 0.009  0.184 1.169 0.245 
CERQ -k-acceptance  0.034 0.370 0.712  0.100 0.851 0.397 
CERQ -k-rumination  -0.044 -0.386 0.700  -0.204 -1.389 0.168 
CERQ -k-catastrophizing  0.146 1.433 0.156  0.057 0.428 0.670 
CERQ -k-other blame  0.078 0.901 0.370  0.008 0.070 0.944 
Note : β, standardized regression coefficient; MAQ = Misophonia Assessment Questionnaire; A -MISO -S = Amsterdam Misophonia Scale; CERQ -
k = Cognitive Emotion Regulation Questionnaire , child version ; CAMM = Child and Adolescent Mindfulness Measure.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Journal Pre-proof

PEDIATRIC MISOPHONIA   38 
Table 4. Two-way interaction  regression model s predicting adaptive functioning variables  
Mindfulness as moderator   CERQ -K-self-blame as moderator  
PROMIS -P-P-PR     PROMIS -P-P-PR    
R2 = 0.2 63; F(6, 95) = 5. 678, p < 0.001   R2 = 0.134; F(6, 91) = 2.349, p = 0.037 
Model variables  β (SE) t p  Model variables  β (SE) t p 
Constant  51.485 (7.064) 7.290 < 0.001   Constant  27.079 (4.878) 5.551 < 0.001  
Age - 0.313 (0.237) - 1.317 
888 0.191  Age - 0.277 (0.252) - 1.099 
888 0.275 
Gender  2.072 (1.215) 1.705 0.092  Gender  1.160 (1.313) 0.883 0.379 
Psych. Diagnosis  4.074  (1.577) 2.584 0.011  Psych. Diagnosis  2.363 (1.633) 1.447 0.151 
MAQ  - 0.616 (0.139) - 4.427 0.001   MAQ  - 0.099 (0.082) - 1.220 0.226 
CAMM  - 0.854 (0.211) - 4.049 0.001   CERQ -k-self-blame  0.529 (0.438) 1.206 0.231 
MAQ x CAMM  0.016 (0.005)  3.287 0.001  MAQ x CERQ -K-self-blame  - 0.008 (0.010) - 0.781 0.437 
PROMIS -P-P-FR     PROMIS -P-P-FR    
R2 = 0.102; F(6, 95) = 1.804 , p = 0.106  R2 = 0.109; F(6, 91) = 1.862, p = 0.0 96 
Model variables  β (SE) t p  Model variables  β (SE) t p 
Constant  32.104 (5.843) 5.495 < 0.001   Constant  31.879 (3.797) 8.396 < 0.001  
Age - 0.116 (0.196)  -0.592 0.555  Age - 0.077 (0.196) - 0.391 0.697 
Gender   1.313 (1.00 5) 1.306 0.195  Gender  1.538 (1.022) 1.505 0.136 
Psych. Diagnosis  0.830  (1.304) 0.636  0.526  Psych. Diagnosis  0.391 (1.271) 0.308 0.759 
MAQ  - 0.054 (0.11 5) - 0.468 0.641  MAQ  - 0.026 (0.063) - 0.412 0.681 
CAMM  0.042 (0.175) 0.242 0.809  CERQ -k-self-blame  - 0.030 (0.341) - 0.089 0.929 
MAQ x CAMM  - 0.001 (0.004)  - 0.354 0.725  MAQ x CERQ -k-self-blame  - 0.004 (0.008) - 0.531 0.597 
PROMIS -P-P-LS     PROMIS -P-P-LS    
R2 = 0.2 11; F(6, 91) = 4. 062, p = 0.001   R2 = 0.193; F(6, 91) = 3.619, p = 0.0 03 
Model variables  β (SE) t p  Model variables  β (SE) t p 
Constant  51.175 (8.134) 6.291 < 0.001   Constant  38.377 (5.229) 7.339 < 0.001  
Age - 0.412 (0.268) - 1.535 0.128  Age - 0.183 (0.270) - 0.678 0.499 
Gender  0.448 (1.368) 0.328 0.744  Gender   0.378 (1.407) 0.269 0.789 
Psych. Diagnosis  1.020  (1.777) 0.574 0.567  Psych. Diagnosis  - 0.656 (1.750) 0.375 0.709 
MAQ  - 0.417 (0.161) - 2.586 0.011  MAQ  - 0.193 (0.087) - 2.207 0.030 
CAMM  - 0.457 (0.245) - 1.864 0.066  CERQ -k-self-blame  - 0.587 (0.470) - 1.249 
0.332  0.215 
MAQ x CAMM  0.007 (0.006) 1.220 0.226  MAQ x CERQ -k-self-blame  0.009 (0.011) 0.799 0.427 
Note : MAQ = Misophonia Assessment Questionnaire; CERQ -k = Cognitive Emotion Regulation Questionnaire , child version ; CAMM = Child and Adolescent 
Mindfulness Measure; PROMIS -P-P-PR = PROMIS Pediatric Parent Proxy  Peer Relationships Measure; PROMIS -P-P-FR = PROMIS Pediatric Parent Proxy 
Family Relationships Measure; PROMIS -P-P-LS = PROMIS Pediatric Parent Proxy Life Satisfaction Measure  
Journal Pre-proof

Highlights  
• Misophonia involves intense sensitivity and affective reactions to ordinary human -generated sounds  
• Mindfulness and cognitive emotion regulation are two p otential processes in pediatric misophonia  
• We examined  said processes in relation to adaptive functioning and symptom ology  
• In 102 youth with misophonia, symptomology was  associated with process variables  
• Mindfulness moderated link between symptomology  and functioning in peer relationships  
• Implications of findings for future intervention de velopment efforts are discussed  
Journal Pre-proof

Author disclosure  
Conflicts of Interest  
 
All authors declare no conflicts of interest.  
 
Ethical Statements  
 
The present study was approved by the Institutional Review Board at Baylor College of 
Medicine.   
 
Informed Consent  
 
Parents/caregivers/legal guardians of all minor child participants provided informed consent 
prior to participation. All children participants provided assent.  
 
Role of funding sources  
 
Research reported in this publication was supported by a grant from the Ream Foundation, as 
well as the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health & Human Development of 
the National Institutes of Health under Award Numbers 1R01HD080096 and P50HD103555 for 
use of the Clinical and Translational Core facilities. The content is solely th e responsibility of the 
authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health.  
  
Data Availability  
 
The datasets generated during and/or analyzed during the current study are available from the 
corresponding au thor on reasonable request.  
 
Journal Pre-proof