Processed by Minitex on: 3/29/2023 3:09:59 PM

This material comes to you from the University of Minnesota collection or another participating library of the Minitex Library Information Network.

Patrons: please contact your library for help accessing this document.

Library staff: for issues or assistance with this document, please email: mtx-edel@umn.edu and provide the following information:

-  Article ID : MIH 01MNPALSIHC0010077
-  Patron email address

____________________________________________________________________________________

Title: Journal of obsessive-compulsive and related disorders.

ArticleTitle: Things that make you go Hmm: Myths and misconceptions within cognitive-behavioral treatment of obsessive-compulsive disorder

ArticleAuthor: Spencer

Description: e-pub only

No: ahead-of-print

Date: 2023-03-01

Pages: 100805-

OCLC - 990385299; ISSN - 22113657; LCN - 2012263062;

Publisher: Amsterdam : Elsevier 2010s-

Source: LibKeyNomad

Copyright: CCG

____________________________________________________________________________________

## NOTICE CONCERNING COPYRIGHT RESTRICTIONS:

The copyright law of the United States [Title 17, United StatesCode] governs the making of photocopies or other reproductions of copyrighted materials.

Under certain conditions specified in the law, libraries and archives are authorized to furnish a photocopy or other reproduction. One of these specific conditions is that the photocopy is not to be "used for any purpose other than private study, scholarship, or research." If a user makes a request for, or later uses, a photocopy or reproduction for purposes in excess of "fair use," that user may be liable for copyright infringement.

This institution reserves the right to refuse to accept a copying order if, in its judgment, fulfillment of that order would involve violation of copyright law.

## Journal Pre-proof

Things that make you go Hmm: Myths and misconceptions within cognitive-behavioral treatment of obsessive-compulsive disorder

Samuel D. Spencer, Jordan T. Stiede, Andrew D. Wiese, Andrew G. Guzick, Matti Cervin, Dean McKay, Eric A. Storch

PII:

S2211-3649(23)00026-X

DOI:

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jocrd.2023.100805

Reference:

JOCRD 100805

To appear in:

Journal of Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders

Received Date:

2 February 2023

Revised Date:

21 March 2023

Accepted Date:

22 March 2023

Please cite this article as: Spencer S.D., Stiede J.T., Wiese A.D., Guzick A.G., Cervin M., McKay D. &amp; Storch E.A., Things that make you go Hmm: Myths and misconceptions within cognitive-behavioral treatment of obsessive-compulsive disorder, Journal of Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders (2023), doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jocrd.2023.100805.

This is a PDF file of an article that has undergone enhancements after acceptance, such as the addition of a cover page and metadata, and formatting for readability, but it is not yet the definitive version of record. This version will undergo additional copyediting, typesetting and review before it is published in its final form, but we are providing this version to give early visibility of the article. Please note that, during the production process, errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.

© 2023 Published by Elsevier Inc.

Things that make you go Hmm: Myths and misconceptions within cognitive-behavioral treatment of obsessive-compulsive disorder

Samuel D. Spencer, M.A. a *, Jordan T. Stiede, M.S. , Andrew D. Wiese, Ph.D. , Andrew G. a a Guzick, Ph.D. a , Matti Cervin, Ph.D. a b , Dean McKay, Ph.D. c , &amp; Eric A. Storch, Ph.D a a Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA;  b Department of Clinical Sciences Lund, Lund University, Lund Sweden;  c Department of Psychology, Fordham University, Bronx, NY, USA Author Note Correspondence regarding this manuscript should be sent to Eric Storch, Ph.D., and Samuel D. Spencer, M.A., Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Baylor College of Medicine, 1977 Butler Boulevard, Houston, TX, 77054, Email: eric.storch@bcm.edu or samuel.spencer@bcm.edu. We would like to acknowledge the contributions of Molly Martinez, and C&amp;C Music Factory for inspiring music. Journal Pre-proof

Preparation of this manuscript was supported by a grant from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health &amp; Human Development of the National Institutes of Health under Award Number P50HD103555 for use of the Clinical and Translational Core facilities. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health.

Myths and Misconceptions in CBT for OCD

Things that make you go Hmm: Myths and misconceptions within cognitive-behavioral treatment of obsessive-compulsive disorder

1

Myths and Misconceptions in CBT for OCD

## Abstract

The past four decades have yielded a robust body of evidence supporting the efficacy and effectiveness of cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) as a gold-standard treatment for obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) across the lifespan. Exposure and response prevention (E/RP) has been identified as a key component of this approach. Despite robust research support for CBT with E/RP, several myths and misconceptions continue to proliferate in both research and practice settings. Such myths and misconceptions are concerning, as they lack empirical basis, may hinder widespread dissemination and implementation of CBT for OCD, and run contrary to the practice of evidence-based psychological medicine. Focusing on the importance of promoting evidence-based practice and generative clinical science, the present review article synthesizes relevant research within the field of treatments for OCD to address the following myths / misconceptions: (a) uncertainty exists concerning the evidence base supporting CBT for OCD, (b) E/RP attrition and dropout rates are unacceptably high due to excessive risk and perceived patient intolerability, and (c) alternative treatments for OCD need to be expeditiously developed due to major limitations of E/RP. Recommendations for future research and clinical dissemination and implementation to further advance a generative clinical science of OCD treatment are discussed. Journal Pre-proof

Keywords. Cognitive-behavioral therapy; exposure and response prevention; obsessive-compulsive disorder; misconceptions; myths.

## Myths and Misconceptions in CBT for OCD

Things that make you go Hmm: Myths and misconceptions within cognitive-behavioral treatment of obsessive-compulsive disorder

Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is a debilitating psychiatric disorder that- left untreated- typically runs a chronic course and is associated with marked distress and impairment along with reduced quality of life (Hollander et al., 2010; Macy et al., 2013). Fortunately, the past four decades have yielded numerous theoretical and applied advances in the treatment of OCD (Franklin &amp; Foa, 2021). To that end, a substantial body of literaturealong with numerous practice guidelines (e.g., Freeman et al., 2018; National Institute for Health and Care Excellence [NICE], 2013; Tolin, Melnyk et al., 2015)- provide robust empirical support for cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) as an evidence-based treatment for OCD across the lifespan. Broadly speaking, CBT for OCD has historically encompassed a range of processes (Tolin, 2009), including cognitive (Rachman, 1998) and meta-cognitive (Melchior et al., 2023) techniques, behavioral learning principles (Abramowitz &amp; Arch, 2014), and acceptance and mindfulness approaches (Twohig et al., 2015, 2018). However, theoretical and empirical findings over the years have converged in asserting that there is little doubt exposure and response (ritual) prevention (E/RP) represents an essential component of CBT for OCD (Foa &amp; McLean, 2016; Hezel &amp; Simpson, 2019). Journal Pre-proof

Unfortunately, seeds of misplaced uncertainty concerning the status and practice of CBT generally, and E/RP specifically, as a front-line intervention for OCD continue to be sown in both research (e.g., Pagsberg et al., 2022; Reid et al., 2021; Uhre et al., 2020) and practice (e.g., Keleher et al., 2020; Shafran et al., 2013) domains. For example, a recent metaanalysis of the adult OCD treatment literature by Reid et al. concluded that their findings 'cast doubt on the superiority of CBT with ERP over other forms of psychological therapy for OCD' (p. 106). Another recent meta-analysis of the pediatric OCD literature by Uhre et al. similarly concluded 'high risk of bias in included trials and low certainty of the evidence

3

Myths and Misconceptions in CBT for OCD

prevent firm conclusions regarding the efficacy of CBT' (p. 75). In the realm of clinical application, it is also common for proponents of alternative treatments besides standalone E/RP (e.g., Keleher et al.; Shafran et al.) to describe exposure in a negative light with an overemphasis on the aversive and distressing nature of the approach.

While we cite numerous illustrative examples from the literature of commonly proliferated misconceptions concerning CBT and E/RP in the present review article, our intent is not a specific, in-depth critique of any one particular study (see, e.g., Storch et al., 2020). Nor do we intend to personally criticize the authors involved in the aforementioned works; in fact, we applaud these researchers for their efforts in developing and examining interventions to improve the lives of those suffering from OCD. Indeed, we believe critical skepticism and intellectual humility to be essential for generative, self-correcting clinical science (O'Donohue, 2021; Washburn et al., 2022), and do not purport to unilaterally reject critiques of CBT or E/RP. However, we are keenly aware of the dangers of unfounded skepticism in the (inadvertent or otherwise) promotion of myths and misconceptions, which can unfortunately become deeply entrenched if left unchecked (Lilienfeld &amp; Strother, 2020). This is especially concerning when considering intervention development for OCD, as such misguided skepticism can lead to reduced reliance on evidence-based practices, diminished trust of the public in psychological science/treatment, and ultimately result in further suffering via untreated OCD (McKay et al., 2021). The present review article synthesizes pertinent OCD treatment literature to address several common myths and misconceptions within that domain. Journal Pre-proof

## Importance of Identifying and Promoting Evidence-based Interventions for OCD

Originally explicated in Paul's (1969) ultimate clinical question, the process of elucidating the efficacy of specific treatments, delivered by particular clinicians, tailored to specific patients with specific problems, under a certain set of circumstances, and the

4

Myths and Misconceptions in CBT for OCD

processes (i.e., active ingredients) by which salutary effects come about, represents an important guiding framework supporting the evidence-based practice movement in clinical psychology (Lilienfeld, 2019; Tolin, McKay et al., 2015). While often understudied compared to research examining salubrious effects (e.g., symptom reduction), consideration of both warranted- and illusory- potentially iatrogenic effects of such treatments (Dimidjian &amp; Hollon, 2010) is critical for identifying and correcting myths and misconceptions surrounding these treatments. This is especially the case for CBT in general- and E/RP specifically- for OCD, an area that possesses a unique history of clinical lore and misconceptions despite its strong evidence base (McKay et al., 2021; Schneider et al., 2020).

Such a critical analysis is essential for the field of clinical psychology, as a lack of access to adequate treatment (along with proliferation of inert or potentially iatrogenic treatments) for debilitating psychiatric disorders such as OCD represents a pressing public health concern in the form of opportunity costs and untreated OCD (Dimidjian &amp; Hollon, 2010). This is particularly important within OCD, a disorder unique in the sense that certain interventions lacking empirical support- or misapplication of evidence-based ones- have been identified as presenting more explicit potential for iatrogenic harm compared to other psychiatric disorders (McKay et al., 2021). Journal Pre-proof

## Purpose of the Present Review Article

Comprehensive examination of the status of a given intervention (i.e., CBT) for a given disorder (i.e., OCD) is best implemented via rigorous: (a) empirical synthesis of past treatment outcome studies (e.g., meta-analyses, systematic reviews), (b) formulation of up-todate practice guidelines/recommendations, and (c) correction of myths and misconceptions that may serve as barriers to dissemination and implementation of best practices. Importantly, these three tenets are often intertwined and dynamically related (National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, 2005, 2013; Reid et al., 2021). Such comprehensive empirical reviews

Myths and Misconceptions in CBT for OCD

are beyond the scope of the present narrative review article (see, e.g., Ong et al., 2016 and Öst et al., 2022). Instead, we focus on identifying and correcting several commonly held myths and misconceptions surrounding CBT for OCD. We also offer specific recommendations and future directions for improving research and clinical efforts in light of these concerns.

This article is especially timely and important, as continued proliferation of the myths and misconceptions reviewed here is likely to produce an unintended effect of misrepresenting and undermining the large body of evidence over the past four decades supporting the efficacy of CBT for OCD (Storch et al., 2020). Such proliferation may also indirectly contribute to larger problems in our field resulting from questionable research practices (Flake &amp; Fried, 2020; Lilienfeld &amp; Strother, 2020; O'Donohue et al., 2022). Lastly, misrepresentation of the evidence base may also substantially hinder important dissemination and implementation of CBT for OCD- an intervention that has consistently demonstrated efficacy for improving quality of life in patients afflicted with this debilitating disorder. Myth / Misconception # 1: Uncertainty Exists Concerning the Evidence Base Supporting CBT for OCD Journal Pre-proof

Efficacy Research. Over the past 4 decades of conceptual and applied advances in CBT for OCD, methodological strategies and tactics have continued to evolve and become more sophisticated. This means that research design, measurement, analyses, and publication / funding contingencies of the past will necessarily look different when viewed with the advantage of hindsight. Furthermore, in light of the recent replication crisis facing psychological science writ large (Clark et al., 2022; Stanley et al., 2018), reflecting back and prognosticating forward has become increasingly important and essential for scientific growth (see, e.g., McKay et al., 2017). However, we find retrospective evaluation (including systematic reviews and meta-analyses) that critically invalidates a given body of research supporting gold-standard clinical interventions through mischaracterization or inappropriate

7

Myths and Misconceptions in CBT for OCD

application of analytic/conceptual approaches to be particularly concerning (see, e.g., Reid et al., 2021; Uhre et al., 2020). In the case of CBT for OCD in particular, such mischaracterizations of the evidence base may be especially problematic in terms of promoting unwarranted decreased confidence in a robust evidence-based intervention.

Additionally, such critiques are likely to obfuscate the standard of research rigor necessary for an intervention to qualify as evidence-based, potentially contributing to a problematic lack of consensus regarding practice guidelines and dissemination efforts (Storch et al., 2020; Tolin, Melnyk et al., 2015).

To further elucidate the certainty of the evidence base supporting E/RP for OCD, it is worth highlighting a few key studies across both the adult and pediatric literature. Dating back to the 1990s and 2000s, a long line of meta-analyses and systematic reviews of randomized controlled trials (RCTs) have consistently provided support for the efficacy of CBT for OCD in adults (e.g., Abramowitz, 1996; Olatunji, Davis et al., 2013; Öst et al., 2015; Rosa-Alcazar et al., 2008). Generally speaking, effect sizes in favor of CBT are largest in comparison to waitlist control, and slightly smaller, but still significant, when compared to other active interventions, including serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SRIs), such as clomipramine (Foa et al., 2005; Öst et al., 2015; Skapinakis et al., 2016). Journal Pre-proof

Parenthetically, it is worth noting that while delineations between behavioral (i.e., E/RP) and cognitive approaches (i.e., CT) for treating OCD are often obfuscated by the use of the umbrella term CBT in the literature (and also by the substantial overlap between the approaches in clinical practice), research findings have been mixed concerning the differential efficacy of these two approaches. Specifically, some studies have found them to be equivalent (e.g., Rosa-Alcazar et al., 2008), while others have demonstrated superiority of E/RP (e.g., Olatunji, Rosenfield et al., 2013; Ponniah et al., 2013). Yet, comparisons of active treatments routinely have far lower statistical power (de Vries et al., 2022), and in particular for

Myths and Misconceptions in CBT for OCD

evaluations of components of CBT, exposure is central not only in E/RP but also in CT via behavioral experiments (see Abramowitz, Taylor et al., 2005). Thus, there is considerable intervention overlap between E/RP and CT.

There also exists robust evidence supporting both the efficacy and effectiveness of CBT for children and adolescents with OCD. The first RCT in this domain consisted of 22 youth with OCD who were randomized to 12 weeks of either CBT or clomipramine (de Haan et al., 1998). The CBT protocol was predominantly based on E/RP and outcomes were measured using the child version of the Yale-Brown Obsessive Compulsive Scale (CYBOCS; Scahill et al., 1997). Importantly, the CY-BOCS (and Y-BOCS for adults), with higher scores indicating more severe OCD and scores ≥14 points indicating clinical severity (Cervin et al., 2022), has been used as the primary outcome measure in nearly all evaluations of treatments for pediatric (and adult) OCD, facilitating comparisons across trials.  In de Haan 1 et al., both CBT and clomipramine showed beneficial effects on symptom reduction, with the CBT group demonstrating superior outcomes. Journal Pre-proof

In 2004, the Pediatric OCD Treatment Study (POTS, 2004) randomized 112 youth with OCD to either CBT, sertraline (a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor), combination treatment (CBT + sertraline), or pill placebo. Results showed that all active treatments were more efficacious than pill placebo, and that combination treatment was significantly more efficacious than monotherapy. Notably, a site effect was found in which CBT monotherapy was not significantly different from combined treatment at the one site that performed robust E/RP (both superior to sertraline) but was similar in efficacy to sertraline at the site that performed E/RP of limited fidelity. This parallels Storch et al. (2013), which found that placebo + CBT demonstrated similar efficacy to sertraline + CBT in youth with OCD.

1 This is a unique strength of the OCD literature relative to other diagnoses which often have a plethora of outcome measures to characterize treatment response, which presents challenges in empirically aggregating and conceptually unifying treatment outcomes.

9

## Myths and Misconceptions in CBT for OCD

Several systematic reviews have synthesized the CBT literature for pediatric OCD, indicating superiority of CBT over control conditions, primarily waitlist and relaxation treatment (McGuire et al., 2015; Öst et al., 2016; Skapinakis et al., 2016; Skarphedinsson, Hanssen-Bauer et al., 2015; Uhre et al., 2020). The relative efficacy of CBT and medication is still uncertain, but most evidence indicates superiority of CBT (Öst et al., 2015), including findings from a recent network meta-analysis which synthesized all available RCTs evaluating CBT and/or medication (Cervin et al., under review). Of note, very similar effects emerge in other RCTs of pediatric OCD where the effect of CBT is not the main research question. For example, when D-cycloserine augmented CBT is examined (reductions of 9-11 points irrespective of being randomized to D-cycloserine or not; Melchior et al., 2023; Storch et al., 2016), when an initial course of CBT is used to parse out non-responders (a CY-BOCS reduction of 13 points in 269 youth with OCD; Torp et al., 2015), and when parent-enhanced CBT is compared to standard CBT (reductions of 10 points; Reynolds et al., 2013). Taken together, these findings provide further empirical support for CBT for OCD in youth across settings, especially in terms of improvement in CY-BOCS scores and concomitant beneficial effects in daily functioning and quality of life (Mataix-Cols et al., 2022). Journal Pre-proof

Considering both adult and pediatric literature concerning CBT for OCD, the fact that such rigorous RCT and meta-analytic methods continued to provide consistent support for CBT throughout the 1980s into the 2020s (e.g., Ferrando &amp; Selai, 2020; Hezel &amp; Simpson, 2019; McKay et al., 2015; Skapinakis et al., 2016; Skarphedinsson, Hanssen-Bauer et al., 2015) lends further credence to the status of CBT as an evidence-based treatment for individuals across the lifespan with OCD. Impressively, virtually every methodologically rigorous study that evaluated CBT with E/RP by different research groups throughout the world has consistently demonstrated superiority of CBT with E/RP over the respective comparison arm . Such longstanding consistency in findings also suggests that rote replication

Myths and Misconceptions in CBT for OCD

of RCTs examining CBT approaches for OCD- which are quite time-consuming and costlymay not be the best use of finite valuable scientific resources. Rather, future research efforts may be better served in extending the evidence base supporting CBT for OCD in areas that have received relatively less attention. Echoing Lilienfeld (2019) and Reid et al. (2021), some areas for consideration include investigating outcomes such as quality of life, disorder remission, and prosperity/thriving, rather than a sole focus on symptom reduction.

Effectiveness Research. A longstanding recognition of challenges in dissemination and implementation of evidence-based treatments in naturalistic clinical settings (Hunsley, 2007; Westen et al., 2004) has led to questions regarding how well CBT (i.e., E/RP) for OCD can be implemented outside specialist, RCT-based contexts. To that end, multiple meta-analyses comparing the effectiveness of CBT in nonrandomized effectiveness vs. RCT studies have been conducted to address whether the efficacy of CBT extends outside highly controlled randomized trial contexts with extensive patient monitoring, thorough assessment, and expert oversight (Hans &amp; Hiller, 2013; Öst et al., 2022; Stewart &amp; Chambless, 2009). Indeed, such studies generally demonstrate comparably strong effects in nonrandomized and randomized trials. For example, a recent meta-analysis (Öst et al., 2022) specifically examined studies with participants referred through usual clinical pathways and treatment carried out in routine clinical settings (e.g., community mental health), and with full-time practicing therapists. Öst et al. found nearly identical effect sizes in effectiveness and efficacy studies at post-treatment (g = 2.12 vs. 2.13) and similar at follow-up (g = 2.30 vs. 2.11); effectiveness studies actually had significantly higher remission rates at post-treatment (59% vs. 44%) and follow-up (57% vs. 44%). Journal Pre-proof

In another illuminating example, as part of the NORDLots study (Torp et al., 2015), CBT was provided to 269 youth with OCD across 44 therapists at 20 (non-specialist) community mental health clinics in Norway, Sweden, and Denmark, finding an average CY-

Myths and Misconceptions in CBT for OCD

BOCS reduction of 53%, with a treatment response rate of 73% and a remission rate of 49% after 14 sessions of CBT. Non-responders were subsequently randomized to either continued CBT or sertraline, with 75% of those who continued CBT and 69% of those who switched to sertraline experiencing treatment response (Skarphedinsson, Weidle et al., 2015). Treatment gains were maintained at 1- and 3-year follow-up among these youth treated in community, non-specialist settings (Højgaard et al., 2017; Melin et al., 2020). Notably, almost none of these clinicians were OCD specialists at study onset.

Another area of effectiveness research involves transporting E/RP to community mental health settings. For example, Mancebo et al. (2021) conducted an RCT of E/RP vs. treatmentas-usual in community mental health centers in a low socioeconomic status, clinically complex (e.g., frequent comorbid psychotic or bipolar disorders) sample of 47 adults, finding a significant advantage for E/RP at post-treatment that was no longer different from treatment-as-usual at 3- and 6-month follow-up. This underscores the need for more research on the efficacy of E/RP for patients with comorbid psychotic or bipolar disorders treated in public community mental health centers (though it is worth noting high attrition in follow-up assessments in this study). Journal Pre-proof

An additional future direction involves diversity within both OCD treatment providers and patients included in clinical trials. For example, Öst and colleagues' (2022) encouraging meta-analysis found that 71% of nonrandomized effectiveness studies included doctoral psychologist therapists. As such, more work is needed to understand how outcomes can be maintained across providers of different educational backgrounds, while still maintaining treatment fidelity. Additionally, reflecting pervasive trends of racial inequality in psychological science research writ large (Roberts et al., 2020), the CBT for OCD literature appears to suffer from a lack of racial diversity among participants typically included in trials. However, the small- but growing- line of work that has been done to examine differences in

Myths and Misconceptions in CBT for OCD

outcomes across racial and ethnic groups generally suggests White and non-White participants respond similarly to CBT (Fernández de la Cruz et al., 2015; Friedman et al., 2003). That said, more work is needed to further understand how CBT and E/RP can be best adapted to meet the needs of patients across myriad diversity variables (Williams et al., 2020).

One final area of effectiveness research involves a focus on telehealth-delivered interventions. In the wake of the digital revolution and COVID-19 pandemic, novel ways to deliver CBT for OCD continue to be developed and examined (Dèttore et al., 2015; Townsend et al., 2022). For example, technology-delivered CBT, broadly considered, has demonstrated efficacy for treating OCD in both youth and adults (Comer et al., 2017; Hollmann et al., 2022). Moreover, research since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic has demonstrated the feasibility and efficacy of E/RP delivered via synchronous telehealth modalities (Candelari et al., 2021). Myth / Misconception #2: E/RP Attrition and Drop-out Rates are Unacceptably High due to Excessive Risk and Perceived Patient Intolerability Journal Pre-proof

Attrition and drop-out research. An additional E/RP-related misconception is that attrition rates in clinical trials and dropout rates in clinical practice are unacceptably highespecially compared to pharmacological and cognitive therapy-based treatments (see, e.g., Pagsberg et al., 2022; Shafran et al., 2013). Furthermore, RCTs examining alternative treatments for OCD beyond standalone E/RP, such as ACT or metacognitive therapy, often rely on the argument that other approaches for OCD treatment are needed because of unacceptably high E/RP attrition rates (see, e.g., Glombiewski et al., 2021; Soondrum et al., 2022). Several historical citations are frequently proffered in support of such arguments. For instance, Schruers et al. (2005) stated that about 25% of patients refuse E/RP treatment and 20% drop out of treatment. Parenthetically, it is worth noting that this statistic was based on a previous non-empirical conceptual article (i.e., Greist, 1992), further exemplifying the

Myths and Misconceptions in CBT for OCD

perpetuation of misconceptions regarding E/RP attrition and drop-out rates. Additionally, Franklin and Foa (2007) suggested that approximately 25% of participants refuse E/RP treatment, while Abramowitz et al. (2009) similarly indicated a 25% dropout rate. That said, attrition rate estimates from these historical references do not represent the most up-to-date authoritative source due to a lack of inclusion of more recent research (e.g., studies conducted since 2010) and an overemphasis on anecdotal clinical experience over systematic and more thorough meta-analytic findings (Garb &amp; Boyle, 2014).

Fortunately, more recent rigorous meta-analyses have investigated attrition rates of E/RP compared to other treatments for OCD, with no marked concerns of excessive attrition for patients receiving E/RP, and in fact suggesting low attrition (Johnco et al., 2020; Ong et al., 2016). Ong et al. conducted a meta-analysis on E/RP attrition rates in RCTs examining treatment for adults with OCD and found 21 studies with at least one E/RP stand-alone treatment condition that reported dropout rates. Unfortunately, only two of the 21 studies reported refusal rates for each individual treatment condition, which limited the ability to determine overall refusal rates for E/RP. Results revealed a weighted mean E/RP dropout rate of 14.7%. When E/RP alone was compared to other active conditions (e.g., cognitive therapy alone, medication), there were no significant differences in dropout rates. Additionally, for the two studies that reported individual treatment condition refusal rate, Ong et al. found that the weighted mean refusal rate for E/RP was 4.0%. Given the limited number of studies that reported individual treatment refusal rates, they did not analyze comparisons across conditions. Journal Pre-proof

Although past studies often cite a 25% dropout rate in E/RP treatment as a rule of thumb heuristic (e.g., Abramowitz et al., 2009; Schruers et al., 2005), the 14.7% mean dropout rate from Ong et al. (2016) is more precise and generalizable because it systematically aggregated data across 21 RCTs. Ong et al. also noted that E/RP dropout rates

Myths and Misconceptions in CBT for OCD

are similar to or lower than the dropout rates for patients receiving treatment for other major psychological disorders. Since the meta-analysis by Ong et al., RCTs of treatment for adults with OCD have continued to show no differences in attrition rates between E/RP and other approaches, such as metacognitive therapy (Glombiewski et al., 2021), eye movement desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR; Marsden et al., 2017), and ACT+E/RP (Twohig et al., 2018).

To examine E/RP attrition rates in youth with OCD, Johnco et al. (2020) conducted a meta-analysis and found 21 RCTs that reported dropout rates in treatment of children with OCD, which included 11 trials with stand-alone E/RP conditions, 9 trials with medication only conditions, and 3 trials that compared E/RP plus medication conditions. Johnco et al. found attritions rates of 10.24% for E/RP, 17.29% for medication, 20.63% for active comparison conditions (e.g., relaxation training, meta-cognitive therapy), and 23.95% for placebo comparison conditions. Results showed that E/RP attrition rates were significantly lower than placebo comparison and active treatment conditions. Further, when comparing E/RP to medication, there were no significant differences in dropout during treatment. In addition, qualitative data on reasons for attrition were examined. For E/RP, logistical reasons, such as family health problems and travel burden, were the most common, followed by perceived lack of effectiveness and loss of contact. Importantly, intolerability of E/RP as a reason for attrition was not reported in any of the studies. Journal Pre-proof

In sum, although past studies (in addition to clinical lore) have suggested that E/RP attrition and drop-out rates are unacceptably high, recent meta-analytic findings do not reveal any notable concerns with excessive attrition or drop-out risk associated with E/RP (Johnco et al., 2020; Ong et al., 2016). E/RP attrition rates were similar to those for other approaches, such as standalone cognitive therapy or pharmacological treatment. Based on aggregated data across RCTs, attrition rates of 14.7% and 10.24% in adult and youth samples, respectively,

Myths and Misconceptions in CBT for OCD

suggest that attrition is likely not a significant concern for E/RP compared to other treatment modalities.

Negative clinician perceptions of E/RP. Despite the extensive body of research demonstrating the efficacy of E/RP for both youth (Öst et al., 2016; Skarphedinsson, Hanssen-Bauer et al., 2015) and adults (Skapinakis et al., 2016; Ferrando &amp; Selai, 2021) with OCD, many patients seeking care unfortunately do not end up receiving this evidence-based intervention (Schwartz et al., 2013). Much of the research investigating this discrepancy has surveyed practicing clinicians to gain greater understanding of reasons for underutilization of E/RP (Deacon et al., 2013; Keleher et al., 2020; Moritz et al., 2019; A. M. Reid et al., 2018). Across multiple studies, some of the most common reasons for clinician hesitancy in administering E/RP in earnest include: (a) negative beliefs about the safety of the approach, (b) perceived patient inability to tolerate exposures, and (c) misconceptions of E/RP as nonessential for efficacious treatment of OCD. Journal Pre-proof

Consistent with the NIH stage model of treatment development (Onken, 2019), the hindrance of widespread uptake of E/RP can be understood in terms of misconceptions arising during intervention development efforts (i.e., efficacy research) as well as perpetuation of misguided clinician attitudes and beliefs (i.e., dissemination efforts). Regarding the former, we argue that the differential emphasis placed by treatment developers on the role and nature of exposure in cognitive and behavioral conceptualizations of OCD (i.e., behavioral experiments in cognitive approaches and standalone E/RP in behavioral ones; Franklin &amp; Foa, 2021) has inadvertently contributed to misconceptions surrounding E/RP.

More specifically, the literature is replete with studies that mischaracterize E/RP as intolerable and potentially dangerous in an attempt to build a case for alternative treatments for OCD. For example, in their advocacy for a cognitive approach, Shafran and colleagues (2013) stated 'the prevailing treatment (exposure and response prevention) is so demanding

Myths and Misconceptions in CBT for OCD

that many people find it hard to tolerate' (p. 270). More recently, Pagsberg and colleagues (2022), in building support for family-based relaxation therapy (FPRT) for pediatric OCD, hypothesized that '…CBT will be associated with more adverse events than FPRT due to the E/RP component of CBT' (p. 3) based on the argument that 'drop-out rates from CBT of up to 26% implies some degree of unacceptability of the treatment' (p. 2). While it is commendable that Pagsberg et al. are taking the initiative to address the important yet underresearched topic of adverse events in psychotherapy research, the specious claims of the unacceptability of E/RP and the increased likelihood of adverse events insert needless doubt concerning an empirically supported treatment for OCD (Hezel &amp; Simpson, 2019). Openness to new ideas and innovation in treatment development is essential for a generative clinical science (Washburn et al., 2022). However, we believe that this forward progress can be achieved with equipoise in mind- that is, without resorting to basing such efforts on mischaracterization of established interventions and their evidence base. Journal Pre-proof

Pertaining to dissemination, negative clinician beliefs have been widely investigated across anxiety disorders in general (Deacon et al., 2013; Whiteside et al., 2016) and OCD specifically (Moritz et al., 2019) in terms of their relation to clinician hesitancy in utilizing exposure for conditions in which it is indicated. As described in more detail elsewhere (i.e., Veale et al., 2009; Lewis et al., 2020), perceived patient intolerability of, and excessive risk associated with, E/RP represent two of the most salient of these negative clinician beliefs.

Beliefs regarding a patient's inability to tolerate E/RP are often founded in clinicians' (well-intentioned but misguided) fear of the patient decompensating or losing control during exposure exercises (Deacon et al., 2013; Pittig et al., 2019). It is an unfortunately ironic paradox that such beliefs are likely to lead to negatively reinforced avoidance of conducting E/RP in earnest and may in fact also perpetuate the patient's OCD symptoms. Indeed, past

Myths and Misconceptions in CBT for OCD

research has found that increased negative beliefs about exposure are associated with decreased utilization of such approaches (Deacon et al.; A. M. Reid et al., 2017).

Another common misconception identified in the OCD treatment literature (i.e., Bruce et al., 2018; Veale et al., 2009) involves the perceived danger of E/RP exercises for specific sub-types of OCD related to harm or sexuality. In these cases, the perceived danger is that patients will inevitably act on their obsessional content during the process of exposure (e.g., engaging in pedophilic behavior at a playground or stabbing one's infant with a knife). However, such risk is only apparent (i.e., illusory), rather than warranted, as patients with OCD are genuinely distressed by such intrusive thoughts and go to great lengths to not act on them via engagement in rituals and avoidance (Lewis et al., 2020).

To directly address the question of possible adverse events associated with E/RP for OCD, Schneider and colleagues (2020) surveyed practicing clinicians regarding serious negative consequences experienced during E/RP. Results across approximately 300 clinicians revealed that serious negative consequences were rare (less than 0.01% per patient), and the few instances reported involved secondary consequences (e.g., interaction with security guard as therapist assisted opposite-gender patient in public restroom exposure) or misunderstandings of others (e.g., inaccurate patient or family perceptions) regarding the rationale for, and practice of, E/RP. Importantly, no adverse events regarding a patient acting on their intrusive thoughts were noted. These findings, along with related research indicating that clinician negative attitudes toward exposure can be improved based on the provision of accurate information and training about the procedure (e.g., Deacon et al., 2013; Farrell et al., 2016), suggest that increasing access to E/RP will undoubtedly be aided by clear communication of the rationale for, and safety of, E/RP to key stakeholders (e.g., patients, families, other mental health professionals). Journal Pre-proof

Myths and Misconceptions in CBT for OCD

## Myth / Misconception #3: Alternative Treatments for OCD Need to be Expeditiously Developed Due to Major Limitations of E/RP

Ample evidence exists indicating that E/RP is in fact an efficacious and acceptable treatment for both adults and children with OCD (Ferrando &amp; Selai, 2021; McGuire et al., 2015). While some of the emerging interventions for OCD beyond E/RP fall within the general umbrella of the CBT tradition of theoretical coherence and empiricism, and have demonstrated preliminary evidence of efficacy (e.g., ACT; Twohig et al., 2015, 2018), more research will be needed before these approaches can be resoundingly labeled as evidence based. It is also of interest to note that a recent narrative review of third-wave CBT approaches for OCD- most notably, ACT- found that exposure principles are likely responsible for much of the efficacy of such interventions (Trent et al., 2021). Therefore, caution should be taken (and qualifiers added) when interpreting the results of such studies evaluating emerging interventions and generating practice recommendations. Additionally, highlighting the common unifying thread of E/RP as an empirically supported component in the treatment of OCD across diverse intervention approaches that utilize it- rather than needlessly promoting incoherence through downplaying such core components- is also strongly encouraged. Journal Pre-proof

As described earlier, recent meta-analytic research (i.e., Reid et al., 2021) questions the effectiveness of CBT compared to other treatments, suggesting the relative effectiveness of CBT is contingent upon comparison treatment group, with larger observed effect sizes relative to non-active interventions (e.g., waitlist control, relaxation) compared to other active interventions. While to an extent this may be true (and indeed even expected; de Vries et al., 2022), we assert that Reid et al. drew inappropriate conclusions regarding: (a) equivalence between CBT and Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing (EMDR)- a comparison

Myths and Misconceptions in CBT for OCD

based on a single EMDR study (Marsden et al., 2018), and (b) their overall critique of existing treatment recommendations of CBT as a first-line treatment for OCD over other interventions.

Indeed, dismantling research does suggest certain elements of EMDR (i.e., exposure) may be effective in addressing certain psychopathologies and/or symptoms (LandinRamomero, 2018). Additionally, existing literature has documented exposure as the key element making CBT an effective intervention regardless of the theoretical model applied in conceptualizing OCD (Abramowitz, 2013; Craske et al., 2015; Foa &amp; Kozak, 1986). However, the broad scope of exposure and the specific overlap between the two interventions does not automatically necessitate a need to explore EMDR- or other experimental approaches for that matter- as a treatment option for OCD. This is especially the case, since CBT- including E/RP- has repeatedly been documented as an effective first-line psychotherapeutic (Ferrando &amp; Selai, 2021; McGuire et al., 2015), and, to date, no clearly articulated conceptual or mechanistic rationale for examining EMDR has been identified. Journal Pre-proof

Similar concerns regarding shared mechanisms can be raised with E/RP and other interventions, namely ACT (Hayes et al., 2012). An important element of ACT includes values-based committed action , or the active engagement in valued activities the individual previously avoided due to symptoms, while actively acknowledging the presence of obsessional thoughts and resisting compulsive behaviors (Twohig et al., 2010). This is conceptually similar to E/RP in the context of traditional CBT, where patients and providers systematically and progressively engage with feared stimuli that elicit intrusive concerns while actively resisting compulsive behaviors (Foa et al., 2012; McGuire et al., 2014). Further, comparison trials exploring traditional E/RP versus E/RP plus ACT demonstrate general equivalence between the interventions, suggesting the shared exposure element in both interventions (Twohig et al., 2018; although, see Ong et al., 2020 for an interesting

Myths and Misconceptions in CBT for OCD

discussion on differential moderators and processes of change in E/RP and ACT-informed E/RP).

Finally, iatrogenic effects of treatments must be considered in the context of OCD (McKay et al., 2021). Specific to E/RP, Schneider et al. (2020) documented near-zero chance of exposure in the context of E/RP resulting in patient harm, suggesting not only is the intervention effective, but also safe for both patients and providers. In contrast, use of cognitive skills in the context of traditional CT (e.g., Beck et al., 1979) has been identified as potentially iatrogenic, as cognitive disputation may function to attain reassurance that functions to provide short-lived relief followed by reemergence of obsessive thoughts (Neal et al., 2017). This in turn may prolong the time an individual experiences the effects of OCD symptoms. Further, as noted by McKay et al., the application of a psychodynamic framework to OCD may result in an inaccurate and harmful conceptualization of some obsessive thoughts, specifically those of a sexual nature, as unconscious impulses rather than ego dystonic thoughts. Journal Pre-proof

While robust evidence does suggest CBT as a first-line psychotherapeutic approach for OCD, it is possible, and indeed likely, that other treatment modalities will develop sufficient evidence in time to become viable options. Until then, appropriate caution and skepticism should be applied when considering other treatment modalities, and parsimonious treatment options should be prioritized over those with treatment elements lacking empirical support (e.g., eye movements in EMDR). Additionally, more rigorous clinical trial research is needed by diverse research groups before providers working with OCD recommend alternative psychotherapeutics over CBT. Until this evidence presents, CBT, with an emphasis on E/RP, will remain the gold standard psychotherapeutic for OCD. Recommendations for Addressing Pervasive Myths / Misconceptions

## Myths and Misconceptions in CBT for OCD

It is clear from the foregoing literature review that the past four decades have yielded an impressive body of evidence consistently supporting the efficacy and effectiveness of CBT as a gold-standard treatment for OCD across the lifespan. Furthermore, extensive research has identified E/RP as an essential component of CBT for OCD. Despite this overwhelming research support, several myths and misconceptions continue to proliferate in both research and practice settings and serve to distort available data and ultimately may lead to harm. Such misinformation is especially concerning, both in terms of obfuscating important dissemination and implementation of CBT and hindering a generative clinical science of CBT for OCD. Through a synthesis of the OCD treatment literature in the present review article, we have addressed what we believe to be several of the most pervasive and insidious of such myths / misconceptions.

In the spirit of equipoise from which we base our argument against the overly critical stance against E/RP in favor of novel interventions for OCD taken by some, we believe that a balance of healthy skepticism and open mindedness is warranted (Washburn et al., 2022). This is especially important when considering diverse- and likely well-intentionedviewpoints in regard to both research and practice of evidence-based treatments for OCD. To that end, we believe several of the critiques and areas of limitation concerning CBT for OCD described in this article (e.g., Reid et al., 2021; Uhre et al., 2020) possess a degree of truth. However, we believe that such critiques and concerns are most likely to lead to a generative clinical science of OCD if they are constructive, balanced, and put forth without misrepresenting the extant evidence base or unnecessarily disparaging a given intervention in service of promoting a different one. In that spirit, we present several specific recommendations directly linked to each of the specific myths / misconceptions, followed by a broader commentary on future directions in CBT for OCD clinical science. Journal Pre-proof

## Myths and Misconceptions in CBT for OCD

Recommendation #1: Future research on CBT for OCD would be well-served to build upon, rather than dismantle, the extant evidence base, in an effort to improve intervention reach and scope. Although there is undoubtedly a strong evidence base supporting CBT for OCD, generative clinical science is predicated on perpetually identifying and addressing gaps or blind spots in our accumulation of knowledge (Lilienfeld, 2019; Washburn et al., 2022). As such, research should continue to examine processes of change underlying both OCD psychopathology and CBT intervention principles that target those psychopathological processes (Hayes &amp; Hofmann, 2017).

Consistent with recommendations from Reid et al. (2021) and Freeman et al. (2018), researchers should also further examine investigator allegiance, effect moderators, boundary conditions, and clinician, patient, and setting factors that may influence (i.e., bolster or attenuate) the effects of CBT for OCD. Further research on moderators of OCD treatment outcome across various CBT-based modalities (i.e., CT, E/RP) may be especially fruitful. Aligned with extant findings (Ong et al., 2020; Steketee et al., 2019), some candidate moderator variables that warrant further investigation include both patient (e.g., baseline OCD severity, depressive symptoms, education level, beliefs about excessive responsibility/threat) and clinician (e.g., experience, degree, perceptions of E/RP) factors. Such findings could address questions related to which patients benefit most from E/RP and help guide clinical decision making to improve outcomes for patients (Steketee et al.). Finally, consistent with Reid et al., an increased emphasis on outcomes associated with overall health and well-being, such as quality of life and prosperity/thriving, instead of simply absence of OCD symptoms, is another important avenue for future research. Journal Pre-proof

Additionally, future research should continue to examine the effectiveness of E/RP across diverse settings and patient populations, especially in regard to how diversity variables may impact OCD symptomology and adaptations to treatment (Williams et al., 2020).

Myths and Misconceptions in CBT for OCD

Similarly, continuing to cultivate a workforce of mental health service providers representative of a range of diversity variables (e.g., gender identity, ethnicity, sexual orientation, training background) is imperative for improving dissemination efforts and reach of CBT. Further, although preliminary evidence is encouraging (Mancebo et al., 2021), additional research on the use of E/RP in community mental health centers with low-income patients with severe comorbid conditions is an important future direction. Finally, to improve access and efficiency of treatment, it is also recommended that researchers continue to examine factors that may attenuate or bolster the effects of telehealth E/RP, and study the efficacy of internet-based, self-help CBT treatment programs.

Recommendation #2: E/RP drop out, attrition, and clinician and patient perceptions continue to merit further research and dissemination efforts. Despite recent meta-analytic findings that do not suggest excessive concerns with E/RP attrition (Johnco et al., 2020; Ong et al., 2016), continuing to better understand reasons for any patient refusing or dropping out of E/RP treatment is imperative to improve the reach and scope of this approach. Indeed, a better understanding of factors (i.e., moderators) associated with poor treatment acceptability and treatment drop out may assist in increasing uptake of E/RP (Ong et al., 2020). Based on previous moderation studies (e.g., Ong et al.; Steketee et al., 2019), some examples of candidate moderators of drop-out risk may include baseline level of symptomology, clinician attitudes toward exposure, or therapy process variables (e.g., working alliance, patient expectations of treatment). Further, reporting specific reasons for treatment refusal and dropout in each treatment condition should be an emphasis of future clinical trials. Journal Pre-proof

Additionally, due to the vigorous and powerful nature of E/RP, it is understandable how such myths and misconceptions regarding the perceived dangerousness and intolerability of E/RP are perpetuated (Moritz et al., 2019). As such, it is imperative to continue to find ways to better disseminate and train clinicians in E/RP, especially providers across diverse

Myths and Misconceptions in CBT for OCD

disciplines and settings. These efforts are needed to increase the availability of providers who are adequately trained in E/RP, and to decrease negative clinician attitudes toward exposure (Whiteside et al., 2016). This is especially pertinent, as inadequately trained, or misinformed, providers may inadvertently perpetuate the message that E/RP is intolerable and dangerous to patients with OCD. Didactic trainings on the procedures of and rationale for E/RP have demonstrated promise for improving clinician negative beliefs toward exposures and reduce clinician hesitancy to provide E/RP (Deacon et al., 2013). Such education and training efforts concerning E/RP may be especially critical at early formative stages of clinical graduate training (Klepac et al., 2012).

Recommendation #3: Further intervention development efforts for OCD will benefit from an equipoise-focused balance of amiable skepticism of extant approaches and striving for innovation. Although some emerging interventions (e.g., third-wave CBTs, such as ACT) have demonstrated preliminary efficacy, more research is needed before these interventions can be definitively considered evidence-based. Additionally, an emphasis on the continued refinement of clear guidelines for the level of research rigor needed to support evidence-based practice guidelines for the treatment of OCD is warranted (Freeman et al., 2018; Tolin, Melnyk et al., 2015). Given the evolving state of the empirical evidence of interventions for OCD, evidence-based practice guidelines should be continually updated and revised to provide guidance to clinicians, patients, and key stakeholders (e.g., funding organizations and third-party payers). This is especially relevant for the APA Division 12 Empirically Supported Treatment (EST) list, which appears to have last been updated in 2015 (Tolin, Melnyk et al.). Updating practice guidelines will also serve to encourage clinicians to further develop the skills necessary to provide patients with recommended, evidence-based treatment. Journal Pre-proof

Future directions in CBT for OCD Clinical Science and Practice

## Myths and Misconceptions in CBT for OCD

Implementation science holds great promise in overcoming the myths / misconceptions about CBT for OCD described in this article. One thoroughgoing misconception that has persisted regarding E/RP is that clinicians are hesitant to conduct the procedure, often out of concerns that they may cause harm or be the object of litigation (Richard &amp; Gloster, 2006). Training can overcome these hesitancies (i.e., Deacon et al., 2013; Farrell, et al., 2016). However, this is based on the original theoretical model of exposure that emphasizes habituation. Thus, the in-session experience of E/RP demands elicitation of anxiety, and over time anxiety reduction, through a well-worn classical conditioning principle (Foa &amp; Kozak, 1986).

That said, the past ten years have ushered in a new model of exposure, one that deemphasizes habituation in favor of and in conjunction with the experience of the feared stimuli under a variety of circumstances. This revised model of exposure, the inhibitory learning model (ILM), focuses on new learning associated with the feared and avoided stimuli, rather than an exclusive focus on habituation (see Craske et al., 2014). Inspection of facets of this model suggest that, in actuality, clinicians who have long relied on traditional models of E/RP implicitly relied on some of the central tenets of ILM. More specifically, one method of conducting exposure using the ILM approach involves violating client expectancies. Thus, conditions where exposure provokes emotional reactions other than anxiety would constitute a change in the a priori prediction the client would make regarding their response. As an illustrative example, consider a patient with contamination fear involving medical waste. The prediction is that when faced with a setting where medical waste might be present (such as a disposal can outside a lab), anxiety around 70 (out of a maximum 100) would be elicited. When the therapist then accompanies the client to the doorway of a medical lab and stand within inches of a medical waste can (but without opening it nor encountering any actual waste), the patient continues to rate anxiety levels Journal Pre-proof

Myths and Misconceptions in CBT for OCD

around 60-70, but laughs at the situation. This would constitute a shift in expectancies, with no habituation to the stimuli necessary because instead laughter competes directly and successfully with anxiety.

In light of the comparably more flexible and adaptive nature of the ILM approach to exposure, it is likely that further dissemination of this strategy will make E/RP more appealing to clinicians and could go a long way to dispelling the various myths and misconceptions discussed at length in this article. This is especially the case, since an overemphasis on habituation during exposure may inadvertently lead to excessive pressure or frustration in both clinicians and patients in OCD presentations less amenable to habituation (e.g., disgust- or symmetry-based). After all, the surest way to eliminate mistaken assumptions among practitioners is the wider successful adoption of E/RP. Formally integrating the ILM into CBT protocols for OCD, a set of approaches that has been referred to as 'the clinician's model,' would be a particularly promising future direction in this area of research. Considering the numerous, creative, and flexible ways of crafting exposure in the ILM, a robust program of research could be pursued to identify treatment decision frameworks that could better guide clinicians in how to best conceptualize E/RP within a CBT for OCD paradigm. Journal Pre-proof

Other areas of future research include treatment dissemination globally. Indeed, members of this team have embarked on a large-scale collaboration Latin American Transancestry Initiative in OCD Genomics (LATINO) - that aims to recruit and collect saliva derived DNA from 5000 Latin American individuals with OCD (see latinostudy.org). Importantly, a major goal of this project is to also build infrastructure for treatment (i.e., CBT) and research among the 14 participating countries in order to reduce existing mental health disparities.

Myths and Misconceptions in CBT for OCD

Another key outstanding question is how to discontinue effective treatments versus remaining on them without clear empirical support for the optimal duration or method of discontinuation. The past several decades have been spent on learning what works and for whom. As this article indicates, we believe we have successfully achieved that goal, and highlight the need for rigorous (but not premature dissemination) research of potential emerging interventions. One pressing question that has received recent empirical support is can we discontinue SRIs after achieving remission (Foa et al., 2022) and if so, for whom is this an option and why might this work mechanistically? Our group has embarked on a replication of the adult trial in youth with OCD with recruitment underway. As this and the LATINO project indicate, instead of answering the same old questions, we suggest that attention should be directed to addressing new questions and gaps in access such as those indicated. Journal Pre-proof

Lastly, we believe that further research into the phenomenology of OCD itself is warranted, especially in light of the rampant misconceptions that exist concerning the very nature of this notably heterogenous condition (Abramowitz et al., 2005). While beyond the scope of the present article, layperson and non-specialist provider perceptions of OCD are another area that deserves attention. Such perceptions of OCD often involve narrow caricatures of the disorder centered on contamination or orderliness, and flippant phrases such as 'that's so OCD' are sometimes used in layperson vernacular to describe non-pathological idiosyncrasies or preferences. These inaccurate cultural messages surrounding OCD likely contribute to under- and over-pathologizing, under- or misdiagnosis, potentially iatrogenic treatment recommendations by non-specialist providers, and increased isolation/confusion in patients with OCD. As such, more research, outreach, and advocacy efforts are sorely needed to improve societal and clinical awareness to dispel confusion, reduce stigmatization and

Myths and Misconceptions in CBT for OCD mischaracterization, and improve access to gold-standard interventions for those suffering from OCD.

Myths and Misconceptions in CBT for OCD

## References

Abramowitz, J. S. (1996). Variants of exposure and response prevention in the treatment of obsessive-compulsive disorder: A meta-analysis. Behavior Therapy, 27 (4), 583600. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0005-7894(96)80045-1

Abramowitz, J. S. (2013). The practice of exposure therapy: Relevance of cognitivebehavioral theory and extinction theory. Behavior Therapy , 44 (4), 548-558.

Abramowitz, J. S., &amp; Arch, J. J. (2014). Strategies for improving long-term outcomes in cognitive behavioral therapy for obsessive-compulsive disorder: Insights from learning theory. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 21 (1),30 31. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cbpra.2013.06.004 Abramowitz, J., McKay, D., &amp; Taylor, S. (2005). Special series: Subtypes of obsessivecompulsive disorder. Behavior Therapy, 36 (4), 367-369. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0005-7894(05)80118-2 Abramowitz, J., Taylor, S., &amp; McKay, D. (2005). Potentials and Limitations of Cognitive Treatments for Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder. Cognitive Behaviour Therapy, 34 , 140-147. doi: 10.1080/16506070510041202. Journal Pre-proof

Abramowitz, J. S., Taylor, S., &amp; McKay, D. (2009). Obsessive-compulsive disorder. The Lancet, 374 , 491-499. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S014-6736(09)60240-3

Beck, A. T., Rush, A., Shaw, B., &amp; Emery, G. (1979). Cognitive Therapy of Depression. New York: The Guilford Press.

Bruce, S. L., Ching, T. H. W., &amp; Williams, M. T. (2018). Pedophilia-themed obsessivecompulsive disorder: Assessment, differential diagnosis, and treatment with exposure and response prevention. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 47 (2), 389402. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10508-017-1031-4

Myths and Misconceptions in CBT for OCD

Candelari, A. E., Wojcik, K. D., Wiese, A. D., Goodman, W. K., &amp; Storch, E. A. (2021). Expert opinion in obsessive-compulsive disorder: Treating patients with obsessive- compulsive disorder during the COVID-19 pandemic. Personalized Medicine in Psychiatry, 27-28 (2), 100079 . https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pmip.2021.100079.

Cervin M., McGuire, J. F., D'Souza, J. M., De Nadai, A., Asvall, K., Goodman, W. K., Andrén, P., Schneider, S. C., Geller, D. A., Mataix-Cols, D., &amp; Storch, E. A. (Under Review). Efficacy and acceptability of serotonin reuptake inhibitors and cognitivebehavioral therapy for pediatric obsessive-compulsive disorder: A network metaanalysis.

Comer, J. S., Furr, J. M., Kerns, C. E., Miguel, E., Coxe, S., Elkins, R. M., Carpenter, A. L., … &amp; Freeman, J. B. (2017). Internet-delivered, family-based treatment for early-onset OCD: A pilot randomized trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology  85 , (2), 178-186. https://doi.org/10.1037/ccp0000155

Cervin, M., OCD Severity Benchmark Consortium, &amp; Mataix-Cols, D. (2022). Empirical severity benchmarks for obsessive-compulsive disorder across the lifespan. World Psychiatry  21 , (2), 315-316. doi: 10.1002/wps.20984 Clark, C. J., Honeycutt, N., &amp; Jussim, L. (2022). Replicability and the psychology of science. In W. O'Donohue, A. Masuda, A., &amp; S. Lilienfeld (Eds.) Avoiding questionable research practices in applied psychology, p. 45 - 72. Springer. Journal Pre-proof

Craske, M. G., Treanor, M., Conway, C. C., Zbozinek, T., &amp; Vervliet, B. (2014). Maximizing exposure therapy: An inhibitory learning approach. Behaviour Research and Therapy , 58 , 10-23. doi: 10.1016/j.brat.2014.04.006

de Haan, E., Hoogduin, K. A. L., Buitelaar, J. K., &amp; Keijsers, G. P. J. (1998). Behavior therapy versus clomipramine for the treatment of obsessive-compulsive disorder.

Myths and Misconceptions in CBT for OCD

Journal of the American Academy of Child &amp; Adolescent Psychiatry  37 , 1029. https://doi.org/10.1097/00004583-199810000-00011

(10), 1022- de la Cruz, L. F., Jassi, A., Krebs, G., Clark, B., &amp; Mataix-Cols, D. (2015). Phenomenology and treatment outcomes in children and adolescents from ethnic minorities with obsessive-compulsive disorder. Journal of Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders, 4, 30-36. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jocrd.2014.11.003

de Vries, Y. A., Schoevers, R. A., Higgins, J. P. T., Munafò, M. R., &amp; Bastiaansen, J. A. (2022). Statistical power in clinical trials of interventions for mood, anxiety, and psychotic disorders. Psychological Medicine, 19, 1 - 8. doi: 10.1017/S0033291722001362 Deacon, B. J., Farrell, N. R., Kemp, J. J., Dixon, L. J., Sy, J. T., Zhang, A. R., &amp; McGrath, P. B. (2013). Assessing therapist reservations about exposure therapy for anxiety disorders: the Therapist Beliefs about Exposure Scale. Journal of anxiety disorders , 27 (8), 772-780. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.janxdis.2013.04.006 Journal Pre-proof

Dèttore, D., Pozza A., &amp; Andersson, G. (2015). Efficacy of technology-delivered cognitive behavioural therapy for OCD versus control conditions, and in comparison with therapist administered CBT: Meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Cognitive Behaviour Therapy,44 (3), 190-211. https://doi.org/10.1080/16506073.2015.1005660. Dimidjian, S., &amp; Hollon, S. D. (2010). How would we know if psychotherapy were harmful?

American Psychologist, 65 (1), 21 - 33. DOI: 10.1037/a0017299

Farrell, N. R., Kemp, J. J., Blakey, S. M., Meyer, J. M., &amp; Deacon, B. J. (2016). Targeting clinician concerns about exposure therapy: A pilot study comparing standard vs. Enhanced training. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 85, 53-59.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brat.2016.08.011

Myths and Misconceptions in CBT for OCD

Fernández de la Cruz, L., Jassi, A., Krebs, G., Clark, B., &amp; Mataix-Cols, D. (2015).

Phenomenology and treatment outcomes in children and adolescents from ethnic minorities with obsessive-compulsive disorder. Journal of Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders , 4 , 30-36. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jocrd.2014.11.003

Ferrando, C., &amp; Selai, C. (2021). A systematic review and meta-analysis on the effectiveness of exposure and response prevention therapy in the treatment of obsessive-compulsive disorder. Journal of Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders , 31 , 100684.

Huppert, J. D., … &amp; Tu, X. (2005). Randomized, placebo-controlled trial of exposure and response prevention, clomipramine, and their combination in the treatment of obsessive-compulsive disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 162 (1), 151 - 161. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.162.1.151.

Flake, J. K., &amp; Fried, E. I. (2020). Measurement Schmeasurement: Questionable measurement practices and how to avoid them. Advances in Methods and Practices in Psychological Science, 3 (4), 456 - 465. https://doi.org/10.1177/25152459209523 Foa, E. B., &amp; Kozak, M. J. (1986). Emotional processing of fear: exposure to corrective information. Psychological Bulletin , 99 (1), 20. Foa, E. B., McLean, C. P. (2016). The efficacy of exposure therapy for anxiety-related disorders and its underlying mechanisms: The case of OCD and PTSD. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology , 12 , 1-18. doi:10.1146/annurev-clinpsy-021815-093533. Foa, E. B., Liebowitz, M. R., Kozak, M. J., Davies, S., Campeas, R., Franklin, M. E., Journal Pre-proof

Foa, E. B., Simpson, H. B., Gallagher, T., Wheaton, M. G., Gershkovich, M., Schmidt, A. B., Huppert, J. D., … &amp; Rosenfield, D. (2022). Maintenance of wellness in patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder who discontinue medication after exposure/response prevention augmentation: A randomized clinical trial. JAMA Psychiatry, 79 (3), 193 200. doi: 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2021.3997.

Myths and Misconceptions in CBT for OCD

Foa, E. B., Yadin, E., &amp; Lichner, T. K. (2012). Exposure and response (ritual) prevention for obsessive-compulsive disorder. 2 nd Ed. Oxford University Press.

Frank, B., &amp; McKay, D. (2019). The Suitability of an Inhibitory Learning Approach in Exposure When Habituation Fails: A Clinical Application to Misophonia. Cognitive &amp; Behavioral Practice, 26 130-142. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CBPRA.2018.04.003

Franklin, M. E., &amp; Foa, E. B. (2007). Cognitive behavioral treatment of obsessive-compulsive disorder. In: P. E. Nathan, &amp; J. M. Gorman (Eds.), A guide to treatments that work (3rd ed., pp. 431-446). New York, NY US: Oxford University Press.

Friedman, S., Smith, L. C., Halpern, B., Levine, C., Paradis, C., Viswanathan, R., Trappler, B., &amp; Ackerman, R. (2003). Obsessive-compulsive disorder in a multi-ethnic urban outpatient clinic: Initial presentation and treatment outcome with exposure and ritual prevention. Behavior Therapy , 34 (3), 397-410. https://doi.org/10.1016/S00057894(03)80008-4

Franklin, M. E., &amp; Foa, E. B. (2021). Obsessive-compulsive disorder. In D. H. Barlow (Ed.) Clinical Handbook of Psychological Disorders, Sixth Edition, p. 133 - 178. Guilford Press. Freeman, J., Benito, K., Herren, J., Kemp, J., Sung, J., Georgiadis, C., Arora, A., Walther, M., &amp; Garcia, A. (2018). Evidence base update of psychosocial treatments for pediatric obsessive-compulsive disorder: Evaluating, improving, and transporting what works. Journal of Clinical Child and Adolescent Psychology, 47 (5), 669 - 698. doi:10.1080/15374416.2018.1496443. Journal Pre-proof

Garb, H. N., &amp; Boyle, P. A. (2014). Understanding why some clinicians use pseudoscientific methods: Findings from research on clinical judgment. In S. Lilienfeld, S. Lynn, &amp; J. Lohr (Eds). Science and pseudoscience in clinical psychology (pp. 19 - 41)  The . Guilford Press.

Myths and Misconceptions in CBT for OCD

Glombiewski, J. A., Hansmeier, J., Haberkamp, A., Rief, W., &amp; Exner, C. (2021).

Metacognitive therapy versus exposure and response prevention for obsessivecompulsive disorder - A pilot randomized trial. Journal of Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders, 30 , https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jocrd.2021.100650

Greist, J. H. (1992). An integrated approach to treatment of obsessive compulsive disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 53, 38-41.

Hans, E., &amp; Hiller, W. (2013). Effectiveness of and dropout from outpatient cognitive behavioral therapy for adult unipolar depression: A meta-analysis of nonrandomized effectiveness studies. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 81 , 75-88. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0031080 Hayes, S. C., &amp; Hofmann, S. G. (2017). The third wave of cognitive behavioral therapy and the rise of process-based care. World Psychiatry, 16 (3), 245-246. doi: 10.1002/wps.20442 Hayes, S. C., Strosahl, K. D., &amp; Wilson, K. G. (2012). Acceptance and commitment therapy: The process and practice of mindful change (2nd ed.) . Guilford Press. Journal Pre-proof

Hezel, D. M., &amp; Simpson, H. B. (2019). Exposure and response prevention for obsessivecompulsive disorder: A review and new directions. Indian Journal of Psychiatry, 61, S85 - S92. doi: 10.4103/psychiatry.IndianJPsychiatry_516_18.

Højgaard, D. R. M. A., Hybel, K. A., Ivarsson, T., Skarphedinsson, G., Becker Nissen, J., Weidle, B., Melin, K., Torp, N. C., Valderhaug, R., Dahl, K., Mortensen, E. L., Compton, S., Jensen, S., Lenhard, F., &amp; Thomsen, P. H. (2017). One-Year Outcome for Responders of Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy for Pediatric Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder. Journal of the American Academy of Child &amp; Adolescent Psychiatry , 56 (11), 940-947.e1. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaac.2017.09.002

Myths and Misconceptions in CBT for OCD

Hollander E., Stein D. J., Fineberg, N. A., Marteau, F., &amp; Lagault, M. (2010). Quality of life outcomes in patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder: Relationship to treatment response and symptom relapse. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 71(6):784792. doi:10.4088/JCP.09m05911blu.

Hollmann, K., Hohnecker, C., Haigis, A., Alt, A., Kühnhausen, J., Pascher, A., Wörz, U., App, R., Lautenbacher, H., &amp; Renner, T. (2022). Internet-based cognitive behavioral therapy in children and adolescents with obsessive-compulsive disorder: A randomized controlled trial. Frontiers in Psychiatry  13 , . https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyt.2022.989550

Keleher J., Jassi, A., &amp; Krebs, G. (2020). Clinician-reported barriers to using exposure with response prevention in the treatment of pediatric obsessive-compulsive disorder. Journal of Obsessive Compulsive and Related Disorders, 24 .

Hunsley, J. (2007). Addressing key challenges in evidence-based practice in psychology. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 38 (2), 113121. https://doi.org/10.1037/0735-7028.38.2.113 Johnco, C., McGuire, J. F., Roper, T., &amp; Storch, E. A. (2020). A meta-analysis of dropout rates from exposure with response prevention and pharmacological treatment for youth with obsessive compulsive disorder. Depression and Anxiety, 37 (5), 407 - 417. https://doi.org/10.1002/da.22978 Journal Pre-proof https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jocrd.2019.100498.

Klepac, R. K., Roman, G. F., Andrasik, F., Arnold, K. D., Belar, C. D., Berry, S. L., Christofff, K. A., … &amp; Dowd, E. T. (2012). Guidelines for cognitive behavioral training within doctoral psychology programs in the United States: Report of the Interorganizational Task Force on Cognitive and Behavioral Psychology Doctoral Education. Behavior Therapy, 43 (4) , 687 - 697. doi: 10.1016/j.beth.2012.05.002

Myths and Misconceptions in CBT for OCD

Landin-Romero, R., Moreno-Alcazar, A., Pagani, M., &amp; Amann, B. L. (2018). How does eye movement desensitization and reprocessing therapy work? A systematic review on suggested mechanisms of action. Frontiers in Psychology , 9 , 1395.

Lewis, A., Stokes, C., Heyman, I., Turner, C., &amp; Krebs, G. (2020). Conceptualizing and managing risk in pediatric OCD: Case examples. Bulletin of the Menninger Clinic, 84 (1), 3 - 20. doi: 10.1521/bumc_2019_83_06.

Lilienfeld S. O. (2019). What is "evidence" in psychotherapies? World psychiatry : official journal of the World Psychiatric Association (WPA) , 18 (3), 245-246.

https://doi.org/10.1002/wps.20654 Lilienfeld, S. O., Lynn, S. J., &amp; Lohr, J. M. (2014). Science and pseudoscience in clinical psychology. The Guilford Press. Lilienfeld, S. O., &amp; Strother, A. N. (2020). Psychological measurement and the replication crisis: Four sacred cows. Canadian Psychology, 61 (4), 281 - 288. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/cap0000236 Macy, A. S., Theo, J. N., Kaufmann, S., Ghazzaoui, R. B., Pawlowski, P. A., Fakhry, H. I., Cassmassi, B. J., &amp; IsHak, W. (2013). Quality of life in obsessive compulsive disorder. CNS Spectrum, 18 , 21-33. doi: 10.1017/S1092852912000697. Journal Pre-proof

Mancebo, M. C., Yip, A. G., Boisseau, C. L., Rasmussen, S. A., &amp; Zlotnick, C. (2021). Behavioral therapy teams for obsessive compulsive disorder: Lessons learned from a pilot randomized trial in a community mental health center. Behavior Therapy, 52 (5), 1296 - 1309. doi:10.1016/j.beth.2021.02.009.

Marsden, K., Lovell, K., Blore, D., Ali, S., &amp; Delgadillo, J. (2017). A randomized controlled trial comparing EMDR and CBT for obsessive-compulsive disorder. Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, 25 , 10-18. https://doi.org/10.1002/cpp.2120

Myths and Misconceptions in CBT for OCD

Mataix-Cols, D., Andersson, E., Aspvall, K., Boberg, J., Crowley, J. J., De Schipper, E., de la Cruz, L. F., Flygare, O., Ivanova, E., &amp; Lenhard, F. (2022). Operational Definitions of Treatment Response and Remission in Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder Capture Meaningful Improvements in Everyday Life. Psychotherapy and psychosomatics , 1-7.

doi: 10.1159/000527115.

McGuire, J. F., Lewin, A. B., &amp; Storch, E. A. (2014). Enhancing exposure therapy for anxiety disorders, obsessive-compulsive disorder and post-traumatic stress disorder. Expert Review of Neurotherapeutics , 14 (8), 893-910.

McKay, D., Abramowitz, J. S., &amp; Storch, E. A. (2017). Obsessive-compulsive and related disorders: Where have we been? In J. S. Abramowitz, D. McKay, &amp; E. A. Storch (Eds.) The Wiley handbook of obsessive compulsive disorders. Wiley.

McGuire, J. F., Piacentini, J., Lewin, A. B., Brennan, E. A., Murphy, T. K., &amp; Storch, E. A. (2015). A meta-analysis of cognitive behavior therapy and medication for child obsessive-compulsive disorder: Moderators of treatment efficacy, response, and remission. Depression and Anxiety , 32 (8), 580-593. https://doi.org/10.1002/da.22389 McKay, D., Abramowitz, J. S., Calamari, J. E., Kyrios, M., Radomsky, A., Sookman, D., Taylor, G., &amp; Wilhelm, S. (2004). A critical evaluation of obsessive-compulsive disorder subtypes: Symptoms versus mechanisms. Clinical Psychology Review, 24, 283 - 313. doi:10.1016/j.cpr.2004.04.003 Journal Pre-proof https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118890233.ch0

McKay, D., Abramowitz, J. S., &amp; Storch, E. A. (2021). Mechanisms of harmful treatments for obsessive-compulsive disorder. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 28 (1), 52

- - 59. https://doi.org/10.1111/cpsp.12337

McKay, D., Sookman, D., Neziroglu, F., Wilhelm, S., Stein, D. J., Kyrios, M., Matthews, K.,

&amp; Veale, D. (2015). Efficacy of cognitive-behavioral therapy for obsessive-

Myths and Misconceptions in CBT for OCD compulsive disorder. Psychiatry Research, 225, 236 - 246. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.psychres.2014.11.058

Melchior, K., van der Heiden, C., Deen, M., Mayer, B., &amp; Franken, I. H. (2023). The effectiveness of metacognitive therapy in comparison to exposure and response prevention for obsessive-compulsive disorder: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders , 100780.

Melin, K., Skarphedinsson, G., Thomsen, P. H., Weidle, B., Torp, N. C., Valderhaug, R., Højgaard, D. R. M. A., Hybel, K. A., Nissen, J. B., Jensen, S., Dahl, K., Skärsäter, I., Haugland, B. S., &amp; Ivarsson, T. (2020). Treatment Gains Are Sustainable in Pediatric Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder: Three-Year Follow-Up From the NordLOTS. Journal of the American Academy of Child &amp; Adolescent Psychiatry , 59 (2), 244-253. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaac.2019.01.010 Moritz, S., Kulz, A., Voderholzer, U., Hillebvrand, T., McKay, D., &amp; Jelinek, L. (2019). 'Phobie a deux' and other reasons why clinicians do not apply exposure with response prevention in patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder. Cognitive Behaviour Therapy, 48 (2), 162 - 176.  https://doi.org/10.1080/16506073.2018.1494750. Journal Pre-proof

National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. (2005). Obsessive-compulsive disorder and body dysmorphic disorder: Treatment . Retrieved from:

https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg31

National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. (2013). Obsessive-compulsive disorder: Evidence update . London: The British Psychological Society and The Royal College of Psychiatrists. Retrieved from:

https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg31/evidence/full-guideline-194883373

Neal, R. L., Alcolado, G. M., &amp; Radomsky, A. S. (2017). Responsibility, checking, and reassurance-seeking in OCD. In J. S. Abramowitz, D. McKay, &amp; E. A. Storch (Eds.),

Myths and Misconceptions in CBT for OCD

The Wiley handbook of obsessive-compulsive disorders (pp. 361-376). Wiley Blackwell.

O'Donohue, W. (2021). Are psychologists appraising research properly? Some Popperian notes regarding replication failures in psychology. Journal of Theoretical and Avoiding questionable research

Philosophical Psychology, 41 (4), 233-247. https://doi.org/10.1037/teo0000179 O'Donohue, W., Masuda, A., &amp; Lilienfeld, S. (Eds.) (2022). practices in applied psychology . Springer.

Olatunji, B. O., Davis, M. L., Powers, M. B., &amp; Smits, J. A. (2013). Cognitive-behavioral therapy for obsessive-compulsive disorder: A meta-analysis of treatment outcome and moderators. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 47 (1), 33 - 41. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2012.08.020 Olatunji, B. O., Rosenfield, D., Tart, C. D., Cottraux, J., Powers, M. B., &amp; Smits, J. A. J. (2013). Behavioral versus cognitive treatment of obsessive-compulsive disorder: An examination of outcome and mediators of change. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 81 (3), 415-428. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0031865 Journal Pre-proof

Onken, L. S. (2019). History and evolution of the NIH stage model: Overcoming hurdles to create behavioral interventions to improve the public health, 28 - 43. In S. Dimidjian (Ed.) Evidence-based practice in action: Bridging clinical science and intervention . Guilford.

Ong, C. W., Blakey, S. M., Smith, B. M., Morrison, K. L., Bluett, E. J., Abramowitz, J. S., &amp; Twohig, M. P. (2020). Moderators and processes of change in traditional exposure and response prevention (ERP) versus acceptance and commitment therapy-informed ERP for obsessive-compulsive disorder. Journal of Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders, 24, 100499. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jocrd.2019.100499

Myths and Misconceptions in CBT for OCD

Ong, C. W., Clyde, J. W., Bluett, E. J., Levin, M. E., &amp; Twohig, M. P. (2016). Dropout rates in exposure with response prevention for obsessive-compulsive disorder: What do the data really say? Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 40 , 8-17.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.janxdis.2016.03.006

Öst, L-G., Enebrink, P., Finnes, A., Ghaderi, A., Havnen, A., Kvale, G., Salomonsson, S., &amp; Wergeland, G. J. (2022). Cognitive behavior therapy for obsessive-compulsive disorder in routine clinical care: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Behaviour Research and Therapy. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brat.2022.104170

Pagsberg, A. K., Uhre, C., Uhre, V., Pretzmann, L., Christensen, S. H., Thoustrup, C., Clemmesen, I., …, &amp; Plessen, K. J. (2022). Family-based cognitive behavioural therapy versus family-based relaxation therapy for obsessive-compulsive disorder in children and adolescents: Protocol for a randomized clinical trial (the TECTO trial). BMC Psychiatry, 22 (204), 1 - 15. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12888-021-03669-2 Paul, G. L. (1969). Behavior modification research: Design and tactics. In C. M. Franks (Ed.), Behavior therapy: Appraisal and status (pp. 29-62). New York: McGraw-Hill. Piacentini, J., Bergman, R. L., Chang, S., Langley, A., Peris, T., Wood, J. J., &amp; McCracken, J. (2011). Controlled comparison of family cognitive behavioral therapy and

Öst, L-G., Havnen, A., Hansen, B., &amp; Kvale, G. (2015). Cognitive behavioral treatments of obsessive-compulsive disorder. A systematic review and meta-analysis of studies published 1993-2014. Clinical Psychology Review, 40, 156 - 169. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cpr.2015.06.003 Öst, L.-G., Riise, E. N., Wergeland, G. J., Hansen, B., &amp; Kvale, G. (2016). Cognitive behavioral and pharmacological treatments of OCD in children: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 43 , 58-69. doi:10.1016/j.janxdis.2016.08.003 Journal Pre-proof

## Myths and Misconceptions in CBT for OCD

psychoeducation/relaxation training for child obsessive-compulsive disorder. Journal of the American Academy of Child &amp; Adolescent Psychiatry  50 , (11), 1149-1161. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaac.2011.08.003

Pittig, A., Kotter, R., &amp; Hoyer, J. (2019). The struggle of behavioral therapists with exposure: Self-reported practicability, negative beliefs, and therapist distress about exposurebased interventions. Behavior Therapy, 50 (2), 353 - 366. doi:

10.1016/j.beth.2018.07.003

Ponniah, K., Magiati, I., &amp; Hollon, S. D. (2013). An update on the efficacy of psychological therapies in treatment of obsessive-compulsive disorder in adults. Journal of Obsessive Compulsive and Related Disorders, 2 (2), 207 - 218. doi:10.1016/j.jocrd.2013.02.005. POTS (2004). Cognitive-behavior therapy, sertraline, and their combination for children and adolescents with obsessive-compulsive disorder: the Pediatric OCD Treatment Study (POTS) randomized controlled trial. Journal of the American Medical Association , 292 (16), 1969-1976. https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.292.16.1969 Rachman, S. (1998). A cognitive theory of obsessions: Elaborations. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 36 (4), 385 - 401. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0005-7967(97)10041-9. Journal Pre-proof

Reid, A. M., Bolshakova, M. I., Guzick, A. G., Fernandez, A. G., Striley, C. W., Geffken, G. R., &amp; McNamara, J. P. (2017). Common barriers to the dissemination of exposure therapy for youth with anxiety disorders. Journal of Community Mental Health, 53 (4), 432- 437. doi:10.1007/s10597-017-0108-9

Reid, A. M., Guzick, A. G., Fernandez, A. G., Deacon, B., McNamara, J. P., Geffken, G. R., McCarty, R., &amp; Striley, C. W. (2018). Exposure therapy for youth with anxiety: Utilization rates and predictors of implementation in a sample of practicing clinicians

Myths and Misconceptions in CBT for OCD from across the United States. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 58, 8 - 17. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.janxdis.2018.06.002

Reid, J. E., Laws, K. R., Drummond, L., Vismara, M., Grancini, B., Mpavaenda, D., &amp; Fineberg, N. A. (2021). Cognitive behavioural therapy with exposure and response prevention in the treatment of obsessive-compulsive disorder: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Comprehensive Psychiatry, 106, 1 13. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.comppsych.2021.152223

Roberts, S. O., Bareket-Shavit, C., Dollins, F. A., Goldie, P. D., &amp; Mortenson, E. (2020). Racial inequality in psychological research: Trends of the past and recommendations for the future. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 15 (6), 1295 - 1309. https://doi.org/10.1177/1745691620927709

Reynolds, S. A., Clark, S., Smith, H., Langdon, P. E., Payne, R., Bowers, G., Norton, E., &amp; McIlwham, H. (2013). Randomized controlled trial of parent-enhanced CBT compared with individual CBT for obsessive-compulsive disorder in young people. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology  81 , (6), 1021-1026. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0034429 Richard, D. C. S., &amp; Gloster, A. T. (2006). Exposure therapy has a public relations problem: A dearth of litigation amid a wealth of concern. In D.C.S. Richard &amp; D.L. Lauterbach (Eds.), Handbook of Exposure Therapies (pp. 409-425) . Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Academic Press. Journal Pre-proof

Rosa-Alcazar, A. I., Sanchez-Meca, J., Gomez-Conesa, A., &amp; Marin-Martinez, F. (2008). Psychological treatment of obsessive-compulsive disorder: A meta-analysis. Clinical Psychology Review, 28 (8), 1310 - 1325. doi: 10.1016/j.cpr.2008.07.001.

Scahill, L., Riddle, M. A., McSwiggin-Hardin, M., Ort, S. I., King, R. A., Goodman, W. K., Cicchetti, D., &amp; Leckman, J. F. (1997). Children's Yale-Brown Obsessive Compulsive

## Myths and Misconceptions in CBT for OCD

Scale: reliability and validity. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry  36 , (6), 844-852. https://doi.org/10.1097/00004583-19970600000023

Schneider, S. C., Knott, L., Cepeda, S. L., Hana, L. M., McIngvale, E., Goodman, W. K., &amp; Storch, E. A. (2020). Serious negative consequences associated with exposure and and experiences. Depression and anxiety , 37 (5), 418-428.

Schruers, K., Koning, K. K., Luermans, J. J., Haack, M. J., &amp; Griez, E. E. (2005). Obsessivecompulsive disorder: A critical review of therapeutic perspectives. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 111, 261-271. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1600- 0447.2004.00502.x Schwartz, C., Schlegl, S., Kuelz, A. K., &amp; Voderholzer, U. (2013). Treatment-seeking in OCD community cases and psychological treatment actually provided to treatmentseeking patients: A systematic review. Journal of Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders, 2 (4), 448-456. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jocrd.2013.10.006 Journal Pre-proof response prevention for obsessive-compulsive disorder: A survey of therapist attitudes https://doi.org/10.1002/da.23000

Shafran, R., Radomsky, A. S., Coughtrey, A. E., &amp; Rachman, S. (2013). Advances in the cognitive behavioural treatment of obsessive compulsive disorder. Cognitive Behaviour Therapy, 42 (4), 265 - 274. DOI: 10.1080/16506073.2013.773061

Skapinakis, P., Caldwell, D. M., Hollingworth, W., Bryden, P., Fineberg, N. A., Salkovskis, P., Welton, N. J., …, &amp; Lewis, G. (2016). Pharmacological and psychotherapeutic interventions for management of obsessive-compulsive disorder in adults: A systematic review and network meta-analysis. Lancet Psychiatry, 3 (8), 730 - 739. doi: 10.1016/S2215-0366(16)30069-4

Myths and Misconceptions in CBT for OCD

Skarphedinsson, G., Hanssen-Bauer, K., Kornør, H., Heiervang, E. R., Landrø, N. I.,

Axelsdottir, B., ... &amp; Ivarsson, T. (2015). Standard individual cognitive behaviour therapy for paediatric obsessive-compulsive disorder: a systematic review of effect estimates across comparisons. Nordic journal of psychiatry , 69 (2), 81-92. doi: 10.3109/08039488.2014.941395.

Skarphedinsson, G., Weidle, B., Thomsen, P. H., Dahl, K., Torp, N. C., Nissen, J. B., Melin, K. H., Hybel, K., Valderhaug, R., Wentzel-Larsen, T., Compton, S. N., &amp; Ivarsson, T. (2015). Continued cognitive-behavior therapy versus sertraline for children and adolescents with obsessive-compulsive disorder that were non-responders to cognitive-behavior therapy: A randomized controlled trial. European Child &amp; Adolescent Psychiatry , 24 (5), 591-602. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00787-014-0613-0 Soondrum, T., Wang, X., Gao, F., Liu, Q., Fan, J., &amp; Zhu, X. (2022). The applicability of acceptance and commitment therapy for obsessive-compulsive disorder: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Brain Sciences, 12 , 656. https://doi.org/10.3390/brainsci12050656. Journal Pre-proof

Stanley, T. D., Carter, E. C., Doucouliagos, H. (2018). What meta-analyses reveal about the replicability of psychological research. Psychological Bulletin, 144 (12), 1325 - 1346. doi: 10.1037/bul0000169.

Steketee, G., Siev, J., Yovel, I., Lit, K., &amp; Wilhelm, S. (2019). Predictors and Moderators of Cognitive and Behavioral Therapy Outcomes for OCD: A Patient-Level MegaAnalysis of Eight Sites. Behavior therapy, 50 (1), 165 -

176. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.beth.2018.04.004

Myths and Misconceptions in CBT for OCD

Stewart, R. E., &amp; Chambless, D. L. (2009). Cognitive-behavioral therapy for adult anxiety disorders in clinical practice: A meta-analysis of effectiveness studies. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology , 77

Storch, E. A., Peris, T. S., De Nadai, A., Piacentini, J., Bloch, M., Cervin, M., McGuire, J., … &amp; Goodman, W. K. (2020). Little double that CBT works for pediatric OCD. Journal of the American Academy of Child &amp; Adolescent Psychiatry, 59 (7), 785 - 786. doi: 10.1016/j.jaac.2020.01.026. Storch, E. A., Wilhelm, S., Sprich, S., Henin, A., Micco, J., Small, B. J., McGuire, J., Mutch, J., Lewin, A. B., Murphy, T. K., &amp; Geller, D. A. (2016). Efficacy of augmentation of cognitive behavior therapy with weight-adjusted D-cycloserine vs placebo in pediatric obsessive-compulsive disorder: A randomized clinical trial. Journal of the American Medical Association, Psychiatry  73 , (8), 779-788. Journal Pre-proof

, 595-606. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0016032 Storch, E. A., Bussing, R., Small, B. J., Geffken, G. R., McNamara, J. P., Rahman, O., Lewin, A. B., … &amp; Murphy, T. K. (2013). Randomized, placebo-controlled trial of cognitivebehavioral therapy alone or combined with sertraline in the treatment of pediatric obsessive-compulsive disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 51 (12), 823 - 829. doi: 10.1016/j.brat.2013.09.007

https://doi.org/10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2016.1128

Tolin, D. F. (2009). Alphabet soup: ERP, CT, and ACT for OCD. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 16 (1), 40-48. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cbpra.2008.07.001

Tolin, D. F., McKay, D., Forman, E. M., Klonsky, E. D., &amp; Thombs, B. D. (2015).

Empirically supported treatment: Recommendations for a new model. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 22 (4), 317-338. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0101729

Tolin, D., Melnyk, T., &amp; Marx, B. (2015). Exposure and response prevention for obsessivecompulsive disorder: Empirically supported treatment report .

Myths and Misconceptions in CBT for OCD doi:10.1037/e675592012-001

Torp, N. C., Dahl, K., Skarphedinsson, G., Thomsen, P. H., Valderhaug, R., Weidle, B., Melin, K. H., Hybel, K., Nissen, J. B., Lenhard, F., Wentzel-Larsen, T., Franklin, M. E., &amp; Ivarsson, T. (2015). Effectiveness of cognitive behavior treatment for pediatric obsessive-compulsive disorder: Acute outcomes from the Nordic Long-term OCD Treatment Study (NordLOTS). Behaviour Research and Therapy , 64 , 15-23. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brat.2014.11.005

Townsend, A. N., Hertz, A. G., D'Souza, J. M., &amp; Wiese, A. D. (2022). Advances in psychotherapy with internet-based cognitive behavioral therapy for anxiety and obsessive-compulsive disorder. Advances in Psychiatry and Behavioral Health, 2 (1), 57 - 70. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ypsc.2022.05.003 Trent, E. S., Guzick, A. G., Viana, A. G., &amp; Storch, E. A. (2021). Third-wave cognitive behavioral therapy for obsessive compulsive disorder: A promising approach if it includes exposure. Advances in Psychiatry and Behavioral Health, 1, 37 - 51. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ypsc.2021.05.004 Journal Pre-proof

Twohig, M. P., Abramowitz, J. S., Bluett, E. J., Fabricant, L. E., Jacoby, R. J., Morrison, K. L., Reuman, L., &amp; Smith, B. M. (2015). Exposure therapy for OCD from an acceptance and commitment therapy (ACT) framework. Journal of ObsessiveCompulsive and Related Disorders, 6, 167-173.

Twohig, M. P., Abramowitz, J. S., Smith, B. M., Fabricant, L. E., Jacoby, R. J., &amp; Morrison, K. L. (2018). Adding acceptance and commitment therapy to exposure and response

Myths and Misconceptions in CBT for OCD

prevention for obsessive-compulsive disorder: A randomized controlled trial.

Behaviour Research and Therapy, 108

, 1-9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brat.2018.06.005

Twohig, M. P., Hayes, S. C., Plumb, J. C., Pruitt, L. D., Collins, A. B., Hazlett-Stevens, H., &amp; Woidneck, M. R. (2010). A randomized clinical trial of acceptance and commitment therapy versus progressive relaxation training for obsessive-compulsive disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology , 78 (5), 705.

Uhre, C. F., Uhre, V. F., Lonfeldft, N. N., Pretzmann, L., Vangkilde, S., Plessen, K., GLuud, C., … &amp; Pagsberg, A. (2020). Systematic review and meta-analysis: Cognitivebehavioral therapy for obsessive-compulsive disorder in children and adolescents. Journal of the American Academy of Child &amp; Adolescent Psychiatry, 59 (1), 64 - 77. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaac.2019.08.480 Veale, D., Freeston, M., Krebs, G., Heyman, I., &amp; Salkovskis, P. (2009). Risk assessment and management in obsessive-compulsive disorder. Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, 15, 332 - 343. doi: 10.1192/apt.bp.107.004705 Washburn, J. J., Teachman, B. A., Gaudiano, B. A., Penberthy, K., Peris, T. S., Davison, G. C., &amp; Hollon, S. D. (2022). The central role of lifelong learning and humility in clinical psychology. Clinical Psychological Science, 1 - 13. Journal Pre-proof https://doi.org/10.1177/21677026221101063

Westen, D., Novotny, C. M., &amp; Thompson-Brenner, H. (2004). The empirical status of empirically supported psychotherapies: Assumptions, findings, and reporting in controlled clinical trials. Psychological Bulletin, 130 (4), 631 - 663. DOI:

10.1037/0033-2909.130.4.631

Whiteside, S. P. H., Deacon, B. J., Benito, K., &amp; Stewart, E. (2016). Factors associated with practitioners' use of exposure therapy for childhood anxiety disorders. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 40, 29 - 36. doi:10.1016/j.janxdis.2016.04.001.

Myths and Misconceptions in CBT for OCD

## Highlights

- · Cognitive-behavior therapy is a gold-standard treatment for obsessive-compulsive disorder.
- · Exposure and response prevention is a key component of this approach.
- · Several myths and misconceptions related to CBT for OCD continue to proliferate.
- · Such myths/misconceptions lack empiricism and slow dissemination and implementation.
- · The present review addresses these myths/misconceptions and provides recommendations for research and practice.

## Author disclosure

## Conflicts of Interest

Dr. Storch reports receiving research funding to his institution from the Ream Foundation, International OCD Foundation, and NIH. He is a consultant for Brainsway and Biohaven Pharmaceuticals. He owns stock less than $5000 in NView. He receives book royalties from Elsevier, Wiley, Oxford, American Psychological Association, Guildford, Springer, Routledge, and Jessica Kingsley. All other authors declare no conflicts of interest. Drs. Eric Storch and Dean McKay serve on the editorial board of the Journal of Obsessive Compulsive and Related Disorders. Given Drs. Storch and McKay's roles as editorial board members, they had no involvement in the peer-review of this article and had no access to information regarding its peer-review.

Journal Pre-proof

## Author disclosure

## Conflicts of Interest

All authors declare no conflicts of interest. Drs. Eric Storch and Dean McKay serve on the editorial board of the Journal of Obsessive Compulsive and Related Disorders. Given Drs. Storch and McKay's roles as editorial board members, they had no involvement in the peer-review of this article and had no access to information regarding its peer-review.

## Ethical Statements

Since no data were collected for the present review article, no IRB approval was sought.

## Contributors

Informed Consent Since no data were collected from participants for the present review article, no informed consent was necessary. Role of funding sources Preparation of this manuscript was supported by a grant from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health &amp; Human Development of the National Institutes of Health under Award Number P50HD103555 for use of the Clinical and Translational Core facilities. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health. Data Availability Since no data were collected from participants for the present review article, no data are available. Journal Pre-proof

The first author led the literature review/manuscript preparation process, discussed research questions with the seventh author (senior author), and wrote and revised the manuscript. The second, third, fourth, fifth, and sixth authors contributed to the literature review, and assisted with drafting, revising, and editing the manuscript. Finally, the seventh (senior) author supervised the first author in conducting the literature review/manuscript preparation, conceptualized the overall idea, and wrote and revised the manuscript. The final manuscript was approved by all authors.