B

J

P

## ARTICLE

## Annie Swanepoel is a

consultant child and adolescent psychiatrist in Hertfordshire. She also holds a PhD in human physiology and is particularly interested in the integration of body and mind, nature and nurture, psychoneuroimmunology, as well as evolutionary science. Graham Music is a consultant child and adolescent psychotherapist at the Tavistock Clinic in London and an adult psychotherapist in private practice. He supervises and teaches on many courses, has a particular interest in the interface between developmental science and clinical work, and his publications include Nurturing Natures (2011) and The Good Life (2014). John Launer is Associate Dean at Health Education England and an honorary lifetime consultant at the Tavistock Clinic. He is a doctor, family psychotherapist and writer. His principal interests include clinical supervision for the health professions, narrative medicine and evolutionary psychology. Michael J. Reiss is Professor of Science Education at the UCL Institute of Education and a Fellow of the Academy of Social Sciences. A priest in the Church of England and the former Director of Education at the Royal Society, he has written extensively about curricula, pedagogy and assessment in science education, sex education and bioethics.

Correspondence Dr Graham Music, Child and Family Department, Tavistock and Portman NHS Trust, 120 Belsize Lane, London NW3 5BA, UK. Email: gmusic@tavi-port.nhs.uk.

## Copyright and usage

© The Royal College of Psychiatrists 2017.

## How evolutionary thinking can help us to understand ADHD

## Annie Swanepoel, Graham Music, John Launer &amp; Michael J. Reiss

## SUMMARY

We argue that current debates about attentiondeficit  hyperactivity  disorder  (ADHD)  can  be considered afresh using an evolutionary lens. We show how the symptoms of ADHD can often be considered adaptive to their specific environment. We suggest that, from an evolutionary point of view, ADHD symptoms might be understood to result from an 'evolutionary mismatch', in which current environmental demands do not fit with what evolution has prepared us to cope with. For  example,  in  our  ancestral  environment  of evolutionary adaptedness (EEA), children were not expected to sit still and concentrate on academic tasks for many hours a day. Understanding ADHD in terms of such a 'mismatch' raises significant issues regarding the management of childhood ADHD, including ethical ones. An approach based on the concept of mismatch could provide an alternative to current debates on whether ADHD results from nature or nurture and whether it is under- or over-diagnosed. It would allow clinicians and policy makers to take both the child and the environment  into  account  and  consider  what might be desirable and feasible, both in society and for specific children, to lessen the mismatch.

## LEARNING OBJECTIVES

- · Grasp the concept of ADHD as an 'evolutionary mismatch'
- · Understand the issues raised by this perspective, including ethical ones
- · Appreciate how a transparent discussion of these issues might inform decisions about management, medication and schooling

## DECLARATION OF INTEREST

The  authors  are  members  of  the  evopsychotherapy study group at the Tavistock Clinic. The aim  of  the  group  is  to  promote  evolutionary thinking in psychotherapy and psychiatry.

Few  childhood  conditions  designated  as  psy­ chiatric disorders are as mired in controversy as attention­deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) (Timimi/Taylor  2004).  Diagnosis  is  generally made on the basis of behavioural checklists, and there are continual debates about the status of such diagnoses. Some mental health professionals see ADHD as a developmental disorder, some as genetically driven and some as a set of symptoms that  are  indistinguishable  from  the  effects  of childhood trauma.

In  a  previous  article  in BJPsych  Advances (Swanepoel 2016) we argued that the traditional disease  model,  still  dominant  in  psychiatry,  is less  than  ideal  for  making  sense  of  a  range  of psychological issues, such as the effects of early childhood experiences on development. We argued that a model based on evolutionary thinking can deepen understanding and aid clinical practice by showing how behaviours, bodily responses and psychological beliefs tend to occur for reasons that are evolutionarily adaptive, even when these might on first appearance seem pathological.

In the present article we apply this reasoning to ADHD, the most commonly diagnosed neuro­ developmental disorder (Thapar 2016). ADHD, characterised by hyperactivity, impulsivity and inattention,  appears  to  be  linked  to  serious consequences,  including  educational  failure, substance misuse and criminal involvement. The prevalence of diagnosis seems to be increasing, but  the  reasons  for  this  are  hotly  disputed (Thapar 2016).

Here, we do not argue for a single explanation for the widespread occurrence of ADHD. Indeed, we caution against too simplistic an understanding of the condition - including a belief either that all ADHD diagnoses are faulty or that the condition can always be objectively identified and straight­ forwardly  treated  with  medication.  Our  hope is  that  an  evolutionary  perspective  will  prove useful to clinicians and others faced with high rates of referral of children (or adults) presenting with  symptoms  of  ADHD.  We  argue  that  the environment of evolutionary adaptedness (EEA) did not prepare children to sit still and concentrate for hours every day and that the difficulties that many children experience can be understood in terms of this mismatch (Box 1).

## ADHD classification and identification

In DSM­4, ADHD fell under 'disruptive behaviour disorders', along with oppositional defiant disor­ der, intermittent explosive disorder and conduct

## BOX 1 Evolutionary mismatch

When the environment in which an organism lives is significantly different from that in which it evolved, traits that were once adaptive may become pathological. This is termed an 'evolutionary mismatch' (Cofnas 2016). One example is that humans evolved to survive food scarcity by craving and eating high-calorie foods when these were available. In the current environment of generally plentiful food, this leads to widespread obesity. Thus, a trait that may have conferred survival advantage in the past may lead to vulnerability to disorder if the environment changes.

disorder. In DSM­5, ADHD was moved into the category of neurodevelopmental disorders, along­ side autism spectrum disorders, intellectual dis­ abilities,  communication  disorders  and  motor disorders. A neurodevelopmental disorder is one in which 'the development of the central nervous system is disturbed' (American Psychiatric Associ­ ation 2013). Common characteristics of ADHD are that onset is in early childhood, that there are cog­ nitive as well as behavioural deficits, and that the symptomatic and functional impairments tend to persist. There is typically a preponderance among males of both neurodevelopmental disorders in general and ADHD in particular, and these dis­ orders tend to have a degree of heritability. There is a large overlap of different neurodevelopmental disorders - co­occurrence is the rule rather than the exception (Dyck 2011; Posner 2014).

In support of a neurodevelopmental view, the Ben­Gurion infant development study showed that sons of fathers with ADHD were more irritable than sons of fathers without ADHD (Auerbach 2004). The at­risk infants also indicated less clearly what was bothering them, making parenting them more difficult, as evidenced by more inadequate responses to their needs. This was confirmed by Elberling et al (2014), who found that motherinfant interaction problems were more likely with at­risk infants. Interestingly, expressed emotion (parental hostility) is child­specific, not parent­ specific (Cartwright 2011).

In  two  large  clinic  samples  of  young  people diagnosed with ADHD before school age, only 10% were in the 'normal' range of functioning at  15-18  years  old  -  thus  there  appears  to  be continuity  (Lahey  2016).  Persistent  classroom inattention is a strong predictor of not obtaining a high school diploma by age 22 (Pingault 2011). ADHD in preschool  boys  has  been  associated with a 10­point reduction in General Certificate of Secondary Education (age 16) scores (Washbrook

B

J

P

2013). A 7-12 point average IQ deficit has been noted  in  individuals  with  ADHD  (Simonoff 2007), although there is considerable variability and  some  individuals  with  ADHD  have  an  IQ well above average. It has also been shown that preschool ADHD incurs a 17­fold greater economic burden due to increased needs in education, health and  social  care  and  makes  it  more  likely  that children will be bullies or the victims of bullying (Verlinden 2015).

There appear to be no discernible differences in the brains of infants with ADHD compared with those  of  unaffected  infants  (Ghassabian  2013); however, by 6-8 years of age, children with ADHD had thinner cortices in the primary somatosensory area (Mous 2014). Adults with ADHD have also been found to show abnormal reactivity in this area  (Dockstader  2009),  although  new  studies show  that  there  is  not  necessarily  continuity between childhood and adult ADHD. Some have argued that the criterion that ADHD must have started before the age of 12 should therefore be dropped (Caye 2016).

## Epidemiological issues

One notable  fact  about  ADHD  is  that  rates  of recognition, diagnosis and treatment vary widely between and within countries. In 2012, at least 9%  of  school­aged  children  in  the  USA  were diagnosed with ADHD; the corresponding figure for France was less than 0.5% (Wedge 2012). The rate  of  ADHD  diagnosis  in  preschool  children varies too, even between quite similar countries: in  Denmark it is 1% (Elberling 2016), whereas it  is  3.8% in Iceland (Gudmundsson 2013). The rates  even  differ  substantially  across  states  in the USA (Fulton 2015). They have also increased considerably in many countries, including the USA and UK, in recent decades. Such variations may be due to differences in how the condition is defined and the ways data are gathered (Polanczyk 2014).

Another  significant  finding  about  ADHD  is that, in large samples in many countries, there is a hugely increased likelihood of the diagnosis if a child is in the youngest group in a school year cohort. For example, children in Denmark born just before the cut­off for the next year were about 2.5  times  more  likely  to  have  an  ADHD  diag­ nosis than their older classmates (Krabbe 2014), and similar results have been seen in a number of other countries, including Germany (Schwandt 2016), Canada (Chen 2015), Taiwan (Chen 2016) and  Israel  (Hoshen  2016).  At  the  very  least, this suggests an increase in diagnoses in children who are less emotionally mature and less able to be still.

There are also cultural differences in diagnosis rates (Ghosh 2015), which might be explained by a range of factors. Some cultures place a higher value on emotion regulation, for example, so that problems with self­regulation  is  more  common among  US  than  Asian  males  (Wanless  2013). Cultures  that  value  close  bodily  contact  and  a quick response to signals of distress, and where there are clear imperatives for children to abide by rules, are ones in which self­regulation tends to  develop  earlier  and  more  fully.  Children  in more interdependent cultures are generally also quicker  to  develop  skills  in  compliance  and emotion regulation (Wanless 2013). Despite these cultural variations, it is nevertheless clear that there is a group of children, principally boys, who show symptoms (identified as ADHD) that cause concern and whose longer­term trajectories might not be good (Thapar 2016).

## Genes, epigenetics and adaptation

According to evolutionary thinking, behaviour traits that have survived and been passed down the generations must have had adaptive value in the past, and possibly still have today. It is certainly conceivable, for example, that more adventurous individuals in hunter­gatherer society sometimes did  better  in  terms  of  having  viable  offspring, perhaps  because  those  individuals  were  more willing to explore (Box 2). It is worth asking why it could be adaptive for a child to have a version of a gene or set of genes that appears to give rise to such a poor prognosis as ADHD. It seems that such a 'temperament' might well be advantageous in  some  environments.  For  example,  when  we examine  the  genes  of  descendents  of  people involved in major migrations of the distant past, we see that a higher proportion than average have

## BOX 2 How a gene associated with ADHD may have been adaptive: an example

About one-seventh of a Kenyan tribe, the Ariaal, have the long version of the DRD4 gene, which is associated with novelty-seeking. Pastoralists, some Ariaal still lead a nomadic life, moving from place to place, whereas others now have a more settled way of living. A study found that men with the novelty-seeking allele who lived a nomadic life were well nourished and healthy. In contrast, those with this same allele living a settled life were on average less well nourished (Eisenberg 2008). It seems that having the 'ADHD-inducing' variant might well be a better option when living a less settled kind of life, and that different genetic variations aid survival or success in some environments but not others.

the  same  'novelty­seeking'  genetic  variant  that is associated with ADHD in children (Matthews 2011). One can speculate that being a carrier of that novelty­seeking variant might have aided the likelihood of survival by making such individuals more  predisposed  to  seek  new  pastures  when danger  loomed,  and  hence  survive  to  pass  on this variant.

Although genes alone are most unlikely to cause ADHD symptoms, gene-environment interaction is looking increasingly likely to play a central role. It  seems,  for  example,  that  carriers  of  the  long allele (7­repeat allele) of the dopamine D  receptor 4 gene DRD4  are  more  likely  to  show  ADHD symptoms (Faraone 2001) and this genetic variant also increases the likelihood that children will be novelty­seeking.  For  these  children,  insensitive parenting  in  the  early  years  predicts  more externalising behaviours, although this is not the case for carriers of the short variant (Windhorst 2015). Inheriting this allele also predicts poorer emotion regulation, and indeed more likelihood of disorganised attachment styles (Pappa 2015). Thus, this and other genes may predispose for ADHD, but will only ever be a partial explanation.

Interestingly, one study looked at hyperactive children who were adopted (Harold 2013). Where these  adopted  children  received  sensitive  and attuned parenting the symptoms of hyperactivity were not subsequently seen. As so often, we find that experiences and genes, nature and nurture interact to produce their effects (van Ijzendoorn 2015).  Thus,  what  we  are  seeing  is  that  some children are born with more genetic susceptibility for ADHD­type symptoms, but also that certain kinds of environmental influence, such as cultural values or parenting, including closely monitoring a child's behaviour, can hugely reduce the potential effects of genes that otherwise might give rise to worrying behaviours.

Epigenetic  research  is  showing  that  some children are more susceptible to the influence of their environment than others, what Belsky and others have called 'the differential susceptibility to rearing' influence (Belsky 2004). Belsky has argued that successful reproduction of one's genes is more likely if some of one's offspring are more influenced by the current environment than others, because in such scenarios, in the face of both continuity and major change, those offspring will survive to pass on their genes. Thus, we should now think not of vulnerability genes (e.g. for ADHD), but rather in terms of relative plasticity (Belsky 2014), because some individuals are simply more influenced by experiences than others, owing at least in part to their genes.

B

J

P

B

J

P

## Environmental influences

There have been a number of studies linking qual­ ity of parenting to ADHD diagnosis, concluding that  ADHD  is  related  to  insecure  attachment relationships  (e.g.  Roskam  2014).  What  much research  makes  clear  (and  in  accordance  with common sense) is that if we expect the environ  ment to be dangerous and unpredictable, we are less relaxed and more hypervigilant and jumpy. Thus, children who grow up in difficult circumstances may be more hyperactive and less likely to settle than children who are used to a relaxed and calm environment. Research (Tronick 2007) as well as  infant  observation  over  many  decades,  such as  in  the  Tavistock  model  (Miller  1989),  have shown how even young infants, when feeling less emotionally held, move around more and are less able to concentrate. Infants and children feel calm, more relaxed and stiller when their emotional and physiological  states  are  regulated  by  an  adult attuned  to  them.  Studies  show  that  having  a stressful or traumatic childhood is highly predictive of being impulsive, emotionally dysregulated and having poor executive functioning (Ersche 2012). In  families  displaying  high  levels  of  negativity, anger  or  aggression,  children  tend  to  struggle much more with emotion regulation (Morris 2007). Indeed, where there is violence and aggression we see extreme sympathetic nervous system arousal together with externalising behaviours (Panzer 2005; El­Sheikh 2009).

From  the  perspectives  of  life  history  theory (Belsky  2012),  a  speeded  up  metabolism,  less trust,  less  relaxation,  and  more  suspicion  and risk­taking might be adaptive for abusive homes or violent neighbourhoods. In such environments there is little emotional security or expectation that  things  will  work  out  well.  It  is  a  strategy that ensures short­term survival, though at the cost of long­term physical and mental health. Our responses can therefore be seen as adaptive to our environments, triggering neurobiological patterns that have a profound effect on the rest of our lives (Belsky 2012). Those born into highly stressed worlds  tend  to  have  a  speeded  up  metabolism and more activated stress response systems and develop what some call a 'fast', as opposed to a 'slow', life history strategy. We see this in a range of other mammals as well as in humans, and it is a strategy that aids survival. Without it, any too  trusting  and  complacent  ancestors  might well have met a violent end before they had time to  reproduce.  In  many  circumstances  the  best response is to be wary, vigilant and untrusting.

Evidence shows that ADHD symptoms increase in response to adverse social and economic as well as  parenting  influences.  For  example,  Mischel (2014)  found  that  children  from  low­income families  in  violent  parts  of  New  York's  Bronx tended to have below average ability to self­regulate compared with more privileged children. Early severe institutional deprivation is associated with adult ADHD (Kennedy 2016). Other studies have found a link between low socioeconomic status and impaired development of the executive parts of the brain (Noble 2005), even linking poverty to  chronic  stress  and  neurocognitive  outcomes right into adulthood (Evans 2009). Indeed, by the age of 6 months, infants from socioeconomically deprived environments have been shown to be less able to pay attention (Clearfield 2013). Childhood poverty and the associated stress levels can have a big effect on capacity for emotion regulation, the development of inhibitory brain networks (Kim 2013) and the likelihood of increased risk­taking (Griskevicius 2011). Being able to defer gratification depends on feeling sufficiently relaxed (high vagal tone) and being helped to bear and regulate one's emotions (Moore 2004).

ADHD can be thought of in part as a deficit in executive functioning (Barkley 2017) - although many forms of executive function  disorder  are unrelated  to  ADHD.  Those  diagnosed  with ADHD  struggle,  for  example,  with  planning, emotion  regulation,  focusing,  concentrating, putting plans into action - all of which are aspects of  executive  functioning  (Brown  2013).  People able  to  delay  gratification  have  more  activity in  prefrontal  brain  regions,  central  to  abstract thinking, planning, working memory and emotion regulation  -  again,  all  of  which  are  aspects  of executive functioning (Barkley 2012). Those with more impulsive character traits tend to lack these prefrontal 'brakes' on their impulsivity (McClure 2004). Instead, more primitive subcortical brain areas are active. This also is seen in trauma and in stressful situations generally, which is partly why many children who display symptoms that fit  with  ADHD checklists for other reasons are misdiagnosed as having ADHD (DeJong 2010).

## Gender-based differential rates

Why are rates of ADHD typically higher in males than  in  females?  One  common  evolutionary explanation for differential rates such as this is that  males  have  had  to  be  more  risk­taking  to compete for mates, since a higher proportion of males than females fail to have children and pass on their genes. Thus, sexual competition between adult males is high, and this can be compounded when males have to leave their families to seek out mates.

Also,  research  might  suggest  a  trade­off  in evolutionary history between the need to be risk­ taking and explore and the capacity to concentrate and be still. For example, boys seem to be more sensitive than girls to the consequences of sub­ optimal parental care. From birth onwards girls on average are better equipped to regulate their emotions and are less badly affected by disruptions in parenting. Parents may need to work harder to imitate and respond to their sons than to their daughters, and researchers have suggested that boys need more input in order to feel emotionally regulated  (Tronick  2000).  Following  maternal postnatal depression it seems that boys tend to fare worse, having less capacity for object constancy at  18  months  and  showing  more  behavioural problems  at  school  age  (Murray  1993).  Sander (2007) looked at newborns separated from their parents and placed with new carers. After a few days the girls had all entrained to their new carers' day-night rhythms, but the boys took several days longer to adjust, suggesting that they were more vulnerable to disruptions of care.

Tronick  (2007)  found  that  mothers  with  de­ pression consistently showed angrier emotional expressions to their sons than to their daughters. By  6  months  the  boys  were  gesturing  more anxiously and were three times more likely than the  girls  to  resort  to  self­comforting  strategies such as sucking their thumbs. It seems that boys generally are more demanding of their interactive partners. A study in France showed that mothers with a propensity for depression were more likely to  become  depressed  if  they  had  male  babies (de  Tychey  2008),  who  were  presumably  more demanding than female ones.

## Social changes

Some ADHD symptoms might still (in contem­ porary  society)  make  adaptive  sense,  such  as being vigilant and wary in the face of violence and prioritising survival and safety over the higher executive functions such as empathy, self­reflection and emotion regulation (Music 2016).

However, the social environment for children has changed dramatically over the past century or two. Whereas most boys would once have typically learnt a trade from their father or another relative, this all changed with the professionalisation of schooling. One result is that there is a mismatch between the strengths of children with ADHD -  i.e.  their  tendency  to  explore,  to  challenge and to try out new ways of doing things - and their  environment  (today's  schools).  ADHD  is unusual in that its diagnosis is most often made in the context of schooling, with most cases being diagnosed in children between the ages of 6 and 12 (NHS Choices 2016).

The standard model of schooling, in which 20 or more young people of the same age are taught in classrooms for about 5 hours a day, 5 days a week, 200 days of the year from age 6 to 16, certainly runs counter to our evolved behavioural strategies. Furthermore,  a  child's  ADHD  symptoms  will affect other children in the room and the teacher's very  capacity  to  teach.  As  the  website  ADHD Solutions (2017) puts it: 'a child with ADHD can be  extremely  challenging'.  Schooling  therefore favours  some  young  people  at  the  expense  of others,  including  those  with  ADHD. To add to this, schools, especially primary schools, can be seen as feminised institutions, the large majority of  teachers  being  women.  Indeed,  in  England in 2015, 80% of the total teaching workforce in state­funded schools (primary and secondary) was female (Department for Education 2016). As we have noted, ADHD predominantly affects males: a 2006 survey reported male:female prevalence of child and adolescent ADHD varying from 3:1 in Norway to 16:1 in Austria (ADHD Institute 2016). This gender imbalance decreases in adulthood. It is likely that schools typically favour the sorts of fairly passive, acquiescent behaviour that society all  too  often  deems  particularly  appropriate for females.

## Treatment

## Treatment types

The main treatments for ADHD are medication and psychological interventions. Methylphenidate can improve irritability in ADHD (Fernández de la Cruz 2015), and a Cochrane meta­analysis showed that  it  also  improves  teacher  ratings  of  ADHD and does not have serious adverse side­effects, although the data quality is poor (Storebø 2016). Psychological interventions for ADHD show small effects  on  non­blinded  outcome  ratings,  but  no effect on blinded ratings (Abikoff 2015).

There is accordingly much controversy about the medication of ADHD, with two main opposing camps. On the one hand, there is some evidence to show that ADHD has a biological component and responds to medication (at least in the short term) and that children who are treated generally have better educational outcomes and are less likely to  misuse  drugs  or  get  in  trouble  with  the  law (Thapar 2016). On the other hand, many clinicians argue that normal children are being medicated to make them compliant and 'less naughty' and that medication is being used as a form of social control. Even among ourselves as authors, we are not of one mind on this matter.

B

J

P

B

J

P

Newer evidence reveals a differential suscepti­ bility to the development of oppositional defiant disorder  and  conduct  disorder  in  children genetically more susceptible to developing ADHD (Bakermans­Kranenburg 2015). The efficacy of interventions might be underestimated or even go undetected as a main effect when it is hidden in  gene­by­environment (G × E) analysis. These children will be more likely to develop ADHD and the attendant serious behavioural complications if experiencing low warmth in their relationships with their caregivers - but will be less likely than average children to develop these difficulties if they experience warm parenting. It is therefore too simplistic to just link genetic traits to outcomes: once again, there are significant gene-environment interactions at play.

## Ethics

From an ethical point of view, a serious question needs to be asked: 'Should psychiatrists prescribe medication to help a child to fit into an environment that is not ideal?' Many ADHD services do not have any behavioural support services to which they can refer. This puts pressure on psychiatrists to prescribe, even if psychological or social measures might be more appropriate. It is also questionable whether prescribing is ethically justifiable when it is undertaken because of the shortcomings of the school environment. Furthermore, there is often a clear conflict of interest between what is best for the child and what is easiest for parents and teachers. In a rare study that examined the views of children with ADHD, Singh (2012) found that, in  both  the  UK  and  the  USA,  children  wanted more  treatment  options  outside  of  medication, but that these were not available. The question of informed consent becomes difficult with younger children, who are completely dependent on their parents. More widely, there are important ethical considerations to be addressed by health, education and social care services (Richards 2013). Some of the complexities that can arise are illustrated by the case vignettes in Box 3.

## Conclusions

We believe that an evolutionary perspective, which points out the mismatch between biological pre­ dispositions and current environments, including schools, has a lot to add to debates about ADHD diagnosis  and  treatment.  This  paves  the  way for  a  more  informed  discussion  about  whether to  medicate  or  not.  Understanding  ADHD  as a  biological  variant  in  some  individuals  that has  adaptive  value  for  living  in  unpredictable situations may help shift perceptions of the child

## BOX 3 The range and complexities of children with ADHD: case vignettes a

## Redressing the mismatch

## Successful use of medication

Alex is 17 years old. He was diagnosed with ADHD at age 8 and treated with stimulant medication until he finished his GCSEs at 16. He was able to stop using medication when he went to a football college. He explained that at college they do 2 hours of football training and then break for an hour of, say, maths, before doing another 2 hours of training and then having a lesson of English. He said that this worked very well for him and he was able to sit still and concentrate without needing medication.

## The influence of nurture

Nine-year-old Joe, who was on a local authority child protection plan because of neglect by his drug-misusing mother, was treated with stimulant medication for ADHD. After he was placed in foster care, his school work improved dramatically and he was able to stop his medication. One of the reasons for this was that the 'breakfast' his mother had assured professionals she was giving him with his stimulant medication before school consisted of a can of caffeinated energy drink.

Mohammed, 14 years old, was on the verge of exclusion from school because of his disruptive behaviour in class, fighting in the playground and rudeness to teachers. He had been diagnosed with ADHD at age 8, but his parents had been opposed to medication. The family now agreed to a trial of stimulant medication, which was a resounding success. The boy explained that he was now able to concentrate and think before he acted. He thrived on the positive feedback he was getting at school and his behaviour and attainment improved.

## Treat the environment, not the child

Seven-year-old Alfie was being treated with short-acting ADHD medication to cover him at school, but neighbours in the flat below complained about his jumping around in the evenings and at the weekends. Members of the multidisciplinary team agreed that medication should not be prescribed in this instance and decided to write a letter to the local housing office instead.

- a.  These  children  are  fictitious,  but  representative of  individuals  we  meet  in  clinical  practice.

as being 'naughty' to seeing someone caught in an evolutionary mismatch. Behavioural strategies in school, for example, could then focus on allowing the child plenty of physical activity and a fidget toy to fiddle with when they have to sit still, as well as making eye contact with the child before giving instructions and keeping instructions single and simple (for further suggestions see LD Online 2017).  Over  the  longer  term,  we  may  need  to rethink how schools are organised, conceptualised and run. Increasingly, the emphasis in schooling is only on academic subjects. Subjects that involve movement and the development of physical skills (physical education, metalwork, home economics, etc.) have largely disappeared from the curricula in a number of countries.

It  may  help  for  adults  with  ADHD to under­ stand what their strengths are and to seek jobs where  these  are  valued,  for  example  in  sport, adventure  tours,  the  military  or  any  other  job where physical activity and rapid decision­making are highly valued.

Of course, there are downsides to having ADHD - individuals are more likely to perform poorly in cognitive tasks, die in accidents and become involved in criminal activity. They are also more

likely to follow a fast life history strategy and tend to have more children at a younger age in whom they invest less - this may lead to an intergenerational transmission of problem behaviours linked to a biological susceptibility to ADHD (Thapar 2016).

In sum, we believe that an evolutionary view can help both professionals and patients understand ADHD in a broader sense, where it can be thought of as both a liability and a strength and where attempts are made to adapt the environment before resorting to medication to adapt the individual.

## References

Abikoff HB, Thompson M, Laver-Bradbury C, et al (2015) Parent training for  preschool ADHD: a randomized controlled trial of specialized and generic  programs. Journal  of  Child  Psychology  and  Psychiatry, 56 : 618-31.

ADHD Institute (2016) Epidemiology:  Gender .  ADHD  Institute  (http:// adhd-institute.com/burden-of-adhd/epidemiology/gender/).  Accessed 15 September 2017.

ADHD Solutions  (2017) ADHD  in  childhood .  ADHD  Solutions  (http:// cmsms.adhdsolutions.org/index.php?page=adhd-at-home). Accessed 15 September 2017.

American  Psychiatric  Association  (2013) Diagnostic  and  Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (5th edn) (DSM-5) . APA.

Auerbach  JG,  Atzaba-Poria  N,  Berger  A,  et  al  (2004)  Emerging developmental  pathways  to  ADHD:  possible  path  markers  in  early infancy. Neural Plasticity, 11 : 29-43.

Bakermans-Kranenburg  MJ,  van  IJzendoorn  MH  (2015)  The  hidden efficacy  of  interventions:  gene × environment  experiments  from  a differential susceptibility perspective. Annual Review of Psychology, 66 : 381-409.

Barkley RA (2012) Executive Functions: What They Are, How They Work, and Why They Evolved . Guilford Press.

Barkley RA (2017) Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder: A Handbook for Diagnosis and Treatment (4th edn). Guilford Press.

Belsky J (2004) Differential susceptibility to rearing influence. In Origins of  the  Social  Mind:  Evolutionary  Psychology  and  Child  Development (eds B Ellis, D Bjorklund): 139-63. Guilford Press.

Belsky  J,  Schlomer  GL,  Ellis  BJ  (2012)  Beyond  cumulative  risk: distinguishing  harshness  and  unpredictability  as  determinants  of parenting and early life history strategy. Developmental Psychology, 48 : 662-73.

Belsky J, Hartman S (2014) Gene-environment interaction in evolutionary perspective: differential susceptibility to environmental influences. World Psychiatry, 13 : 87-9.

Brown TE (2013) A New Understanding of ADHD in Children and Adults: Executive Function Impairments . Routledge.

Cartwright KL, Bitsakou P , Daley D, et al (2011) Disentangling child and family influences on maternal expressed emotion toward children with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Journal of the American Academy of Child &amp; Adolescent Psychiatry, 50 : 1042-53.

Caye A, Rocha TB, Anselmi L, et al (2016) Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder trajectories from childhood to young adulthood: evidence from a birth cohort supporting a late-onset syndrome. JAMA Psychiatry, 73 : 705-12.

Chen  K,  Fortin  N,  Phipps  S  (2015)  Young  in  class:  implications  for inattentive/hyperactive behaviour of Canadian boys and girls. Canadian Journal of Economics, 48 : 1601-34.

Chen M-H, Lan W-H, Bai Y-M, et al (2016) Influence of relative age on diagnosis  and  treatment  of  attention-deficit  hyperactivity  disorder  in Taiwanese children. Journal of Pediatrics, 172 : 162-7.

Clearfield MW, Jedd KE (2013) The effects of socio-economic status on infant attention. Infant and Child Development, 22 : 53-67.

Cofnas N (2016) A teleofunctional account of evolutionary mismatch. Biological Philosophy, 31 : 507-25.

DeJong M (2010) Some reflections on the use of psychiatric diagnosis in the looked after or 'in care' child population. Clinical Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 15 : 589-99.

Department for Education (2016) School Workforce in England: November 2015 . Department  for  Education  (https://www.gov.uk/government/ uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/533618/SFR21_2016_ MainText.pdf).

de Tychey C, Briançon S, Lighezzolo J, et al (2008) Quality of life, postnatal depression and baby gender. Journal of Clinical Nursing, 17 : 312-22.

Dockstader C, Gaetz W, Cheyne D, et al (2009) Abnormal neural reactivity to unpredictable sensory events in attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. Biological Psychiatry, 66 : 376-83.

Dyck MJ, Piek JP, Patrick J (2011) The validity of psychiatric diagnoses: the case of 'specific' developmental disorders. Research in Developmental Disabilities, 32 : 2704-13.

Eisenberg DTA, Campbell B, Gray PB, et al (2008) Dopamine receptor genetic polymorphisms and body composition in undernourished pastoralists: an exploration of nutrition indices among nomadic and recently settled Ariaal men of northern Kenya. BMC Evolutionary Biology, 8 : 173.

Elberling H, Linneberg A, Olsen EM, et al (2014) Infancy predictors of hyperkinetic and pervasive developmental disorders at ages 5-7 years: results from the Copenhagen Child Cohort CCC2000. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 55 : 1328-35.

Elberling H, Linneberg A, Rask CU, et al (2016) Psychiatric disorders in Danish children aged 5-7 years: a general population study of prevalence and risk factors from the Copenhagen Child Cohort (CCC 2000). Nordic Journal of Psychiatry, 70 : 146-55.

El-Sheikh  M,  Kouros  CD,  Erath  S,  et  al  (2009)  Marital  conflict  and children's  externalizing  behavior:  pathways  involving  interactions between  parasympathetic  and  sympathetic  nervous  system  activity. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development, 74 : 1-79.

Ersche KD, Turton AJ, Chamberlain SR, et al (2012) Cognitive dysfunction and anxious-impulsive personality traits are endophenotypes for drug dependence. American Journal of Psychiatry, 169 : 926-36.

Evans  GW,  Schamberg  MA  (2009)  Childhood  poverty,  chronic  stress, and adult working memory. Proceedings  of  the  National  Academy  of Sciences, 106 : 6545-9.

Faraone  SV,  Doyle  AE,  Mick  E,  et  al  (2001)  Meta-analysis  of  the association between the 7-repeat allele of the dopamine D4 receptor gene and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 58 : 1052-7.

Fernández de la Cruz L, Simonoff E, McGough JJ, et al (2015) Treatment of  children  with  attention-deficit/hyperactivity  disorder  (ADHD)  and irritability: results from the multimodal treatment study of children with ADHD (MTA). Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 54 : 62-70.

Fulton BD, Scheffler RM, Hinshaw SP (2015) State variation in increased ADHD  prevalence:  links  to  NCLB  school  accountability  and  state medication laws. Psychiatric Services, 66 : 1074-82.

Ghassabian A, Herba CM, Roza SJ, et al (2013) Infant brain structures, executive  function,  and  attention  deficit/hyperactivity  problems  at preschool age. A prospective study. Journal  of  Child  Psychology  and Psychiatry, 54 : 96-104.

Ghosh M, Holman CD, Preen DB (2015) Exploring parental country of birth differences in the use of psychostimulant medications for ADHD: a whole-population linked data study. Australian and New Zealand Journal of Public Health, 39 : 88-92.

Griskevicius  V,  Tybur  JM,  Delton  AW,  et  al  (2011)  The  influence  of mortality and socioeconomic status on risk and delayed rewards: a life history theory approach. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 100 : 1015-26.

B

J

P

B

J

P

Gudmundsson OO, Magnusson P, Saemundsen E, et al (2013) Psychiatric disorders in an urban sample of preschool children. Child and Adolescent Mental Health, 18 : 210-7.

Harold GT, Leve LD, Barrett D, et al (2013) Biological and rearing mother influences  on  child  ADHD  symptoms:  revisiting  the  developmental interface between nature and nurture. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 54 : 1038-46.

Hoshen MB, Benis A, Keyes KM, et al (2016) Stimulant use for ADHD and relative age in class among children in Israel. Pharmacoepidemiology and Drug Safety, 25 : 652-60.

Kennedy M, Kreppner J, Knights N, et al (2016) Early severe institutional deprivation is associated with a persistent variant of adult attentiondeficit/hyperactivity disorder: clinical presentation, developmental continuities and life circumstances in the English and Romanian Adoptees study. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 57 : 1113-25.

Kim P, Evans GW, Angstadt M, et al (2013) Effects of childhood poverty and chronic stress on emotion regulatory brain function in adulthood. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 110 : 18442-7.

Krabbe EE, Thoutenhoofd ED, Conradi M, et al (2014) Birth month as predictor of ADHD medication use in Dutch school classes. European Journal of Special Needs Education, 29 : 571-8.

Lahey  BB,  Lee  SS,  Sibley  MH,  et  al  (2016)  Predictors  of  adolescent outcomes  among  4-6-year-old  children  with  attention-deficit/ hyperactivity disorder. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 125 : 68-81.

LD  Online  (2017) Helping  the  Student  with  ADHD  in  the  Classroom: Strategies for Teachers .  WETA (http://www.ldonline.org/article/5911). Accessed 15 September 2017.

Matthews LJ, Butler PM (2011) Novelty-seeking DRD4 polymorphisms are  associated  with  human  migration  distance  out-of-Africa  after controlling for neutral population gene structure. American Journal of Physical Anthropology, 145 : 382-9.

McClure SM, Laibson DI, Loewenstein G, et al (2004) Separate neural systems value immediate and delayed monetary rewards. Science, 306 : 503-7.

Miller L (1989) Closely Observed Infants . Duckworth.

Mischel W (2014) The Marshmallow Test: Understanding Self-control and How To Master It . Little, Brown and Company.

Moore C, Macgillivray S (2004) Altruism, prudence, and theory of mind in preschoolers. New Directions for Child and Adolescent Development, 2004 (103): 51-62.

Morris  AS,  Silk  JS,  Steinberg  L,  et  al  (2007)  The  role  of  the  family context in the development of emotion regulation. Social Development, 16 : 361-88.

Mous SE, Muetzel R1, El Marroun H, et al (2014) Cortical thickness and inattention/hyperactivity symptoms in young children: a population-based study. Psychological Medicine, 44 : 3203-13.

Murray L, Kempton C, Woolgar M, et al (1993) Depressed mothers' speech to their infants and its relation to infant gender and cognitive  development. Journal  of  Child  Psychology  and  Psychiatry, 34 : 1083-101.

Music G (2016) Nurturing Natures: Attachment and Children's Emotional, Social and Brain Development . Psychology Press.

NHS Choices (2016) Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) . NHS Choices (http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/Attention-deficit-hyperactivitydisorder/Pages/Introduction.aspx). Accessed 27 October 2016.

Noble KG, Norman MF, Farah MJ (2005) Neurocognitive correlates of socioeconomic status in kindergarten children. Developmental Science, 8 : 74-87.

Panzer  A,  Viljoen  M  (2005)  Supportive  evidence  for  ADHD  as  a neurodevelopmental disorder. Medical Hypotheses, 64 : 755-8.

Pappa I, Mileva-Seitz VR, Bakermans-Kranenburg MJ, et al (2015) The magnificent seven: a quantitative review of dopamine receptor d4 and its  association  with  child  behavior. Neuroscience  and  Biobehavioral Reviews, 57 : 175-86.

Pingault J-B, Tremblay RE, Vitaro F, et al (2011) Childhood trajectories of inattention and hyperactivity and prediction of educational attainment in early adulthood: a 16-year longitudinal population-based study. American Journal of Psychiatry, 168 : 1164-70.

Polanczyk GV, Willcutt EG, Salum GA, et al (2014) ADHD prevalence estimates across three decades: an updated systematic review and meta-regression analysis. International Journal of Epidemiology, 43 : 434-42.

Posner MI, Rothbart MK, Sheese BE, et al (2014) Developing attention: behavioral and brain mechanisms. Advances in Neuroscience, 1 May (doi: 10.1155/2014/405094).

Richards LM (2013) Is it time for a more integrated bio-psycho-social approach to ADHD? Clinical Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 18 : 403503.

Roskam I, Stievenart M, Tessier R, et al (2014) Another way of thinking  about  ADHD:  the  predictive  role  of  early  attachment  deprivation in  adolescents'  level  of  symptoms. Social  Psychiatry  and  Psychiatric Epidemiology, 49 : 133-44.

Sander  L  (2007) Living  Systems,  Evolving  Consciousness,  and  the Emerging Person: A Selection of Papers from the Life Work of Louis Sander . Routledge.

Schwandt H, Wuppermann A (2016) The youngest get the pill: ADHD misdiagnosis  in  Germany,  its  regional  correlates  and  international comparison. Labour Economics, 43 : 72-86.

Simonoff E, Pickles A, Wood N, et al (2007) ADHD symptoms in children with mild intellectual disability. Journal of the American Academy of Child &amp; Adolescent Psychiatry, 46 : 591-600.

Singh  I  (2012) VOICES:  Voices  on  Identity,  Childhood,  Ethics  and Stimulants. Children Join the Debate . ADHD Voices.

Storebø OJ, Simonsen E, Gluud C (2016) Methylphenidate for attentiondeficit/hyperactivity disorder in children and adolescents. JAMA, 315 : 2009-10.

Swanepoel A, Sieff DF, Music G, et al (2016) How evolution can help us understand child development and behaviour. BJPsych Advances, 22 : 36-43.

Thapar  A,  Cooper  M  (2016)  Attention  deficit  hyperactivity  disorder. Lancet, 387 : 1240-50.

Timimi S/Taylor E (2004) ADHD is best understood as a cultural construct (debate). British Journal of Psychiatry, 184 : 8-9.

Tronick EZ, Weinberg MK (2000) Gender differences and their relation to maternal depression. In Stress, Coping, and Depression (eds SL Johnson, AM Hayes, TM Field, et al): 23-34. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Tronick E (2007) The Neurobehavioral and Social Emotional Development of Infants and Children . Norton.

van Ijzendoorn MH, Bakermans-Kranenburg MJ (2015) Genetic differential susceptibility on trial: meta-analytic support from randomized controlled experiments. Development and Psychopathology, 27 : 151-62.

Verlinden M, Jansen PW, Veenstra R, et al (2015) Preschool attentiondeficit/hyperactivity and oppositional defiant problems as antecedents of school bullying. Journal of the American Academy of Child &amp; Adolescent Psychiatry, 54 : 571-9.

Wanless SB, McClelland MM, Lan X, et al (2013) Gender differences in behavioral regulation in four societies: The United States, Taiwan, South Korea, and China. Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 28 : 621-33.

Washbrook E, Propper C, Sayal K, et al (2013) Pre-school hyperactivity/ attention problems and educational outcomes in adolescence: prospective longitudinal study. British Journal of Psychiatry, 203 : 265-71.

Wedge M (2012) Why French kids don't have ADHD. Psychology Today, 8 March (Blog: Suffer the Children).

Windhorst DA, Mileva-Seitz VR, Linting M, et al (2015) Differential susceptibility in a developmental perspective: DRD4 and maternal sensitivity predicting externalizing behavior. Developmental Psychobiology, 57 : 35-49.

## MCQs

Select the single best option for each question stem

- 1  Viewing ADHD as an 'evolutionary mismatch' means that:
- a there is a single explanation for the widespread occurrence of ADHD
- b all diagnoses of ADHD are faulty
- c the condition can always be objectively identified
- d previous selection pressures have not adapted us to our present environment
- e diagnosis can made using behavioural checklists.
- 2  The fact that ADHD is so much rarer among children in France than in the USA is most likely due to:
- a the presence of far more child psychiatrists in the USA compared with France
- b different cultural presumptions between the

two countries as to what behaviour constitutes ADHD

- c better school food in France
- d higher rates of teenage pregnancy in the USA
- e higher rates of divorce in the USA.
- 3  The most likely explanation why younger children in a school year are more likely to be diagnosed with ADHD is that such children:
- a are more likely to be bullied
- b need to go to the toilet more often
- c have more difficulties sitting still and paying attention to their teachers
- d are behind their peers in respect of reading and writing
- e are less likely to make friends with their peers.
- 4  It is not true that infants at high-risk of ADHD:
- a are more irritable than controls
- b signal their needs less clearly

B

J

P

- c are parented less effectively
- d experience more hostility from their parents
- e have parents who are more hostile in general.
- 5  According to evolutionary science, the high prevalence of ADHD in school-aged children can be explained by the concept of:
- a fast life history, in which the emphasis is on ensuring short-term survival even if at the cost of long-term suffering
- b mismatch, in which our ancestral environment did not prepare us for current environmental demands
- c evolutionary trade-off between physical fitness and academic excellence
- d natural selection of active children
- e survival of the fittest, which favours children who can work on their own.