252 The Journal of Medical  Research 20 20; 6(5): 252-254 
Review  Article  
JMR 20 20; 6(5): 252-254 
September - October  
ISSN: 2395 -7565  
© 20 20, All rights reserved  
www.medicinearticle.com  
Received: 28-09-2020 
Accepted : 14-10-2020 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*Correspond ing author:  
Shiraz Syed  
Senior Resident Surgeon, 
Himalayan Institute of Medical 
Science, Uttarakhand, 
Dehradun - 248140, India  
Email: 
shiraz_orthos@hotmail.com  The role of the bio -psychosocial model in public health  
Shiraz Syed 1, Sumbul Syed  2 Kshitij Bhardwaj  3 
1 Senior Resident Surgeon, Himalayan Institute of Medical Science, Uttarakhand, Dehradun - 248140,  India  
2 Post graduate student, Department of Psychology, Amity Uni versity, Noida, Uttar Pradesh - 201313, India  
3 Intern, Sri Guru Ram Rai Institute of Medical Science, Dehradun, Uttarakhand - 248001, India  
Abstract  
It is pertinent to understand th e role of factors in the development of the diseases. After careful recognition a 
healthcare worker can better direct an appropriate treatment response. The bio -psychosocial model showed how 
biology, psychology and socio -environmental factors play a role i n health. In contrast, biomedical model assumed that 
each occurrence of the disease was a result of deviation of biological molecules inside the body. The bio -psychosocial 
model is a stronger model focusing more on the person as a whole rather on the illne ss alone. It has generated a new 
perception to see the health of the population. It has broadened the horizon of public health agencies to see and 
examine the illness with a different approach and to provide better results in the preventative approaches. T his review 
highlights the importance of the bio -psychosocial model in public health.  
Keywords:  Public health, Problem of living, Bio -psychosocial model . 
INTRODUCTION  
George L. Engel employed his multifaceted and critical thinking in 1977 to develop the bio-psychosocial 
model. It was pivotal to just not psychology but to health, medicine and human development as well. The 
bio-psychosocial model scrutinised how biology, psychology and socio -environmental factors play a role in 
health. George L. Engel along  with Jon Romano of Rochester University proposed a more holistic approach 
to frame this model for illness and psychological problems both. The authors pointed out that the new 
approach will be responsible for the re -education of the people with “problem o f living”.  
The diseases were seen with the lens of biomedical models having molecular biology as its pillar. The 
biomedical model assumed that each occurrence of the disease was a result of deviation of biological 
molecules inside the body. It excluded the  importance of social, psychological and behavioural dimensions 
of the illnesses and forced the health care workers to analyse the behavioural aberrations as a result of 
abnormal biochemical or neuro -physiological processes. It also amalgamated reductionis m and mind -body 
dualism [1].  
Review  
In the society, people have different perceptions of health. The general perception of the health is the 
absence of any objective signs or symptoms of the disease relating to improper functioning of the body, 
like pain or distress. This cannot be shared as  an ideology amongst health care givers. It is not merely the 
absence of any disease which defines health rather it is a dynamic process of well -being. An individual’s 
well-being is largely determined by his/her psychological state and social harmony. Psyc hological trauma 
plays a significant role in the development of mental illnesses. Post -traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is a 
characteristic clinical picture resulting from psychological trauma. It is found that people experiencing 
stressful life has more f requent symptoms of PTSD [2]. It is thus worthwhile to note the importance of 
psychosocial factors in the development of an illness.       
George L. Engel quoted “We are now faced with the necessity and the challenge to broaden the approach 
to disease to i nclude the psychosocial without sacrificing the enormous advantages of the biomedical 
approach” [1, 3]. This is a more realistic approach as lifestyle factors play a significant role since the 
society has entered the new millennium. The author mentioned in  his article that psychological, social and 
biological factors were in play in the development of disease in all strata of societies; ancient or modern, 
pre-literate or literate. To determine whether a person is sick, the author mentioned, the verbal and 
behavioural demonstration of an individual are the first to be noticed to make a judgement [1]. 
The biomedical model puts forth a view that a person who is feeling sick but has normal laboratory 
findings is healthy and a person feeling well having abnormal laboratory findings is unhealthy. This 
discrepancy can never be explained with the biomedical model of the disease. The bio -psychosocial model

253 weighs the relative contribution of social and psychological as well as 
biological factors in the status of patient -hood. It can be understood by 
an example of a man acquiring diabetes at the age of 40 years. The 
clinical manifestation of the disease might  have presented at the age of 
40 years but the pathological processes already started at earlier stage 
because of stress and poor eating habits of excess carbohydrates and 
refined foods, which lead to insulin resistance and which ultimately 
resulted in the  apparent disease [4]. It takes a long time for insulin 
resistance to manifest as diabetes, which is a result of chronic stress 
and prolong unhealthy behaviour. Patient with diabetes requires a 
holistic approach for their treatment. Such patients are requi red to 
address all of the factors responsible for the development of disease 
and not just one. It will be futile to only correct his blood glucose levels 
by a medicine and not thinking about the major contributing factors at 
all.   
The bio -psychosocial mod el helps a health care giver to understand 
better the role of various factors responsible for the development of 
the disease and provide more comprehensive preventative information 
to the patients in the society about how they should adjust their 
lifestyle s to have a better quality of life. The diseases of modern age 
like coronary heart disease and cancers are associated with established 
psychological and social components to their causation. The 
psychological factors such as high self -esteem and perceived control of 
life have been attributed to many health promoting behaviours like 
exercise, balanced diet, avoiding excess alcohol and avoiding smoking. 
All of them prevent having coronary heart disease [3]. Tobacco use is 
an established cause of cancer which relies heavily on behavioural and 
psychological aspects of a person. Similarly, gastrointestinal cancers 
have been found to have dietary factors associated with them [5].  
The role of burden of stress i n the development of diseases is well 
known. Many individuals are faced with various environmental, social 
and psychological demands which exceed their ability to cope. Such 
individuals ultimately produce adverse physiological changes in the 
body and thus are responsible for the disease outcome [6]. It implies 
that a patient should never be only looked at as a diseased body. The 
psychological and social factors should always be included for a proper 
intervention. It is necessary to address the beliefs, perc eption and 
attributes of an individual about their health and illness. It would have 
been difficult to accomplish a holistic approach to increase the status 
of the society had we been considering biomedical models alone.   
Consideration of social factors i s deemed necessary to address an 
illness. Factors such as loneliness, lack of social participation, the 
effects of unemployment  are all related to poor health outcomes [3]. 
It will help to address the public health agencies to intervene in 
poverty, unempl oyment and loneliness in society through proper 
channels. It is a revolutionary approach. The public health agencies will 
be able to provide enormous data associated with these adverse social 
conditions to the government to implement changes at political l evel. 
In an article by Buckner et al  in 2013, the authors mentioned that the 
relationship between substance use disorder and social anxiety 
disorder could be very well explained using the bio -psychosocial 
model. The authors explained that socially anxious individuals manage 
their unpleasant affective states by using substances thereby 
increasing positive affect and avoiding social scrutiny [7]. Social anxiety 
is also related to tobacco smoking and nicotine dependence and thus it 
is important to address subs tance -use behaviours in people with social 
anxiety. It is also imperative to find the reason behind the substance 
use or else all efforts to treat a person will go in vain.   
The general practitioners and hospital doctors should be able to accept 
the role of psychological techniques to address the issues related to 
illnesses. The psychological, social and biological aspects of a disease 
are inseparable and should be seen together. It is beneficial to train 
new doctors and health care givers keeping the fund amental teachings 
of the bio -psychosocial model. Such trained healthcare givers will be able to see a patient effectively and be able to divide their resources 
efficiently. All of this will lead to better outcomes for public health.  
In a study conducted by  Alonso in 2004, the author pointed out that 
physicians were reluctant to incorporate the bio -psychosocial model 
and were more focussing on traditional methods for treating the 
patients [8]. On the contrary, there are studies which showed adoption 
of the b io-psychosocial model in the treatment of schizophrenia [9], 
chronic fatigue [10], antisocial behaviour [11], gastrointestinal illnesses 
[12], spinal cord injury [13] and pain management [14]. It is also 
essential to understand that this model is not only concerned with the 
curing of the lesion, but also helping an ailing patient to regain his 
normal life activities. A study done by Ashar et al  in 2007 showed that 
neural pathways which were associated with pain detection and those 
that link pain with negati ve emotions became relatively less active 
after having a prior knowledge about the success of a medical 
intervention [15]. 
Although, the agents causing an illness are mainly biological, 
psychological and social, the individual should be centred while 
treat ing the disease and thus he or she is responsible for their 
treatment. For example, taking medication, changing lifestyle and 
avoiding unhealthy food items are responsibility of the individual. 
Health and illness exist on a continuum and the person progres ses 
along this continuum. In contrast to this, the biomedical model states 
that individuals are regarded as victims of some external agents 
causing unhealthy internal changes and these individuals are not seen 
responsible for their own health. The onus lie s on the treating 
physician himself, and health and illness are seen qualitatively different 
from each other. The biomedical model also wrongly states that the 
illness may have psychological consequences, but not psychological 
agents. For example, cancer m ay lead to sadness and depression and 
not the vice versa.  
The bio -psychosocial model guides the availability of medical wisdom 
for the benefit of each patient individually which leads to improved 
satisfaction and better adherence to the treatment plan. This applies to 
any disease in the society and with improved health outcomes of 
everyone we can uplift the health status of the society. It is easier to 
reduce unnecessary utilisation of available resources and strengthen 
the efficiency of the health care framework in the society by using the 
bio-psychosocial model.  Public health agencies can use this model to 
predict various outcomes of psychological and social factors into 
preventing appropriate preventative and intervention strategies. It 
leads to significant understanding of mental health difficulties and 
helps i n the development of application of psychological support for 
mentally ill.    
There have been critical views of the bio -psychosocial models. Experts 
state that it is time consuming and expensive to apply. It lacks the 
theoretical basis and the evidence to  support it is not many. It was also 
suggested that it is difficult to gauge which factor is more responsible 
for the outcome of disease and thus lead to an unequal measure for 
the treatment. There are many poorly equipped countries with lack of 
adequate r esources to implement such a model. Also, there is a lack of 
straightforward guidelines to treat a disease, under this model, in 
clinical practice. There are authors who have put an objection on this 
model and called it “vague”. The authors proposed that p redictions 
cannot be measured or tested to evaluate this model [16]. Also, it was 
mentioned that it represents an inefficient and time -consuming 
process which cannot be applied for individual patients on a daily basis. 
From the perspective of a health psyc hologist, the dynamic swaying 
between health and illness has multi -factorial causes. It is naïve to 
attribute the psychological and social causes alone for the causation of 
disease [17].   
Nonetheless, the incorporation of the bio -psychosocial model in pub lic 
health leads to ideal practice of modern medicine. It leads to better 
and improved patient care, compliance and satisfaction. The fact that

254 there is a dire need for more research in this model and thus cannot be 
ignored to help identify its clear role in public health.    
There are many evidences showing that health disparities and social 
determinants play a significant role in the health outcomes such as 
illness, wellness, disability and death [17]. Leading causes of death i.e. 
heart diseases, stroke a nd chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases are 
all preventable through lifestyle choices [18]. It challenges and 
demands us to shift our outlook of the diseases in the current times. 
We are failing as healthcare givers if we are ignoring the impact of the 
most crucial aspect of psychological and social factors on our health.  
We need to accept the issues such as multi -morbidity and we need to 
integrate patient -oriented and recovery -oriented care into the current 
medical practices [19]. A better part of any p rescription should include 
behavioural components like weight loss, smoking cessation and 
regular exercises to reduce the risk.  
CONCLUSION  
The bio -psychosocial model has indeed revolutionised the way the 
health care sector approaches a patient of the 21st century and has 
been hugely successful in cutting short the gap between actual health 
and a sense of being healthy. The bio -psychosocial model is a strong 
model that draws heavy attention on the person as whole rather on 
the illness alone. It has generate d a new perception to see the health 
of the population. It has broadened the horizon of public health 
agencies to see and examine the illness with a different approach and 
to provide better results in the preventative approaches.  
REFERENCES  
1. Engel GL. The n eed for a new medical model: a challenge for 
biomedicine. Science. 1977;  196(4286):129 -36. 
2. Hasto J, Vojtova H, Hruby R, Tavel  P. Biopsychosocial approach to 
psychological trauma and possible health consequences. Neuro 
Endocrinology Letters. 2013;  34(6):464 -81. 
3. Inerney S. Introducing the biopsychosocial model for good 
medicine and good doctors. BMJ. 2018;  324(7353).  
4. Lloyd C, Smit h J, Weinger K. Stress and diabetes: a review of the 
links. Diabetes Spectrum. 2005;  18(2):121 -7. 
5. Doll R, Peto R. The causes of cancer: quantitative estimates of 
avoidable risks of cancer in the United States today. JNCI: Journal 
of the National Cancer Ins titute. 1981;  66(6):1192 -308.  
6.  Lazarus RS, Folkman S. Coping and adaptation. The Handbook of 
Behavioral Medicine. 1984;  282325.  
7. Buckner JD, Heimberg RG, Ecker AH, Vinci C. A biopsychosocial 
model of social anxiety and substance use. Depression and 
Anxiety.  2013;  30(3):276 -84. 
8. Alonso Y. The biopsychosocial model in medical research: the 
evolution of the health concept over the last two decades. Patient 
Education and Counseling. 2004;  53(2):239 -44. 
9. Kotsiubinskii A. A biopsychosocial model of schizophrenia. 
International Journal of Mental Health. 2002;  31(2):51 -60. 
10.  Jason LA, Richman JA, Friedberg F, Wagner L, Taylor R, Jordan KM. 
More on the biopsychosocial model of chronic fatigue syndrome. 
 American Psychologist, 1998 ; 53(9):1081 -1082.  
11. Dodge KA, Pettit GS. A biopsychosocial model of the development 
of chronic conduct problems in adolescence. Developmental 
Psychology. 2003;  39(2):349.  
12. Drossman  DA. Gastrointestinal illness and the biopsychosocial 
model. Journal of Clinical Gastroenterology. 1996;  22(4):252 -4. 13. Mathew K, Ravichandran G, May K, Morsley K. The 
biopsychosocial model and spinal cord injury. Spinal Cord. 2001;  
39(12):644.  
14. Truchon M. De terminants of chronic disability related to low back 
pain: towards an integrative biopsychosocial model. Disability and 
Rehabilitation. 2001;  23(17):758 -67. 
15. Ashar  YK, Chang LJ, Wager TD. Brain mechanisms of the placebo 
effect: an affective appraisal account. Annual Review of Clinical 
Psychology. 2017;  13:73 -98. 
16. Smith RC, Fortin AH, Dwamena F, Frankel RM. An evidence -based 
patient -centered method makes the biopsycho social model 
scientific. Patient Education and Counseling. 2013;  91(3):265 -70. 
17. Frazier LD. The past, present, and future of the biopsychosocial 
model: A review of The Biopsychosocial Model of Health and 
Disease: New philosophical and scientific development s by Derek 
Bolton and Grant Gillett. New Ideas in Psychology. 
2020;57:100755.  
18. World Health Organisation. Top 10 causes of deaths 2019 [cited 
2019 20 -November -2019]. Available from: 
https://www.who.int/news -room/fact -sheets/detail/the -top-10-
causes -of-
death #targetText=Ischaemic%20heart%20disease%20and%20stro
ke,in%20the%20last%2015%20years.  
19. Gittell JH, Hajjar L. Strengthening Patient -Centered Care in the 
VHA: A Relational Model of Change. Springer , 2019.