EXPERT REVIEW OPEN
Putting the “mental ”back in “mental disorders ”: a perspective
from research on fear and anxiety
Vincent Taschereau-Dumouchel1,2✉, Matthias Michel3, Hakwan Lau4, Stefan G. Hofmann5,6and Joseph E. LeDoux7,8
© The Author(s) 2021
Mental health problems often involve clusters of symptoms that include subjective (conscious) experiences as well as behavioral
and/or physiological responses. Because the bodily responses are readily measured objectively, these have come to be emphasized
when developing treatments and assessing their effectiveness. On the other hand, the subjective experience of the patient
reported during a clinical interview is often viewed as a weak correlate of psychopathology. To the extent that subjective symptomsare related to the underlying problem, it is often assumed that they will be taken care of if the more objective behavioral and
physiological symptoms are properly treated. Decades of research on anxiety disorders, however, show that behavioral and
physiological symptoms do not correlate as strongly with subjective experiences as is typically assumed. Further, the treatmentsdeveloped using more objective symptoms as a marker of psychopathology have mostly been disappointing in effectiveness.
Given that “mental ”disorders are named for, and de ﬁned by, their subjective mental qualities, it is perhaps not surprising,
in retrospect, that treatments that have sidelined mental qualities have not been especially effective. These negativeattitudes about subjective experience took root in psychiatry and allied ﬁelds decades ago when there were few avenues
for scienti ﬁcally studying subjective experience. Today, however, cognitive neuroscience research on consciousness is thriving,
and offers a viable and novel scienti ﬁc approach that could help achieve a deeper understanding of mental disorders and
their treatment.
Molecular Psychiatry (2022) 27:1322–1330; https://doi.org/10.1038/s41380-021-01395-5
INTRODUCTION
Problems related to fear and anxiety are among the most prevalentforms of mental illnesses [ 1] and have been the subject of much
research in animals [ 2–8] and humans [ 9,10]. The success of this
pre-clinical research has substantially in ﬂuenced modern clinical
interventions [ 11–19]. Yet, treatments remain less satisfactory than
patients and therapists would like [ 20–24]. We propose here that
one factor, more than all others, has contributed to this state of
affairs: the systematic marginalization of the subjective experienceof patients as a research topic and treatment target.
Modern theories of emotion started in the late nineteenth
century with Charles Darwin [ 25] and William James [ 26]. Both
emphasized subjective experience but in different ways. ForDarwin the mental state of emotion caused behavioral andphysiological responses in the body, while for James the body
responses de ﬁned the mental state. Contemporary theories of
human emotions, including fear and anxiety, still emphasize therelation between subjective experience, overt behavior, and
physiological changes [ 26,27]. But the subjective component,
typically assessed via verbal report, has been viewed as no moreimportant than the others, and, in fact, has often been least valuedby scientists. This bias has its roots in the early twentieth centurywhen behaviorists, because of free-wheeling attribution of mental
states as causes of human and animal behavior [ 28,29], shunned
subjective experience as a scienti ﬁc construct [ 30]. The trend
continued in the middle of the century, when physiological
psychologists, mostly from behaviorist backgrounds, began study-
ing brain mechanisms of overt behavior in animals using themethods of behaviorism and embracing its disdain for anything
mental [ 31–34]. Although cognitive science was emerging as a new
approach to the mind around this time, it treated the mind as asystem that processes information rather than one that generatessubjective experiences [ 35].
Throughout much of the ﬁrst half of the twentieth century, the
subjective mind was nevertheless alive and well in psychiatry,which was dominated by the psychoanalytic approach initiated bySigmund Freud. But clinical psychologists in the 1950s and 60s
began designing new therapies based on behavioral principles
[36,37
]. And biologically oriented psychiatrists were searching
for medicinal treatments, often through behaviorist-inspired
studies of animals [ 38–40]. Proponents of these approaches were
motivated, in part, by a desire to distance themselves from Freud ’s
legacy. While they had cause to desire a fresh start, rather thansimply distancing themselves from Freud ’s view of the mind,
Received: 23 April 2021 Revised: 11 November 2021 Accepted: 19 November 2021
Published online: 26 January 20221Department of Psychiatry and Addictology, Université de Montréal, Montreal, Canada.2Centre de Recherche de l ’Institut Universitaire en Santé Mentale de Montréal, Montreal,
Canada.3Department of Philosophy, New York University, New York, NY 1003, USA.4RIKEN Center for Brain Science, Wako, Japan.5Department of Clinical Psychology, Philipps-
University Marburg, Marburg, Germany.6Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Boston University, Boston, MA, USA.7Center for Neural Science and Department of
Psychology, New York University, New York, NY 1003, USA.8Department of Psychiatry, and Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, New York University Langone Medical
School, New York, NY 1003, USA.✉email: vincent.taschereau-dumouchel@umontreal.cawww.nature.com/mp Molecular Psychiatry1234567890();,:

they dismissed the central role of subjective mental states in
mental illness.
During this same time, the cognitive approach to therapy was
also emerging in the hands of Albert Ellis [ 41] and Aaron Beck [ 42],
both of whom were initially trained as psychoanalysts. Their twistwas to change the focus of subjective distress from unresolved
unconscious con ﬂict to maladaptive beliefs and automatic
thoughts. However, over the subsequent years, the popularity ofthe medical model of psychiatry came to be the standard of howto evaluate therapeutic outcomes, and even cognitive approaches
began to treat subjective experience as just another factor
that contributed to the “disease ”. As a result, the tendency to
marginalize subjective experience is the norm rather than theexception in the ﬁeld, despite the fact that the way a patient feels
subjectively is a major factor that leads them to seek help, and
also shapes their evaluation of whether the treatment has beeneffective.
Clinicians, of course, have always wanted their patients to
feel better as a result of their therapies. But because of theinconsistencies they observed in the self-report of patients duringclinical interviews, self-report acquired a bad reputation. As we will
see, this was supported by research that questioned the reliability
of self-report. But in throwing the baby out with the bathwater,important, empirically useful aspects of self-report were ignored.As therapy became more evidence-based, and insurers demanded
objective treatment targets to evaluate treatment success, the
scienti ﬁc merit of self-reports was further marginalized (as
reﬂected in the NIMH RDoC initiative [ 43,44]).
In this paper, we propose that the marginalization of subjective
experience in modern psychology, neuroscience, and psychiatrymade it inevitable that the treatments developed and implemen-ted would be less effective than desirable. Speci ﬁcally, we suggest
that treatments designed to target easily measurable behavioral
and physiological manifestations, while useful for treatingbehavioral and physiological symptoms, are problematic as anapproach to improving subjective well-being.
We will use fear to make our case, and will argue that, contrary
to long-standing and current trends, subjective fear is notjust
another factor in the emotion fear; it is what the emotion fear is[3,22,45]. We believe that the acceptance of this view would
allow a deeper understanding of the relation of adaptive to
pathological fear and anxiety, and pave the way for new, moreeffective, approaches for the treatment of prevalent and troubling
conditions involving these mental states.
Before laying out our arguments, it is important to point out
that fear and anxiety, though related, are different states (see [ 3]).
Nevertheless, because these terms have often been used
interchangeably in the historical literature, we use the terms
interchangeably when referring to historical points.
THE DISEASE MODEL OF FEAR AND ANXIETY
Early nosological systems emphasized deep-seated psychody-namic con ﬂicts as the latent causes of dysfunction in multiple
mental illnesses. Today, the Ame rican Psychiatric Association
[46,p .2 0 ]d e ﬁnes mental disorders, including anxiety disorders,
as“a syndrome characterized by clinically signi ﬁcant distur-
bance in an individual ’s cognition, emotion regulation, or
behavior that re ﬂects a dysfunction in the psychological,
biological, or developmental processes underlying mental
functioning ”. Contemporary classi ﬁcation systems, such as the
International Classi ﬁcation of Disease (ICD-11) and the Diag-
nostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5),
explain “
dysfunction ”by adopting a medical illness model that
a s s u m e st h a ts y m p t o m sr e ﬂect latent disease entities. In this
perspective, anxiety disorders are a consequence of abnormal
brain circuits, neurotransmitter s, genes, and/or other biological
abnormalities [ 43]. It is assumed that pharmacological and/orpsychological interventions can b e effective treatments because
they correct such pathophy siological conditions.
This medical perspective gave rise to the commonly used
approach of evaluating the involvement of pharmaceutical andother biological targets using behavioral tests in animals beforeconducting clinical trials in humans. It was assumed that
interventions that proved effective and safe in pre-clinical studies
could then be tested in human patients. Because animals lackthe ability to give verbal self-reports of their inner feelings,behavioral and physiological responses could be used as proxies
for subjective experience.
But contrary to the predictions of the medical model, decades
of research have failed to discover new, ef ﬁcacious pharmacolo-
gical treatments [ 20,21,47–49]. As a result, the pharmaceutical
industry has been eliminating or reducing efforts in psychiatric
drug discovery [ 23,24,50]. According to Steven Hyman [ 51],
former director of the National Institute of Mental Health, the
failure of the pharmaceutical industry in the area of psychiatric
research is leading to a global healthcare crisis since psychiatricillness is the world ’s leading cause of disability, and is resulting in
enormous societal burden.
Why has this effort failed? We believe that it was, in fact,
doomed from the start by its commitment to a simplistic view ofhuman suffering [ 52]. Speci ﬁcally, the medical model of fear
depends too heavily on the assumption that all three aspects of
fear (subjective, behavioral, physiological) have a common
origin —a fear circuit —in the brain. For instance, the DSM-5
describes fear as including “surges of autonomic arousal
necessary for ﬁght or ﬂight, thoughts of immediate danger,
and escape behaviors ”([46], p. 189). This view posits that all
three aspects are manifestations o f the same underlying circuits.
Since we humans are assumed to have inherited our “fear
circuits ”from our mammalian ancestors, interventions that are
effective at normalizing behavior al and physiological proxies in
rats and mice should be effecti ve in treating fear and anxiety
d i s o r d e r s .T ot h ee x t e n tt h a ts u b j e c t i v ef e e l i n g sa r ea l s o
troubling, treating the fear circ uit should address those, since
fear, like behavioral and physiol ogical responses, is a product of
the fear circuit. As noted above, we do not share this view andsuggest that subjective and objective responses be addressed
separately.
Terminological confusion in the study of “fear ”
Fear has received more scienti ﬁ
c attention than any other
emotion. But there have been two con ﬂicting approaches. The
ﬁrst started with Darwin, who de ﬁned emotions like fear as “states
of mind ”that we have inherited from our mammalian ancestors
by virtue of having inherited some feature of their nervous system
[25]. This meshed well with the emphasis on consciousness by
both animal and human psychologists in the late nineteenthcentury [ 53]. The second approach began in the early twentieth
century when the “behaviorists “called out psychologists for their
rampant and often unjusti ﬁed use of consciousness as explanation
of behavior.
The behaviorists dominated psychology for the next several
decades. Consequently, the vast majority of researchers in animalpsychology from the 1920s into the 1960s, and even into the1970s, were either behaviorists, or trained by behaviorists. Despite
their disdain for the use of subjective states to explain behavior,
behaviorists nevertheless retained the use of subjective stateterms (e.g., fear, hunger) to describe the motivations underlyingbehavior. These researchers did not typically mean that a
subjective state of fear or hunger was responsible for avoidance
of danger or approach to food [ 54,55]. Instead, these terms were
said to refer to hypothetical intervening variables that connected
stimuli with responses [ 56]. For example, fear was a functional
relation between a dangerous or threatening stimulus and aprotective (defensive) response [ 57–59].V. Taschereau-Dumouchel et al.
1323
Molecular Psychiatry (2022) 27:1322 – 1330

Meanwhile, biologists studying behavior worked more in the
tradition of Darwin. One group, the ethologists, opposed the
behaviorist lack of concern with species differences in behavior,
but tended to side with them regarding subjective experience[60]. Another group, physiologists, studied the brain mechanisms
of emotional behavior. The well-known work of Cannon, Bard,
Hess, Kluver, and Bucy revealed the role of the hypothalamus and
temporal lobe in aggressive and defensive behaviors (see [ 2]).
These researchers were unconstrained by behaviorism and somefreely treated the emotional behaviors they studied as indicators
of subjective feelings of rage or fear.
In the 1950s some behaviorists became physiological psychol-
ogists. That is, their intervening variables became physiologicalstates in brain areas. This move was inspired by the work of the
physiologists mentioned above. But physiological psychologists
mostly remained true to their behaviorist legacy, treating thephysiological factors they studied as non-subjective motivational
states, at least initially.
The leading behavioral approach for studying “fear”in animal
psychology from the 1940s through the 1970s was Mowrer ’s[61–64]
avoidance procedure ([ 65,66]F o rar e v i e w ,s e e[ 67]). Mowrer
proposed that rats are motivated to avoid aversive stimuli (electric
shocks) by “fear.”Behaviors that led to successful escape from, and
later avoidance of, the aversive stimulus were reinforced by “fear”
reduction. An important ﬁnding was that early in training heart rate
rises, but then once the avoidance response is well-established the
rate normalizes [ 65,66,68]. This was interpreted to mean that “fear”
leads to the elevation of heart rate. Successful avoidance is then
accompanied by a reduction of “fear,”and a decrease in heart rate
follows [ 69].
Behaviorists like Mowrer treated fear as an intervening variable
[57,64]. What did this mean? The natural assumption among
behaviorists at the time was that fear was a non-subjective state
that controls behavior. But as behaviorism became a lessdominant force in psychology, even some behaviorists began tospeak about “fear”as if they meant subjective fear, using
expressions like “frightened rats ”or“rats frozen in fear ”[65,70].
Often within a single paper “fear”seemed to refer to a non-
subjective state in some sentences, while in others it seemed to
imply that the animals were subjectively afraid. This was likely as
much about ideology as about how dif ﬁcult it is to refrain from
reverting to the use of an everyday vernacular term for a mentalstate in a non-mental state way.
Some two decades after starting the ﬁeld, Mowrer clari ﬁed his
position, noting that rats freeze and avoid “by-cause of ”fear; for
him, in other words, “fear”always meant conscious fear [ 71].
Though one could have read this between the lines that he
penned over the years, the ﬁeld seems to have been blinded to
what he was really saying by their ideology.
Mowrer ’s work not only impacted research on animal behavior
but also came to be the way that fear was viewed by clinicians.
From the beginning, Mowrer was interested in avoidance learning
in animals as a tool for understanding pathological human anxiety[63]. At that time, Freud ’s psychoanalytic approach was the
dominant clinical approach, and Mowrer proposed that principles
of behavioral learning could improve clinical treatments [ 72].
Subsequently, Mowrer ’s colleague, Neal Miller, continued this
effort, writing a book called Personality and Psychotherapy with the
psychoanalyst John Dollard [ 73]. But by then psychoanalysis was
on the wane, and these efforts, rather than broadening the scopeof psychoanalytic treatment, paved the way for the emergence ofbehavior therapy [ 36], and then cognitive-behavioral therapy
[41,74]. Mowrer ’s two-factor theory continues to be cited in
contemporary clinical understanding of anxiety [ 75–77].
The terminology of fear became even more confusing in the
1970s with the revival of the Darwinian approach adopted by
psychological researchers in guise of basic emotions theory [ 78–81].
Fear, in this perspective, was an innate emotion inherited frommammalian ancestors in the form of a neural “affect program “or
“emotion operating system. ”Jaak Panksepp [ 80,81], for example,
used evidence implicating the amygdala and periaqueductal gray
regions of the brain in the defensive behaviors of rats as the basis forpostulating that homologous emotion operating systems underlies,not just behavioral and physiological responses, but also the
subjective experience of fear in rats and humans alike.
Many working on the circuits underlying defensive behavior in
the behaviorist-oriented physiological psychology tradition at thistime did not bother to address the issue of what fear meant, since
conscious fear was a non-starter, and they just assumed it was a
non-subjective physiological amygdala state. Nevertheless, whendiscussing the implications of behavioral studies in animals forunderstanding fear and anxiety as clinical problems, they often
talked about fear in the colloquial way.
Because the colloquial way is the way most people, including
lay people, journalists, and most scientists not in the fear ﬁeld,
think about fear, the public conv ersation about fear circuits was
about conscious fear. The result was that the idea of the
amygdala as the seat of fearful feelings in the brain became acultural meme, one that also implied that drugs or other
treatments that target the amygdala could make people less
fearful and anxious [ 18,82,83].
Lang ’s three-systems model of fear
As a result of the inconsistent use of the term “fear”in the 40s and
50s, some researchers in the 1960s began to wrestle anew withfear as a scienti ﬁc construct. The work of Peter Lang was
particularly important.
Lang noted a number of instances in the literature which
showed that subjective fear experiences (as measured by verbalreports) did not correlate well with objective and measurable
behavioral responses (e.g., avoidance behavior) and physiological
changes (e.g., in heart rate) [ 84–86]. Accordingly, he was critical of
the importance that some clinicians placed on subjective statesover behavior and physiology.
Under the lingering in ﬂuence of behaviorism and the growing
inﬂuence of the new cognitive movement in psychology, Lang
proposed that verbal behavior should be repurposed. Rather thanusing it as a way to assess intangible subjective experiences, it
should be used to track more tangible cognitive processes.
Treatment could then be focused on altering verbal behavior,which would, in turn, re ﬂect changes in the underlying cognitive
processes, much like the way that treatments that change overt
behavior or physiological arousal do so because they changeunderlying processes.
Expressing his scienti ﬁc distaste for subjective experience, Lang
noted: “whether seen as causes or consequences, feelings are
beyond the pale of direct scienti ﬁc inquiry ”([87], 124). Fear, he
said, “is not some hard phenomenal lump that lives inside people ”
[87]. Instead, it is a response expressed in three response systems:
verbal (cognitive), overt motor, and somatic. The responses
corresponding with these were self-report for the cognitivesystem, behavior (especially avoidance behavior) for the overt
motor system, and physiological changes for the somatic system.
Therapy, he argued, should focus on changing the speci ﬁc
response systems, since each contributes separately to the overallintensity of fear.
Discordance and desynchrony
Lang ’s,“three-system model ”stimulated much clinical research
and theorizing [ 88–94]. While his views had their greatest impact
on clinical research, they also affected basic research in
psychology and neuroscience.
One problem was that Lang ’s terminology (cognitive, overt
motor, and somatic responses) was a bit unclear. For example,
“somatic ”is more typically used to refer to skeletal-motor
responses underlying overt behavior than to visceral autonomicV. Taschereau-Dumouchel et al.
1324
Molecular Psychiatry (2022) 27:1322 – 1330

responses (e.g. [ 95]). As we proceed we will, therefore, use a more
straightforward set of terms: self-report, behavioral, and physio-
logical responses. By “self-report ”we speci ﬁcally mean verbal
reports resulting from conscious fear experiences. Such reportscan be interpreted as indicating that the person is having, or hashad, a subjective experience of fear in the presence of a
threatening stimulus or situation. By “physiological responses ”
we mean increases in skin conductance, heart rate or othervisceral changes in the body in response to threatening stimuli orsituations. By “behavioral responses ”we mean threat-elicited
reactions (freezing, ﬂight), as well as threat-motivated instru-
mental behaviors (avoidance), expressed in the presence ofthreatening stimuli or situations [ 96].
We will use this terminology to discuss two kinds of
discrepancies in this literature. The lack of concordance between
the three measures of “fear”at a given time is referred to as
discordance [90]. There are many examples of discordance in the
literature [ 97]. For instance, in the presence of threat, patients
have reported high levels of subjective fear, and yet demonstratenormal or even low levels of physiological threat responses (e.g.heart rate or skin conductance measures), while others show the
opposite pattern [ 89,98–102]. Other forms of discordance have
been observed following pharmacological interventions [ 103].
Medications, such as beta-blockers, for example, can dampen thehyperreactivity of the autonomic nervous system (e.g. heart rate
acceleration) or behavior (e.g., trembling hands, ﬁdgeting) in the
presence of actual or perceived threats without necessarilyaffecting the subjective experience of anxiety [ 104].
Discordance is distinguished from the phenomenon of desyn-
chrony. The latter refers to variations in the levels of the threemeasures over time. For example, a patient undergoing behavioraltherapy for exaggerated fear or anxiety may ﬁrst show signs of
reduced behavioral and physiological symptoms, and gradually
demonstrate changes in self-reports of fear later on. This wasreported by Lang in early clinical trials [ 105]. Another example
pertains to the desynchrony between avoidance behaviors and
subjective fear. For instance, the presentation of aversive stimuli
often generates both avoidance behaviors and subjective reportsof fear. But, successful avoidance will typically lead to a decreasein fear reports while avoidance behaviors can persist over
extended periods of time [ 106].
Cases of discordance and desynchrony emphasize that beha-
vioral and physiological responses that are sometimes correlated
with subjective fear should not necessarily be interpreted as
indicating that the person is consciously experiencing subjectivefeelings of fear per se [ 54,55,107]. In fact, for the sake of clarity,
if nothing else, we maintain that the mental state term “fear”
should be reserved for the mental state, and behavioral and
physiological responses should be referred to as “threat ”or
“defense “responses.
Considerable confusion in the discordance and desynchrony
literature has also resulted from a failure to recognize that in
threatening situations a variety of behaviors can result [ 96].
Species-typical (innate) reactions (e.g. freezing behavior) are
automatically elicited by unlearned or conditioned stimuli, while
instrumental responses (e.g. avoidance) are acquired by theirconsequences and are emitted in appropriate situations. Species-typical reactions to unlearned or conditioned stimuli have reliable
physiological correlates that are “wired in ”as part of the “defense
reaction ”[108], but most avoidance and other instrumental
responses do not, since these can be achieved in many ways[109]. This may account for the poor correlation often observed
between physiological measures and avoidance behavior [ 106].
Furthermore, instrumental avoidance responses, though oftentreated as a single class of response, can be due to habit learning,
goal-directed action learning, or cognitive deliberation, each of
which involves different neural circuits [ 96,110]. Future studies
should adopt a more subtle approach to behavioral measures.Conceptual challenges
Given that discordance and desynchrony between responses
occur, the key question is whether self-report, behavior, and
physiology should be interpreted as indicating the existence ofdifferent psychological constructs, or whether they should beinterpreted as indications of a single multi-faceted underlying
construct. This is an issue of construct validity [ 111].
Construct validation is typically achieved by establishing
robust correlations between the results of different testspurporting to measure the same construct. If measures of self-
report, physiological activity , and behavioral responses were
systematically correlated, it would be relatively straightforwardto interpret them as collectively re ﬂecting a single underlying
construct. However, studies have typically found that self-report
shares only a modest part of its variance with other measures
[112], with the most optimistic e stimates indicating about
27–28% of shared variance [ 113].
There are two main views regarding the interpretation of
discordance and desynchrony in this literature (for an in-depthdiscussion of these in relation to construct validity in “fear”studies,
see [ 114]). The ﬁrst attempts to salvage a singular fear construct,
despite the existence of discordance and desynchrony, by arguing
that self-report, behavior, and physiology are each indicators ofthe same underlying construct (fear), but that they differ in thedegree of accuracy with which they re ﬂect the construct. The
second posits that the three factors are independent, but
interacting, constructs.
Those who favor the ﬁrst view maintain that using self-reports to
assess fear in effect amounts to using an inaccurate measurement
procedure. For instance, Fanselow and Pennington (2018) [ 82,p .2 7 ]
argue that the amygdala is a “fear generator ”that controls all three
response types, but that the most reliable measures are the
behavioral and physiological outputs. They write that “the additional
machinery needed to generate subjective report probably addsadditional noise, rendering it …a less pure and objective measure of
fear.”In this view, cases of discordance and desynchrony are
explained away as being due to the fact that self-reports are the
l e a s ta c c u r a t eo ft h et h r e em e a s u r e so ff e a r[ 58,82
,115]. According
to Fanselow and Pennington (2018), emphasizing the subjectiveexperience of fear will “push us back well over a century to what was
truly the dark ages of psychiatry ”(p. 28).
In contrast, those who favor the second view posit that cases of
discordance and desynchrony indicate the existence of separate
factors. For example, LeDoux and colleagues [ 21,116–118] argue
that while behavioral and physiological responses elicited bythreats are products of the amygdala, subjective fear re ﬂects a
cognitive interpretation that one is in a situation of potential or
actual psychological or physical harm. Such an approach is hardly
a fringe idea, as cognitive theories are leading explanations ofemotions [ 119–121]. Recently, the higher-order theory (HOT) of
consciousness (see Box 1;[122]), which is usually discussed in
relation to visual perception, has been extended as a novel
cognitive account of fear and other emotions [ 116,123,124].
According to HOT, consciousness arises when higher-order
cognitive structures monitor or meta-represent lower-order
information (see Fig. 1). A simple version of the higher-order
account would be that signals resulting from the consequences ofthe behavioral and physiological responses generated by the
amygdala in the brain and body are re-represented and contribute
to the experience of fear. But the model also includes emotionschema and self-schema, as well as meta-representations ofsemantic and episodic memories. These representations result in a
mental model of the dangerous situation, which can fully account
for the subjective experience of fear, even in situations where theamygdala activity and body feedback are absent. That this is
necessary is clearly indicated by discordance and desynchrony
between subjective fear and body arousal. Antonio Damasio [ 125]V. Taschereau-Dumouchel et al.
1325
Molecular Psychiatry (2022) 27:1322 – 1330

similarly noticed this and proposed “as if body loops ”that
simulate brain and body activity when these are absent.
The controversy surrounding the two perspectives is in part
fueled by the long and complex history of subjective reports[29,126]. For instance, some social psychologists have suggested
that self-reports about the causes of our own actions are
often mistaken [ 127,128]. The use of self-reports has also been
criticized in other disciplines, such as sociology [ 129], thusindicating that humans sometimes exhibit surprisingly poor
capacities for self-knowledge (for a review, see [ 130]). This
evidence could be interpreted as suggesting that subjective
reports are systematically inaccurate, and are, therefore, unreliablescienti ﬁc tools.
However, alleged cases of unreliability are not cases in which
subjects report about ongoing conscious experiences, but instead
are typically cases in which participants report about the causes oftheir behaviors [ 128], or about long-standing psychological
attitudes such as their beliefs [ 130]. Aside from pathological cases
(e.g. Anton ’s syndrome), or malicious deceit, there is no signi ﬁcant
body of empirical evidence to support a general dismissal ofsubjective reports about conscious experiences such as perceptualexperiences, fear or anxiety [ 131,132]. As a matter of fact, a wide
variety of experiments in ﬁelds, such as perceptual psychology
[133], and even more germane, the scienti ﬁc study of emotions
[134], rely on experimentally controlled subjective reports about
what the subject experiences.
According to Borsboom et al. ’s[135, p. 1061] de ﬁnition of
validity, “a test is valid for measuring an attribute if and only if (a)
the attribute exists and (b) variations in the attribute causally
produce variations in the outcomes of the measurement
procedure ”. Given that self-reports can be interpreted as resulting
from variations in metacognitions (cognitive re-representations)that are directly antecedent to the experience of fear, it follows
that self-reports are valid indicators of fear experience. On the
other hand, since behavior and physiology can sometimesdissociate from the feeling of fear, interpreting them as reliable
indicators of fear, if we follow Borsboom, is invalid, though not
necessarily useless.
These observations are in line with the second interpretation of
discordance and desynchrony in fear research discussed above. As
such, we hold that behavior and physiology, on the one hand,
result from threat detection and the activity of defense mechan-isms, while self-report, on the other hand, results from themetacognitions upon which subjective experience is based. It
follows that self-report, which re ﬂects these metacognitions as
well (Fig. 1), is the only valid indicator of fear as a subjective
experience.
Clinical pragmatism
In addition to its scienti ﬁc merits, our view of the subjective fear
construct is consistent with the way patients express their
concerns in clinical settings, and is often what they care most
about. From a clinical perspective, a problem usually only reachesthe level of clinical signi ﬁcance if it is associated with signi ﬁcant
subjective distress and/or interferes with the person ’s life. Without
the subjective experience of distress, it is very dif ﬁcult to conclude
that an individual suffers from an emotional disorder. This is whysubjective distress is a core feature of the de ﬁnition of an
emotional disorder (e.g., in the DSM-5). From this perspective, self-
report is the most direct measure of the patient ’s problem and
treatment ef ﬁcacy. Thus, whether implicit or explicit, the
subjective experience of the patient has been the focal point of
all mental disorders, especially emotional disorders.
At the same time, self-report data rarely determine the clinical
status directly. Instead, the patient ’s subjective report is ﬁltered
and interpreted by a clinician to derive a clinical assessment. This
is in part because clinicians have long recognized that relying
only on self-report in their clinical assessment presents somelimitations. As we discussed in the “Conceptual challenges ”
section, self-report about recalled causes of past behaviors [ 128]
or about beliefs [ 130] can sometimes be misleading. Such
observations, together with the in ﬂuence of the behaviorist
movement, fueled a general trend in psychiatry research to look
for objective (behavioral and physiological) markers of pathology.
For instance, although the Research Domain Criteria initiative(RDoC) of the NIMH (the National Institute of Mental Health in theBox 1. First-order theories vs higher-order theories
In consciousness science, one core topic of disagreement pertains to the origin of
consciousness in the brain. Here, when we say consciousness, we refer to what is
sometimes called phenomenal consciousness, that is the qualitative or phenom-
enal “feel”of experiences. For example, looking at a sunset has a subjective
character that can be described in terms of “what it feels like ”. This is different
from what can be called states of consciousness which are studied, for instance, in
minimally conscious patients or sleep. While undoubtedly important, especially for
clinical practices, the study of states of consciousness does not directly address the
question of how the brain generates this subjective “feel”of things.
While many theories of phenomenal consciousness make vastly different
predictions from one another [ 156], they can be broadly divided in two categories.
First-order theories, such as recurrent processing theory [ 157–160], posit that
consciousness originates in brain regions specialized in the processing of a given
type of information (for instance, visual or auditory cortices). As we saw in the main
text, some authors have suggested that the amygdala might be such a ﬁrst-order
structure in the subjective experience of fear [ 81,82,161]. Another ﬁrst-order
theory, the global neuronal workspace theory, posits that the activity within ﬁrst-
order structures becomes conscious when it is made available to other brain regions
through a global broadcasting mechanism.
On the contrary, higher-order theories suggest that these ﬁrst-order structures
may not be suf ﬁcient for the information to become conscious [ 122,162,163]. They
posit that some additional cognitive processes in other regions may be needed inorder to monitor the information. In this perspective, subjective experience arises
from a mechanism closely related to metacognition, which also involves the
monitoring of one ’s own cognitive and sensory processing [ 164]. As such, the
information represented in ﬁrst-order structures should remain unconscious if no
higher-order processing is involved. With respect to fear, this view posits that the
amygdala non-consciously controls defensive behavioral and physiological
responses to threats, but that higher-order processes are required in order togenerate the subjective experience to the same threatening stimulus
[54,55,107,116,163]. In this view, the re-representation of the ﬁrst-order
information (often termed as meta-representation) is a non-conscious antecedent
to consciousness. We suggest that treatment strategies that target both the
subjective (conscious experience) and objective (behavioral and physiologicalresponses) will be more effective than approaches that primarily focus on objective
responses. We also suggest that measures of discordance and desynchrony can
provide additional indicators of treatment progress.
Fig. 1 Discordance and desynchrony in light of a higher-order
perspective. Threatening stimuli often lead to subjective fear via the
higher-order circuit, and trigger bodily reactions (behavioral andphysiological responses) via the defensive survival circuit, in parallel.
This higher-order model can account for situations where subjective
and objective responses are discordant or desynchronous. Forinstance, blocking physiological reactions (X1) dissociates themfrom conditioned or forecasted actions and/or conscious experi-ences, while blocking physiological reactions (X2) dissociates thosefrom behavior reactions and/or conscious experience. Similar logic
applies to X3 and X4. ANS autonomic nervous system.V. Taschereau-Dumouchel et al.
1326
Molecular Psychiatry (2022) 27:1322 – 1330

United States) [ 43,44] purports to recognize the importance of
human psychology, its view of self-report is ambivalent at best:
“experiential claims represent a kind of “folk”psychology of the
self that should [not be] assumed veridical. ”It also acknowledges
that these claims should not be “simply discounted ”[44, p. 292].
As such, the ultimate goal in psychiatry research in modern times
has chie ﬂy been to identify biological markers of mental disorders,
akin to other medical diseases.
Some have resisted this trend and advocated for the
importance of subjective reports [ 136–138]. For instance, Edna
Foa [ 139], a leading clinical researcher, noted that self-report
generates “valid measures of key constructs, some of which
cannot be measured in any other way, and sometimes are the bestmeasure of the construct of interest ”. Similarly, we [ 3,21,55] and
others [ 45] argued that emotions are ﬁrst and foremost subjective
experiences. As a result, self-report should play a signi ﬁcantly
more prominent role in clinical practice. It can be collected
through clinical interviews, daily diaries, in vivo exposure,
computerized tasks, or using virtual reality approaches. And giventhat we now have better understanding of the various factors thataffect the validity and reliability of self-report, we can work toward
improving clinical tools, paving the way for more rigorous and
valid assessments of subjective experience in clinical practice.
By distinguishing between physiological, behavioral, and self-
report measures, fear and anxiety research can use valid and
reliable procedures for addressing each of those constructs when
needed. For instance, unlike physiological responses, subjectiveratings during an extinction procedure (i.e., expectancy of the
unconditioned stimulus) are predictive of post-exposure affective
ratings, a clinically meaningful measure associated with therelapse of fear [ 140]. Importantly, this association was observed
even though subjective ratings were also correlated with
physiological responses at various stages of the experiment.
Furthermore, another line of evidence comes from a recent meta-analysis indicating that psychotherapy and pharmacotherapy mayhave very different effects in the brain [ 141]. More precisely, the
results suggest that psychotherapy might target cognitive
processes and schema in the prefrontal cortex while antidepres-sant medication might primarily affect the amygdala and basalganglia. As we saw above, there are reasons to believe that
objective measures may primarily originate from the defensive
survival circuit that includes the amygdala while the subjectiveexperience is likely generated by the higher-order circuit that
includes the prefrontal cortex [ 141–143]. As such, these examples
highlight the added values of considering the three constructsseparately as they each provide distinct information and mayrequire different treatment strategies.
Furthermore, by studying how discordance and desynchrony
between the three measures naturally occur it may be possible totailor therapies to the individual needs of patients [ 21,144–146].
This idea was notably put forward some time ago by Rachman [ 89]
and Michelson [ 100] who suggested that behavioral therapy may
be particularly effective if a patient has exaggerated behavioralor physiological responses, but low levels of self-reported fear.
Such “
tailored ”approach must however be used with caution as
treating exclusively the objective response systems may lead thesubjective system to relapse, and vice versa [ 21].
Early reports also revealed gender differences in discordance and
desynchrony [ 147]. In some situations, men showed lower self-
reported levels of negative emotions compared to women evenwhen their physiological responses were high [ 148]. As one can
imagine, effects like these may well be modulated by age and
cultural factors. If we can track what the systematic factors
modulating the effects on discorda nce are, this may help establish
that discordance is a real, meaningful phenomenon, and not just due
to the noisiness of individual measures. Additionally, such ﬁndings
may help achieve a better understa nding of underlying mechanisms.Once individuals are identi ﬁed as having higher degrees of
discordance and/or desynchrony, it would be possible to examine
how their brain ’s structure and physiology might be associated
with such variations. In Taschereau-Dumouchel et al. (2020) [ 142]
we identi ﬁed brain regions that are speci ﬁcally important for
decoding self-report vs physiological responses to threat. Studying
the connectivity between these different regions —as assessed by
structural imaging based on diffusion, or resting-state fMRI data —
may also predict individual differences in discordance anddesynchrony [ 145,146]. Similarly, machine-learning algorithms
trained to predict self-report, physiology and behavior [ 142,149]
could also help us reveal the brain mechanisms associated withdiscordance and desynchrony. Studying such individual differ-ences in brain processes might therefore help us better under-
stand how discordance and desynchrony are associated with
pathological conditions.
As such, distinguishing between the three measures might have
great clinical bene ﬁts. At the same time, we should not lose sight
of the fact that they are related constructs, in part because theyare consequences of the same external stimulus. And althoughthe brain processes underlying each are separate, they interact.
Moving forward
To this day, the role of subjective experience in leading theories ofemotions remains marginalized. Basic emotions theorists have
tended to emphasize the facial expression of emotions, and to a
lesser extent, autonomic responses to a greater degree thansubjective experiences [ 79,150]. Cognitive appraisal theorists give
more weight to subjective experience than basic emotions theories,
but they typically treat it as one component among several thatcollectively constitute an emotion [ 151]. Cognitive construction
theories, on the other hand, respect the centrality of subjective
experience, and treat it as a conceptualized byproduct of valence
and arousal [ 152]. Our higher-order theory is, in some sense,
constructionist and conceptual in nature, but it has a broader viewof the non-conscious precursors [ 107,116,118,123,145,153]a n di t
highlights the idea that the conscious experience is the emotion
(also see [ 45]).
Considering the marginalized role of subjective experience in
emotion research, and the fact that objective measures of
physiology and behavior are relatively poor indicators of
subjective suffering, we [ 3
,21,55] and others [ 45], have felt
compelled to raise concerns. In some related ﬁelds, this issue has
long been taken seriously. For instance, in the study of pain, self-
report is the traditional gold standard in part due to well-knowncases of discordance (see [ 154]), not unlike those we emphasized.
But research on many mental health disorders has unfortunately
not generally bene ﬁted from a similar epiphany. With discussions
about other disorders also emerging [ 155], we think that the time
is right for a change.
Progress in the scienti ﬁc study of consciousness, and recent
work applying this knowledge to explore emotional conscious-
ness, opens the door for a new beginning for designingtreatments that will hopefully better target subjective aspects of
mental disorders. To succeed, though, this will require a
reassessment of some of the implicit assumptions of thebehaviorist and medical model legacies, both of which linger assources of unconscious inferences that guide research and theory.
However, we are con ﬁdent that the approach we tout will lead to
new interventions, including personalized ones, capable oftackling mental health disorders in a more complete fashion.
REFERENCES
1. Kessler RC, Berglund P, Demler O, Jin R, Merikangas KR, Walters EE. Lifetime
prevalence and age-of-onset distributions of DSM-IV disorders in the NationalComorbidity Survey Replication. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2005;62:593 –602.V. Taschereau-Dumouchel et al.
1327
Molecular Psychiatry (2022) 27:1322 – 1330

2. LeDoux JE. The emotional brain: the mysterious underpinnings of emotional life.
Simon and Schuster; 1996.
3. LeDoux JE. Anxious: using the brain to understand and treat fear and anxiety.
Penguin; 2015.
4. Morrison FG, Ressler KJ. From the neurobiology of extinction to improved
clinical treatments. Depress Anxiety. 2014;31:279 –90.
5. Perusini JN, Fanselow MS. Neurobehavioral perspectives on the distinction
between fear and anxiety. Learn Mem. 2015;22:417 –25.
6. File SE. Factors controlling measures of anxiety and responses to novelty in the
mouse. Behav Brain Res. 2001;125:151 –7.
7. Lang PJ, Davis M. Emotion, motivation, and the brain: re ﬂex foundations in
animal and human research. Prog Brain Res. 2006;156:3 –29.
8. Gray JA, McNaughton N. The psychology of anxiety and enquiry in to the func-
tions of the septo hippocampus system. New York: Oxford University Press; 2000.
9. Hartley CA, Phelps EA. Changing fear: the neurocircuitry of emotion regulation.
Neuropsychopharmacology. 2010;35:136 –46.
10. Büchel C, Dolan RJ. Classical fear conditioning in functional neuroimaging. Curr
Opin Neurobiol. 2000;10:219 –23.
11. Grupe DW, Nitschke JB. Uncertainty and anticipation in anxiety: an integrated
neurobiological and psychological perspective. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2013;14:488–501.
12. Krystal JH, Deutsch DN, Charney DS. The biological basis of panic disorder. J Clin
Psychiatry 1996;57:23 –31. Discussion 32 –33
13. Maren S, Phan KL, Liberzon I. The contextual brain: implications for fear con-
ditioning, extinction and psychopathology. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2013;14:417 –28.
14. Craske MG, Kircanski K, Zelikowsky M, Mystkowski J, Chowdhury N, Baker A.
Optimizing inhibitory learning during exposure therapy. Behav Res Ther.2008;46:5 –27.
15. Ehlers A, Bisson J, Clark DM, Creamer M, Pilling S, Richards D, et al. Do all
psychological treatments really work the same in posttraumatic stress disorder?
Clin Psychol Rev. 2010;30:269 –76.
16. Barlow DH, Raffa SD, Cohen EM. Psychosocial treatments for panic disorders,
phobias, and generalized anxiety disorder. In: Nathan PE, Gorman JM, editors. Aguide to treatments that work, Oxford University Press; 2002.
17. Hofmann SG, Asmundson GJG, Beck AT. The science of cognitive therapy. Behav
Ther. 2013;44:199 –212.
18. Milad MR, Quirk GJ. Fear extinction as a model for translational neuroscience:
ten years of progress. Annu Rev Psychol. 2012;63:129 –51.
19. Mathew SJ, Coplan JD, Gorman JM. Neurobiological mechanisms of social
anxiety disorder. Am J Psychiatry. 2001;158:1558 –67.
20. Griebel G, Holmes A. 50 years of hurdles and hope in anxiolytic drug discovery.
Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2013;12:667 –87.
21. LeDoux JE, Pine DS. Using neuroscience to help understand fear and anxiety: a
two-system framework. Am J Psychiatry. 2016;173:1083 –93.
22. LeDoux JE, Hofmann SG. The subjective experience of emotion: a fearful view.
Curr Opin Behav Sci. 2018;19:67 –72.
23. Hyman SE. Revolution stalled. Sci Transl Med. 2012;4:155cm11.24. Miller G. Is pharma running out of brainy ideas? Science 2010;329:502 –4.
25. Darwin C. The expression of the emotions in man and animals. London: John
Murray; 1872.
26. James W. What is an emotion? Mind 1884;9:188 –205.
27. Cannon WB. Organization for physiological homeostasis. Physiol Rev.
1929;9:399 –431.
28. Keller FS. The de ﬁnition of psychology. 2nd ed. Appleton-Century-Crofts; 1973.
29. Boring EG. A history of introspection. Psychol Bull. 1953;50:169 –89.
30. Watson JB. Psychology as the behaviorist views it. Psychol Rev. 1913;20:158 –
77.
31. Stellar E. The physiology of motivation. Psychol Rev. 1954;61:5 –22.
32. Olds J. Pleasure centers in the brain. Sci Am. 1956;195:105 –17.
33. Weiskrantz L. Behavioral changes associated with ablation of the amygdaloid
complex in monkeys. J Comp Physiol Psychol. 1956;49:381 –91.
34. Goddard GV. Functions of the amygdala. Psychol Bull. 1964;62:89 –109.
35. Miller GA, Galanter E, Pribram KH. Plans and the structure of behavior. Martino
Fine Books; 2013.
36. Wolpe J. Psychotherapy by reciprocal inhibition. Stanford, CA: Stanford Uni-
versity Press; 1958.
37. Bandura A. Psychotherapy as a learning process. Psychol Bull. 1961;58:143 –59.
38. Braslow JT, Marder SR. History of psychopharmacology. Annu Rev Clin Psychol.
2019;15:25 –50.
39. Valenstein E. Blaming the brain. New York: Free Press; 1999.
40. Wittenborn JR. The clinical psychopharmacology of anxiety. Spring ﬁeld: C.C.
Thomas; 1966.
41. Ellis A. Rational psychotherapy and individual psychology. J Individ Psychol.
1957;13:38 –44.
42. Beck AT. Thinking and depression. II. Theory and therapy. Arch Gen Psychiatry.
1964;10:561 –71.43. Insel T, Cuthbert B, Garvey M, Heinssen R, Pine DS, Quinn K, et al. Research
domain criteria (RDoC): toward a new classi ﬁcation framework for research on
mental disorders. Am J Psychiatry. 2010;167:748 –51.
44. Kozak MJ, Cuthbert BN. The NIMH Research Domain Criteria Initiative: back-
ground, issues, and pragmatics. Psychophysiology 2016;53:286 –97.
45. Lieberman MD. Boo! The consciousness problem in emotion. Cogn Emot.
2019;33:24 –30.
46. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental
disorders (DSM-5 ®). American Psychiatric Pub; 2013.
47. Moncrieff J. The myth of the chemical cure: a critique of psychiatric drug
treatment. Springer; 2016.
48. Harrington A. Mind ﬁxers: psychiatry ’s troubled search for the biology of mental
illness. W. W. Norton & Company; 2019.
49. Ivanov I, Schwartz JM. Why psychotropic drugs don ’t cure mental illness —but
should they? Front Psychiatry. 2021;12.
50. Greenberg G. The psychiatric drug crisis. New Yorker. 2013;3.
51. Hyman SE. Psychiatric drug development: diagnosing a crisis. Cerebrum
2013;2013:5.
52. Braslow JT, Brekke JS, Levenson J. Psychiatry ’s myopia-reclaiming the social, cul-
tural, and psychological in the psychiatric gaze. JAMA Psychiatry. 2020;78:349.
53. Michel M. Consciousness science underdetermined: a short history of endless
debates. Ergo. 2019;6.
54. LeDoux JE. Coming to terms with fear. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2014;111:2871 –8.
55. LeDoux JE. Semantics, surplus meaning, and the science of fear. Trends Cogn
Sci. 2017;21:303 –6.
56. Tolman EC. Purposive behavior in animals and man. New York: Century; 1932.57. Brown JS, Farber IE. Emotions conceptualized as intervening variables —with
suggestions toward a theory of frustration. Psychol Bull. 1951;48:465 –95.
58. Kozak MJ, Miller GA. Hypothetical constructs versus intervening variables: a re-
appraisal of the three-systems model of anxiety assessment. Behav Assess.
1982;4:347 –58.
59. Marx MH. Intervening variable or hypothetical construct? Psychol Rev. 1951;
58:235 –
47.
60. Tinbergen N. The study of instinct. New York: Oxford University Press; 1951.61. Miller NE. Studies of fear as an acquirable drive fear as motivation and fear-
reduction as reinforcement in the learning of new responses. J Exp Psychol.
1948;38:89 –101.
62. Mowrer OH. Anxiety-reduction and learning. J Exp Psychol. 1940;27:497 –516.
63. Mowrer OH. A stimulus-response analysis of anxiety and its role as a reinforcing
agent. Psychol Rev. 1939;46:553 –65.
64. Mowrer OH, Lamoreaux RR. Fear as an intervening variable in avoidance con-
ditioning. J Comp Psychol. 1946;39:29 –50.
65. Rescorla RA, Solomon RL. Two-process learning theory: relationships between
Pavlovian conditioning and instrumental learning. Psychol Rev. 1967;74:151 –82.
66. Solomon RL, Wynne LC. Traumatic avoidance learning: the principles of anxiety
conservation and partial irreversibility. Psychol Rev. 1954;61:353 –85.
67. LeDoux JE, Moscarello J, Sears R, Campese V. The birth, death and resurrection
of avoidance: a reconceptualization of a troubled paradigm. Mol Psychiatry.2017;22:24 –36.
68. Mineka S. The role of fear in theories of avoidance learning, ﬂooding, and
extinction. Psychol Bull. 1979;86:985 –1010.
69. McAllister WR, McAllister DE. Behavioral measurement of conditioned fear.
Aversive conditioning and learning, Elsevier; 1971. p. 105 –79.
70. Bolles RC. Theory of motivation. Harper and Row, New York; 1967.71. Mowrer OH. Learning theory and behavior. Wiley; 1960.
72. Mowrer OH. Learning theory and the neurotic paradox. Am J Orthopsychiatry.
1948;18:571 –610.
73. Dollard J, Miller NE. Personality and psychotherapy; an analysis in terms of
learning, thinking, and culture. Vol. 488. New York: McGraw-Hill; 1950.
74. Beck AT. Cognitive therapy: nature and relation to behavior therapy. Behav Ther.
1970;1:184 –200.
75. Levis DJ. The case for a return to a two-factor theory of avoidance: the failure of
non-fear interpretations. In: Klein SB, Mowrer RR, editors. Contemporary learning
theories: pavlovian conditioning and the status of traditional learning theory.Hillsdale: Lawrence Erlbaum Assn.; 1989.
76. Beckers T, Craske MG. Avoidance and decision making in anxiety: an intro-
duction to the special issue. Behav Res Ther. 2017;96:1.
77. Dykman RA, Ackerman PT, Newton JE. Posttraumatic stress disorder: a sensiti-
zation reaction. Integr Physiol Behav Sci. 1997;32:9 –18.
78. Ekman P. Universals and cultural differences in facial expressions of emotions.
In: Cole J, editor. Nebraska symposium on motivation, vol. 19, University ofNebraska Press; 1972. p. 207 –83.
79. Izard CE. The face of emotion New York. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts; 1971.80. Panksepp J. Toward a general psychobiological theory of emotions. Behav Brain
Sci. 1982;5:407 –22.V. Taschereau-Dumouchel et al.
1328
Molecular Psychiatry (2022) 27:1322 – 1330

81. Panksepp J. Affective neuroscience. Oxford University Press; 1998.
82. Fanselow MS, Pennington ZT. A return to the psychiatric dark ages with a two-
system framework for fear. Behav Res Ther. 2018;100:24 –29.
83. Ressler KJ. Translating across circuits and genetics toward progress in fear- and
anxiety-related disorders. Am J Psychiatry. 2020;177:214 –22.
84. Lang PJ, Lazovik AD, Reynolds DJ. Desensitization, suggestibility, and pseu-
dotherapy. J Abnorm Psychol. 1965;70:395 –402.
85. Lacey JI. Psychophysiological approaches to the evaluation of psychotherapeutic
process and outcome. In: Rubinstein EA, Parloff MB. editors. Research in psy-chotherapy. Washington, DC: American Ps ychological Association; 1959. p. 160 –208.
86. Lang PJ. The mechanics of desensitization and the laboratory study of human
fear. In: Franks C, editor. Assessment and status of the behavior therapies, NewYork: McGraw-Hill; 1969. p. 160 –91.
87. Lang PJ, Miller GA, Levin DN. Anxiety and fear. In: Davidson RJ, Schwartz GE,
Shapiro D, editors. Consciousness and self-regulation: Vol. 3: Advances inresearch and theory. Boston, MA: Springer US; 1983. p. 123 –51.
88. Miller GA, Kozak MJ. Three-systems assessment and the construct of emotion. In:
Birbaumer N, Öhman A, editors. The structure of emotion: physiological, cog-nitive and clinical aspects. Hogrefe & Huber Kirkland, WA; 1993. p. 31 –47.
89. Rachman S. The passing of the two-stage theory of fear and avoidance: fresh
possibilities. Behav Res Ther. 1976;14:125 –31.
90. Rachman S, Hodgson RI. Synchrony and desynchrony in fear and avoidance.
Behav Res Ther. 1974;12:311 –8.
91. Borkovec TD. Physiological and cognitive processes in the regulation of anxiety.
In: Schwartz GE, Shapiro D, editors. Consciousness and self-regulation: advancesin research. Vol. 1. Boston, MA: Springer US; 1976. p. 261 –312.
92. Hugdahl K. The three-systems-model of fear and emotion —a critical examina-
tion. Behav Res Ther. 1981;19:75 –83.
93. Zinbarg RE. Concordance and synchron y in measures of anxiety and panic recon-
sidered: a hierarchical model of anxi ety and panic. Behav Ther. 1998;29:301 –23.
94. Foa EB, Kozak MJ. Emotional processing of fear: exposure to corrective infor-
mation. Psychol Bull. 1986;99:20 –35.
95. Romer AS. The vertebrate as a dual animal —somatic and visceral. In: Dobzhansky
T, Hecht MK, Steere WC, editors. Evolutionary biology, Springer; 1972. p. 121 –56.
96. LeDoux JE, Daw ND. Surviving threats: neural circuit and computational
implications of a new taxonomy of defensive behaviour. Nat Rev Neurosci.
2018;19:269 –82.
97. Hollenstein T, Lanteigne D. Models and methods of emotional concordance. Biol
Psychol. 2014;98:1 –5.
98. Davidson RJ, Schwartz GE. The psychobiology of relaxation and related states: a
multi-process theory. In: Mostoesky DI, editor. Behavior control and modi ﬁcation
of physiological activity. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall; 1976. p. 399 –442.
99. Lang PJ. Physiological assessment of anxiety and fear. In: Cone JD, Hawkins RP,
editors. Behavioral assessment: new directions in clinical psychology. New York:Brunner-Mazel; 1977. p. 178 –95.
100. Michelson L. The role of individual differences, response pro ﬁles, and treatment
consonance in anxiety disorders. J Behav Assess. 1984;6:349 –67.
101. Ost LG, Jerremalm A, Johansson J. Individual response patterns and the effects
of different behavioral methods in the treatment of social phobia. Behav Res
Ther. 1981;19:1 –16.
102. Ost LG, Johansson J, Jerremalm A. Individual response patterns and the effects
of different behavioral methods in the treatment of claustrophobia. Behav ResTher. 1982;20:445 –60.
103. Gerrans P, Scherer K. Wired for despair the neurochemistry of emotion and the
phenomenology of depression. J Conscious Stud. 2013;20:254
–68.
104. Steenen SA, van Wijk AJ, van der Heijden GJMG, van Westrhenen R, de Lange J,
de Jongh A. Propranolol for the treatment of anxiety disorders: systematicreview and meta-analysis. J Psychopharmacol. 2016;30:128 –39.
105. Lang PJ, Lazovik AD. Experimental desensitization of phobia. J Abnorm Soc
Psychol. 1963;66:519 –25.
106. Gray JA. The psychology of fear and stress. London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson; 1971.107. LeDoux JE. Rethinking the emotional brain. Neuron 2012;73:653 –76.
108. Hilton SM, Zbrozyna AW. Amygdaloid region for defence reactions and its
efferent pathway to the brain stem. J Physiol. 1963;165:160 –73.
109. Cohen DH, Obrist PA. Interactions between behavior and the cardiovascular
system. Circ Res. 1975;37:693 –706.
110. Balleine BW, Dickinson A. Goal-directed instrumental action: contingency and
incentive learning and their cortical sub strates. Neuropharm acology 1998;37:407 –19.
111. Cronbach LJ, Meehl PE. Construct validity in psychological tests. Psychol Bull.
1955;52:281 –302.
112. Barrett LF. Variety is the spice of life: a psychological construction approach to
understanding variability in emotion. Cogn Emot. 2009;23:1284 –306.
113. Friedman BH, Stephens CL, Thayer JF. Redundancy analysis of autonomic and
self-reported, responses to induced emotions. Biol Psychol. 2014;98:19 –28.114. Schaffner KF. A comparison of two neurobiological models of fear and anxiety: a
‘construct validity ’application? Perspect Psychol Sci. 2020;2020. https://doi.org/
10.1177/1745691620920860 .
115. Lonsdorf TB, Merz CJ, Fullana MA. Fear extinction retention: is it what we think it
is? Biol Psychiatry. 2019;85:1074 –82.
116. LeDoux JE, Brown R. A higher-order theory of emotional consciousness. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA. 2017;114:E2016 –E2025.
117. LeDoux JE. What emotions might be like in other animals. Curr Biol. 2021;31:
R824 –R829.
118. LeDoux JE. Thoughtful feelings. Curr Biol. 2020;30:R619 –R623.
119. Schachter S, Singer JE. Cognitive, social, and physiological determinants of
emotional state. Psychol Rev. 1962;69:379 –99.
120. Ortony A, Clore GL. Emotions, moods, and conscious awareness; comment on
johnson-laird and oatley ’s‘the language of emotions: an analysis of a semantic
ﬁeld’. Cognition Emot. 1989;3:125 –37.
121. Barrett LF, Russell JA, editors. The psychological construction of emotions.
Guilford Press; 2015.
122. Rosenthal D. Consciousness and mind. Oxford University Press; 2005.123. LeDoux JE. How does the non-conscious become conscious? Curr Biol. 2020;30:
R196 –R199.
124. LeDoux JE, Brown R, Pine D, Hofmann SG. Know thyself: well-being and sub-
jective experience. Cerebrum. 2018;2018.
125. Damasio AR. The somatic marker hypothesis and the possible functions of the
prefrontal cortex. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 1996;351:1413 –20.
126. Danziger K. The history of introspection reconsidered. J Hist Behav Sci.
1980;16:241 –62.
127. Johansson P, Hall L, Sikström S, Olsson A. Failure to detect mismatches between
intention and outcome in a simple decision task. Science 2005;310:116 –9.
128. Nisbett RE, Wilson TD. Telling more than we can know: verbal reports on mental
processes. Psychol Rev. 1977;84:231 –
59.
129. Jerolmack C, Khan S. Talk is cheap. Sociol Methods Res. 2014;43:178 –209.
130. Carruthers P. The opacity of mind: an integrative theory of self-knowledge.
Oxford University Press; 2011.
131. Robinson MD, Clore GL. Belief and feeling: evidence for an accessibility model of
emotional self-report. Psychol Bull. 2002;128:934 –60.
132. Walentynowicz M, Schneider S, Stone AA. The effects of time frames on self-
report. PLoS ONE. 2018;13:e0201655.
133. Chirimuuta M. Psychophysical methods and the evasion of introspection. Philos
Sci. 2014;81:914 –26.
134. Quigley KS, Lindquist KA, Barrett LF. Inducing and measuring emotion and
affect: tips, tricks, and secrets. In: Reis HT, Judd CM, editors. Handbook ofresearch methods in social and personality psychology. Cambridge University
Press; 2014. p. 220 –52.
135. Borsboom D, Mellenbergh GJ. The concept of validity. Psychol Rev. 2004;111:
1061 –71.
136. Cohen JA, Mannarino AP, Deblinger E. Treating trauma and traumatic grief in
children and adolescents, 2nd ed. Guilford Publications; 2016.
137. Schneider KJ, Krug OT. Existential-humanistic therapy. American Psychological
Association Washington, DC; 2010.
138. Hofmann SG, Gómez AF. Mindfulness-based interventions for anxiety and
depression. Psychiatric Clin. 2017;40:739 –49.
139. Zoellner LA, Foa EB. Applying Research Domain Criteria (RDoC) to the study of
fear and anxiety: a critical comment. Psychophysiology. 2016;53:332 –5.
140. Constantinou E, Purves KL, McGregor T, Lester KJ, Barry TJ, Treanor M, et al.
Measuring fear: association among different measures of fear learning. J Behav
Ther Exp Psychiatry. 2021;70:101618.
141. Nord CL, Barrett LF, Lindquist KA, Ma Y, Marwood L, Satpute AB, et al. Neural
effects of antidepressant medication and psychological treatments: a quanti-tative synthesis across three meta-analyses. Br J Psychiatry. 2021;219:1 –5.
142. Taschereau-Dumouchel V, Kawato M, Lau H. Multivoxel pattern analysis reveals
dissociations between subjective fear and its physiological correlates. MolPsychiatry. 2020;25:2342 –54.
143. FeldmanHall O, Glimcher P, Baker AL, PROSPEC NYU Collaboration, Phelps EA.
The functional roles of the amygdala and prefrontal cortex in processinguncertainty. J Cogn Neurosci. 2019;31:1742 –54.
144. Hofmann SG, Curtiss JE, Hayes SC. Beyond linear mediation: toward a dynamic
network approach to study treatment processes. Clin Psychol Rev. 2020;76:101824.
145. LeDoux JE, Lau H. A new vista in psychiatric treatment: using individualized func-
tional connectivity to track symptom s. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2020;117:4450 –2.
146. Sylvester CM, Yu Q, Srivastava AB, Marek S, Zheng A, Alexopoulos D, et al.
Individual-speci ﬁc functional connectivity of the amygdala: a substrate for
precision psychiatry. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA. 2020;117:3808 –18.
147. Allen JG, Haccoun DM. Sex differences in emotionality: a multidimensional
approach. Hum Relat. 1976;29:711 –22.V. Taschereau-Dumouchel et al.
1329
Molecular Psychiatry (2022) 27:1322 – 1330

148. Gard MG, Kring AM. Sex differences in the time course of emotion. Emotion
2007;7:429 –37.
149. Zhou F, Zhao W, Qi Z, Geng Y, Yao S, Kendrick KM, et al. A distributed fMRI-based
signature for the subjective experience of fear. Nat Commun. 2021;12:6643.
150. Ekman P. An argument for basic emotions. Cognition Emot. 1992;6:169 –200.
151. Scherer KR. The dynamic architecture of emotion: evidence for the component
process model. Cognition Emot. 2009;23:1307 –51.
152. Barrett LF. How emotions are made: the secret life of the brain. Houghton Mif ﬂin
Harcourt; 2017.
153. Mashour GA, Roelfsema P, Changeux J-P, Dehaene S. Conscious processing and
the global neuronal workspace hypothesis. Neuron 2020;105:776 –98.
154. Apkarian AV. De ﬁnitions of nociception, pain, and chronic pain with implications
regarding science and society. Neurosci Lett. 2019;702:1 –2.
155. Krueger RF, Hobbs KA. An overview of the DSM-5 alternative model of per-
sonality disorders. Psychopathology 2020;53:126 –32.
156. Michel M, Lau H. On the dangers of con ﬂating strong and weak versions of a
theory of consciousness. Philos. Mind Sci. 2020;1.
157. Dretske F. Naturalizing the mind. Cambridge, MA: Bradford; 1995.158. Lamme VAF. How neuroscience will change our view on consciousness. Cogn
Neurosci. 2010;1:204 –20.
159. Tye M. Consciousness, color, and content (representation and mind). MIT Press;
2000.
160. Block N. Empirical science meets higher order views of consciousness: reply to
Hakwan Lau and Richard Brown. Blockheads! Essays on Ned block ’s philosophy
of mind and consciousness. MIT Press Cambridge, MA; 2019. p. 199 –213.
161. Panksepp J. What is an emotional feeling? Lessons about affective origins from
cross-species neuroscience. Motiv Emot. 2012;36:4 –15.
162. Lau H, Rosenthal D. Empirical support for higher-order theories of conscious
awareness. Trends Cogn Sci. 2011;15:365 –73.
163. Brown R, Lau H, LeDoux JE. Understanding the higher-order approach to con-
sciousness. Trends Cogn Sci. 2019;23:754 –68.
164. Fleming SM, Daw ND. Self-evaluation of decision-making: a general Bayesian
framework for metacognitive computation. Psychol Rev. 2017;124:91 –114.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
V.T-D, M.M., H.L., S.G.H., and J.E.L. wrote and edited the manuscript.
FUNDING INFORMATION
SGH receives ﬁnancial support from the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation
and the James S. McDonnell Foundation 21st Century Science Initiative inUnderstanding Human Cognition —Special Initiative. HL received ﬁnancial support
from the US National Institute of Mental Health (R61MH113772) and The TempletonWorld Charity Foundation (RA537-01). JELD receives ﬁnancial support from the
National Institute of Drug Abuse, The Templeton World Charity Foundation, New York
University, and private donors. VT-D received the ﬁnancial support from the Canadian
Institute of Health Research (CIHR).
COMPETING INTERESTS
SGH receives compensation for his work as editor from SpringerNature and theAssociation for Psychological Science, and as an advisor from the Palo Alto HealthSciences Otsuka Pharmaceuticals, and for his work as a Subject Matter Expert from
John Wiley & Sons, Inc. and SilverCloud Health, Inc. He also receives royalties and
payments for his editorial work from various publishers. JELD receives royalties fromhis books. The remaining authors declare no competing interests.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Vincent
Taschereau-Dumouchel.
Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/
reprints
Publisher ’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims
in published maps and institutional af ﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you giveappropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the CreativeCommons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party
material in this article are included in the article ’s Creative Commons license, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in thearticle ’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directlyfrom the copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/ .
© The Author(s) 2021V. Taschereau-Dumouchel et al.
1330
Molecular Psychiatry (2022) 27:1322 – 1330