Literature Review
Open camera or QR reader and
scan code to access this article
and other resources online.
Understanding Stigma in Autism:
A Narrative Review and Theoretical Model
Alice Turnock, MBBCh,1Kate Langley, PhD,2and Catherine R.G. Jones, PhD2
Abstract
The experience of stigma by autistic people is relatively understudied, despite contributing to a range of poor
outcomes and having an overarching impact on well-being. The current review of the literature synthesizesresearch to determine what is currently known and presents a theoretical model of autism stigma. Autism stigmais primarily inﬂuenced by a public and professional understanding of autism in combination with interpretationof visible autistic traits. Moderating factors include the quality and quantity of contact with autistic people,cultural factors, sex and gender, individual differences, and diagnostic disclosure. Stigma can reduce well-beingas well as increase the presence of camouﬂaging behaviors, which mask autistic traits. Caregivers of autistic
people can experience stigma by association, that is, afﬁliate stigma, which can impact their own well-being.
A variety of interventions and approaches to reduce stigma are discussed, including ‘‘autism friendly’’ spaces,positive media representation, educational and psychosocial training for the public and professionals, as well ascultural and systemic shifts that foster inclusivity and recognize neurodiversity.
Keywords: autism, stigma, attitudes, neurodiversity, discrimination, well-being
Community Brief
Why is this topic important?
Autistic people are known to experience stigma. This means that they can face ignorance, prejudice, and
discrimination.
What was the purpose of this article?
The purpose of the article was to review research on autism stigma. We wanted to better understand autismstigma. We looked at why autistic people and their families experienced stigma. We also looked at what factorsinﬂuenced stigma and the impact of stigma. Last, we discussed how to reduce stigma for autistic people and
their families.
What do the authors conclude?
We summarized the research ﬁndings into a model. Autism stigma is affected by people’s understanding ofautism and by visible autistic traits. Poor understanding of autism means that visible autistic traits may be
viewed negatively. Certain factors inﬂuence the amount of stigma. One factor was the quality and quantity ofcontact that autistic people have with others. Another factor was cultural differences, such as speciﬁc beliefsabout autism. Sex and gender were important, as were other differences such as education and age. Last,whether an autistic person had shared their diagnosis affected stigma. Autism stigma had a negative impact on
1School of Medicine, Cardiff University, University Hospital of Wales, Cardiff, United Kingdom.
2Wales Autism Research Centre, School of Psychology, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom.AUTISM IN ADULTHOOD
Volume 4, Number 1, 2022ªMary Ann Liebert, Inc.
DOI: 10.1089/aut.2021.0005
76

well-being. This included poor mental and physical health, as well as reduced social connections. Autism
stigma also led to increased ‘‘camouﬂaging’’ of autistic traits. Family members also experienced stigma, whichcan affect their own well-being. Reducing autism stigma is important. To reduce stigma people should createmore ‘‘autism friendly’’ spaces. They should include more positive representations of autistic people in themedia. They should also improve the autism education of the public and professionals. Last, they should supportneurodiversity.
What do the authors recommend for future research on this topic?
We need to better understand the factors that lead to autism stigma. We also need more effective ways to reducestigma for autistic people and their families. Including the autistic community in this research process is very
important.
How will this review help autistic adults now and in the future?
The review shows how stigma affects the autistic community. Autistic adults may ﬁnd that the model helpsthem understand their own experiences of stigma. We hope the review will help develop more research into
how to reduce autism stigma. Reducing autism stigma will improve the lives of autistic adults.
Introduction
The experience of stigma for minority groups is well
recognized,1,2with autism considered an identity-based
minority.3However, the speciﬁc experience of stigma for
autistic people has been relatively understudied, with a biastoward the experiences of family members rather than autis-tic people themselves.
4The term stigma dates back to the
ancient Greek practice of cutting or burning a mark into a
person to brand them a slave, traitor, or criminal, the markof someone to be avoided.5In modern usage, stigma is con-
sidered an attribute that is unfavorable and that seemingly
discredits an individual, leaving them to be viewed as lessvaluable than the rest of society.1,5,6Notably, this deﬁnition
depends on a collective understanding of what is unfavorable,
thus stigma is inherently socially constructed.1
Stigma can be seen as an overarching term for problems
of knowledge (i.e., ignorance), problems of attitudes (i.e.,
prejudice), and problems of behaviors (i.e., discrimination).7
Deﬁnitions of the interconnecting processes that contribute
to or reﬂect stigma are varied, underlining the challenge of
capturing this complex process. This review draws on Link
and Phelan’s seminal conceptualization of stigma.8They
argue that the development of stigma derives from the cul-
turally driven detection and labeling of a difference (e.g.,
labeling people with a particular set of behavioral charac-teristics as autistic), which converges with other interrelated
components to form stigma.
Link and Phelan’s8second component of stigma is the
attribution of unfavorable stereotypes to the label (e.g., au-tistic people are unfriendly). From a social-cognitive per-
spective, this linking between a label and its stereotypes is
key to the development of stigma, as stereotypes can im-plicitly affect how an individual perceives other people.
9The
next component is the use of the label to cause a separation
between ‘‘them’’ and ‘‘us’’ (e.g., autistic people vs. everyoneelse). The ﬁnal component is loss of status and the experience
of discrimination (e.g., not being hired or promoted because
of being autistic).
Status loss and discrimination can be perceived as be-
havioral outcomes of stigma; a consequence of being labeled,being classiﬁed as other, and being linked to undesirable
characteristics. Experiencing status loss and discrimination
lies at the heart of the inequality that a stigmatized personfaces and contributes to negative treatment at both personal
and structural levels.
7,8Limited knowledge and understand-
ing has a critical role in the presence of stigmatized views, asan individual is more likely to rely on reductionist labels andstereotypes, dichotomize into them versus us, and ultimately
behave in a discriminatory way.
Attitudes and beliefs can be conceptualized as the deeply
held cognitions that lead to the labeling, stereotyping, setting
apart, and discriminating that contribute to stigma.
8Attitudes
are often measured by directly asking people to state how muchthey endorse positive and negative attitudes toward autism.10
Alternatively, openness toward a ﬁctional autistic adult or childcan be explored, for example, by asking participants to ratewhether they would feel afraid of the autistic person.
11,12
Stigma is traditionally measured by using a measure of social
distance, which is seen as a consequence of stigmatized views
and conceptualized as the deliberate avoidance or exclusion ofanother person from social interactions.13,14
Stigma can be categorized into different types. Most
commonly, the discussion of stigma refers to enacted orpublic stigma, which is the overt discrimination of stigma-
tized individuals.15However, this review will also consider
self-stigma, or felt stigma, which is when the stigmatizedperson turns the prejudice they experience onto themselves.16
This can include feeling shame in relation to stigmatizedcharacteristic(s), and fear of enacted stigma.16,17Afﬁliate, or
courtesy, stigma will also be discussed, which is stigma ex-perienced by people associated with the stigmatized person,
e.g., family members (Table 1).5,15
Autistic people can experience loneliness and fewer friend-
ships compared with neurotypical peers,18–20fewer friend-
ships in adolescence compared with peers with other special
educational needs,21have more difﬁculties with education22
and employment,23,24experience poor social integration,25,26
and face high rates of bullying.21These factors are associated
with a reduced quality of life.27While these experiences have
been attributed to autistic traits, more recent thinking has
also considered the impact of negative societal responsesSTIGMA AND AUTISM 77

to autistic people in contributing to these outcomes.28,29
Reﬂecting this, interviews with neurotypical people have
found that autism is perceived by some as violating ‘‘accepted
societal norms.’’30
Autistic people encounter negative experiences in their
everyday lives that likely reﬂect autism stigma. For example,
neurotypical people are less likely to want to live in the
same building as autistic people or to spend time together asfriends,11and they are also less likely to want an intimate
relationship with an autistic person.31At the extreme, autis-
tic people can be dehumanized by neurotypical people.32
Autistic people describe autism stigma as destructive and at
odds with their own conception of autism as a value-neutral
category, such as handedness and eye color.33
Accordingly, 15.4% of a recent sample of 149 autistic
adults report moderate to severe felt stigma,4with the expe-
rience of stigma being reported by autistic adolescents and
adults across a range of qualitative accounts.33–35Alongside
this, there is consistent evidence that afﬁliate stigma is expe-
rienced by the families of autistic people.36–45
The breadth of psychological and social issues relevant to
autism stigma and the limited synthesis of this work drew us
to a narrative review. The broad remit of a narrative review
enabled us to consider a wide range of pertinent issues: fac-tors that contribute to autism stigma, the impact of stigma forautistic people and their families, and possible interventions
to reduce stigma. These ﬁndings will be conceptualized in a
theoretical model of autism stigma (Fig. 1).
The model provides an overview for researchers interested
in exploring the many facets of autism stigma and supports
autistic people wanting to map their own experiences ontoexisting evidence. Importantly, when developing the model,
we considered the deﬁnition of stigma broadly and also
incorporated relevant research on attitudes and acceptance,which are correlates of stigma and theoretically tightly
coupled.
8,46Our narrative approach was underpinned by a
thorough PubMed review of articles on autism (autis*) pairedsystematically with each of the following terms stigma,attitude, understanding, and knowledge.
We followed up relevant citations enabling our search to
snowball and reach saturation. The model has been shapedby the ﬁndings, theory, and critical analysis within the ref-
erences, as well as by additional areas of research ﬂagged as
important by our initial search and included as part of oursnowballing strategy (e.g., neurodiversity in autism).
Factors Inﬂuencing Stigma in Autism
As detailed in Figure 1, the variables that contribute to
autism stigma are public and professional understanding ofautistic traits and expressed autistic traits. As previously
mentioned, understanding has an overarching effect on thedevelopment of stigma. We also include expressed autistic
traits, as stigma is fundamentally driven by a culturally driven
detection and labeling of a difference.8We argue that it is
from this intersection of understanding of and observation of
autism that other components of stigma occur.
Moderating factors that inﬂuence the strength or direc-
tion of the relationship between these variables and stigma
include: the quality and quantity of contact, diagnostic dis-
closure, culture, sex and gender, and individual differences.Note that our model only includes the direct moderating
effects on enacted stigma. These moderators are likely to
have direct effects on both felt and afﬁliate stigma, but thisis beyond the scope of the review.
Public and professional understanding of autistic traits
When discussing understanding we are referring to a holis-
tic conception and comprehension of autism that goes beyondfactual or ‘‘book’’ knowledge. For example, knowing that
autism is diagnosed more in males would not be useful when
wanting to support an autistic person struggling with sensoryoverload. However, studies have focused on measures that
probe knowledge, for example, discrete facts about etiology,
treatment, or selected symptoms.
13,47Poorer public and
professional knowledge of autism is often correlated withless positive attitudes48and more stigma,29,48–51although
null results also occur.52–56Knowledge is also recognized by
carers of autistic children as contributing toward stigmati-zed views.44
Some surveys have shown encouraging levels of autism
knowledge among the public.48,57,58However, incorrect knowl-
edge is present in the public and the impact of incorrect
knowledge, even in the context of dominantly correct
knowledge, is not understood. Some areas of misinforma-tion include that autism is characterized by symptoms of
other conditions,58that all autistic children show poor eye
contact,57and that autistic people do not show affection or
attachments.50
Undergraduate students who incorrectly attributed unfa-
vorable traits to autism were likely to have less positive
attitudes toward autism regardless of the number of correcttraits they identiﬁed.53This suggests certain misconceptions
may dominate, even in the face of some correct knowl-
edge. Another important consideration is the valence of theknowledge that is associated with autism. Eight of the 10
characteristics that undergraduate students most commonly
associated with autism had negative valence, with negativestereotyping likely to contribute to stigma.
59Table 1.A Summary of the Deﬁnitions of Stigma
Term Deﬁnition
Stigma A socially constructed concept; any attribute that is seen as unfavorable and that seemingly
discredits an individual, leaving them to be viewed as less valuable than the rest of society.
Public/Enacted Stigma Discrimination or rejection experienced by a stigmatized person.Felt/Self Stigma The internalized prejudice experienced by a stigmatized person, including shame and fear of
enacted stigma.
Afﬁliate/Courtesy
StigmaStigma experienced through association with a stigmatized person (e.g., parents/caregivers and
other family members).78 TURNOCK ET AL.

There are also misconceptions and inadequate knowledge
about autism among health care professionals.52,56,60–65UK
general practitioners displayed good knowledge of autism
but only modest conﬁdence in their ability to work with au-tistic people,66which arguably highlights the limitations of
factual knowledge in equipping professionals to engage ef-
fectively with autistic people. Teachers and childcare pro-
viders may also have poor knowledge and outdated beliefsabout autism, particularly relating to etiology,58,67–71al-
though teachers with more experience of autism have more
knowledge.72,73Some autistic pupils reported feeling stigmatized by their
teachers and attributed this to being judged based on previous
experiences with other autistic pupils.74These limitations
have been partly attributed to insufﬁcient training,64–66,75
with professionals with better knowledge and experiencesless likely to stigmatize autistic children.44,49
To fully explore the effect of autism understanding on
autism stigma, ﬁne-grained analysis is needed to disentan-gle what types of knowledge and understanding are most
predictive of better attitudes and lower stigma. We argue
that nuanced understanding, which critically recognises the
FIG. 1. Theoretical model of causes and impact of autism stigma. Red circles indicate stigma, with Enacted stigma
represented by the convergence of public and professional understanding of autism and expressed autistic traits (observedvariables). Felt stigma and Afﬁliate stigma are experienced through Enacted stigma (black arrows). Purple rectangles
indicate factors that have a moderating effect on the observed variables. Blue circles indicate the impact of stigma, including
Well-being, measured by three observed variables, and camouﬂaging. Black arrows indicate the direct effects betweenEnacted stigma and Well-being and Camouﬂaging, as well as the indirect effects through the effects of Afﬁliate and Felt
stigma. The curved black double- headed arrow illustrates covariance between public and professional understanding of
autistic traits and expressed autistic traits, and between Well-being and Camouﬂaging. The bullet points above the dashedlines indicate interventions that may reduce stigma.STIGMA AND AUTISM 79

heterogeneity and complexity within the autism spectrum,
would be a better predictor than discrete facts. To this end,
measuring understanding through identifying autistic peoplein vignettes or a video, which relies on consideration ofpatterns of behaviours, may be a more sensitive measure than
fact endorsement.
It would also be meaningful to extend understanding
of autism to knowing how to best support autistic people.
Consideration should also be given to what the autistic com-
munity think others should understand about autism. Ref-lecting this, a recent autism knowledge questionnaire that
was co-produced by the autistic community found that the
subsections around societal views and the experience ofbeing autistic were predictors of autism attitudes in Austra-lian adults.
48
Expressed autistic traits
Autistic people’s difﬁculties in social communication are
often physically expressed; examples include unusual pat-terns of eye contact, reduced facial expression and sharing
of emotions, and limited gesture use.76Restricted and repet-
itive behaviors can include motor mannerisms and unusualresponses to sensory stimuli.76Sensory behaviors can be par-
ticularly prevalent outside the home in unfamiliar spaces,77
and overwhelming sensory experiences can induce signiﬁ-
cant distress.78
These visible autistic traits may lead to negative attitudes
during ﬁrst impression formation.28,79,80When assessing ﬁrst
impressions using video clips, neurotypical people have per-ceived autistic people as less attractive, more submissive, and
more awkward than matched neurotypical counterparts.28
However, ﬁrst impressions were not negative when the speech
transcript was presented without visual stimuli, suggesting that
the bias was driven by expressive differences.28
Some of these expressed differences can be particularly
negatively perceived by the neurotypical population. Stereo-
typed or repetitive motor mannerisms, or ‘‘stimming,’’ were
recognized by autistic people as being negatively judgedby neurotypical people, making them feel devalued or‘‘weird.’’
81Autistic people have also reported that some
autistic differences can be perceived as frightening to neuro-
typical people82and that people sometimes associate autism
with violent acts.33Relatedly, students in the United States
and Lebanon perceived disruptive autistic behaviors as more
‘‘dangerous’’ than withdrawn behaviors, which promptedgreater stigmatization.14
Within our model (Fig. 1), we have indicated a covariance
between public and professional understanding of autistictraits and expressed autistic traits. This is because the social
model of disability recognizes the social construction within
which autistic people exist, with poor understanding andattitudes from professionals and the public likely to affectexpressed traits and possibly lead to elevated distress or
discomfort for autistic people.
83Similarly, the way that an
autistic person behaves will inform public and professionalinsights into autism.
Moderating factors
The quality and quantity of contact that autistic and neu-
rotypical people have with one another is an important con-sideration. Knowing and spending time with an autisticperson is associated with more positive attitudes toward
autistic adults and children.11,48,53,84,85It is important to
consider the distinct contributions of both the quantity andquality of contact, with both dimensions associated withmore positive attitudes
54and decreased stigma.86However,
quality of contact appears to be a more robust predictor
of attitudes than quantity.54,86This pattern of ﬁndings is
congruent with data showing that people with autistic imme-
diate family members have more positive attitudes,11and less
stigma toward autism.13,29
For neurotypical people, high-quality interactions may
lead to decreased anxiety and increased comfort around
autistic people, which lays the foundation for better under-standing and, consequently, better attitudes toward autism.54
Similarly, high-quality interactions also support autistic
people in feeling comfortable, which create better conditions
for autistic people to be accurately understood. Conversely,lack of understanding and unfavorable attitudes about autism
from neurotypical people may lead to negative social inter-
actions (e.g., being unwelcoming) that impact the interac-tions of autistic people (e.g., displaying wariness), limiting
opportunities for quality social connections and potentially
exacerbating stigmatized views.
28,87
The quality of contact may be inﬂuenced by the issue of
‘‘double empathy,’’ whereby autistic and neurotypical people
are mutually challenged in their understanding of one anotherdue to fundamental differences in how each understand theworld.
88,89Autism is not associated with distinctive physical
features; therefore, autistic people’s ‘‘typical’’ appearance
coupled with their unusual behaviors may elevate stigma,with autistic behaviors understood as social deviance rather
than reﬂecting an underlying difference or difﬁculty.30,90
Overall, although more direct comparisons are required, ex-
isting research suggests that quality of contact has more
impact than quantity.
Another important consideration is whether diagnostic
disclosure may moderate how autistic people are perceived.The attribution model of stigma proposes that if a behavior
is perceived as controllable, then negative reactions to a
stigmatized individual will be greater as responsibility fortheir actions will be assumed.
91Related to this, the label
of autism leads to more favorable ﬁrst impressions of autis-
tic people presented in video clips than when this label isnot provided80,92There is growing evidence that diagnostic
disclosure can lead to more positive attitudes,55,93,94more
positive affective responses,95greater acceptance of inap-
propriate social behaviors,96as well as reduced stigma.97
However, these ﬁndings are not universal. For example,
knowledge of diagnosis can have a negative impact on ﬁrstimpressions of autistic people for those with high autismstigma,
98whereas school children and adolescents do not
modify their social distancing toward a ﬁctional autistic peer
when diagnosis is disclosed.99A recent scoping review
concluded that the fear of stigma was tied to the reluctance of
autistic people to share their diagnosis,100although concerns
about judgment and misunderstanding have been attributed toboth disclosing and not disclosing an autism diagnosis.33,101
The disconnect between experimental evidence of the
positive impact of diagnostic disclosure and the lived expe-riences of autistic people warrants further exploration. One
possible source of variance is the impact of preexisting au-
tism knowledge or understanding on the effect of diagnostic80 TURNOCK ET AL.

disclosure, with ﬁndings currently mixed.92,95It is also rel-
evant that diagnostic disclosure may also affect how autistic
people express themselves. A stronger autistic identity hasbeen linked to a more open expression of autistic behaviorsin everyday life, mediated by the extent to which the autis-
tic person is open about their diagnosis.
102Further, autistic
people may choose not to share their diagnosis in certaincontexts,103which means they may behave differently across
environments.
Another possible moderator is cultural factors. People in
the United States have been found to hold less stigma to-
ward autistic people than those in Lebanon, Japan, and
China. However, whereas people in China and Lebanon hada lower understanding of autism, people in Japan had asimilar level of knowledge to the United States.
50,104,105
This aligns with the idea that dominantly collectivist cul-tures, where group cohesion is biased over the needs of theindividual, may be more susceptible to stigma due to more
ready adoption of culturally deﬁned norms.
104However, it
is notable that an investigation of autism stigma in collegestudents in Lebanon and the United States found that in-
dividual characteristics (e.g., previous contacts with autis-
tic people) exerted a stronger inﬂuence on autism stigmathan the country of residence.
106
Cultural differences can clearly exert signiﬁcant inﬂuence.
In South Korea, the lay classiﬁcation of ‘‘border children’’recognizes children in mainstream schools who would bedescribed as autistic by Western-trained clinicians.
107This
label is partly driven by parental desire to avoid autism stigma,
with the cultural importance of academic success supportingtheir child’s ‘‘normalcy.’’107Parents in China have described
that the cultural belief that respect for the father is related to
the prospects of the son, can mean that parents do not want todisclose their son’s autism.108
In other countries, the conceptualization of autism as
something other than a developmental disorder can leavecommunities vulnerable to stigma. For example, in Vietnam,autism has been variously conceptualized as a disease, a
‘‘family problem,’’ and karmic demerit.
109In parts of Africa,
autism has been attributed to supernatural phenome-non.110,111These types of beliefs not only lead to signiﬁcant
stigma, such as autistic children being asked to leave public
transport or families being unable to rent accommodation,112
but can also lead to inappropriate and sometimes danger-
ous ‘‘cures’’ by traditional healers.110,111
Cultural differences can also be perceived within a coun-
try among minority immigrant or indigenous communities.
Somalian families in the United Kingdom report high levels
of stigma toward their autistic children, leading to familieshiding their child and delaying seeking support becausechallenging behaviors are not tolerated within their commu-
nities.
113–116There is prevalent autism stigma within Black
American communities from diverse socioeconomic back-grounds, particularly related to denial and shame,117,118as
well as lower levels of autism acceptance in Asian American
communities.119
Aboriginal and Torres Strai t Island community members
in Australia that have autistic family members also report a
high degree of stigma.120The experience of shame, which
has strong cultural relevance, was commonly identiﬁed and
linked with a reluctance to share the diagnosis. An addi-
tional challenge for minority groups is that autism stigma,which may have community-speciﬁc manifestations, is
likely to interact with other s tigma, such as those relating to
religion, race, and ethnicity. I ndeed, the starkest accounts of
stigma by the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Island com-munities were related to interactions with non-Aboriginal
people.120
In addition, Black American parents have reported expe-
riencing racism, including negative assumptions about their
autism knowledge and family circumstances, within the
diagnostic process.117More nuanced investigation is needed
to better understand the impact of culture and community,
both within and across countries, on the experience of stigma
for autistic people and their families. This could include adirect exploration of whether there are contrasting experi-ences of autism stigma for families and autistic individuals
within and outside of different community groups, and the
extent to which additional forms of ‘‘otherness’’ may com-pound stigma.
Although cultural factors are more easily associated with
their possible impact on public or professional perceptionsand understanding, it is also true they may inﬂuence the
expression of autistic traits. Reﬂecting this, there is modest
evidence that the severity of some autistic traits may varyacross some cultures.
121
It is also important to consider the moderating effects
of the sex and gender of autistic people. Though sometimesused interchangeably, sex focuses on the biological differ-ences between males and females, whereas gender focuses on
socially constructed roles, behaviors, and attributes.
122There
is growing interest in delineating differences in the expres-sion of autism based on sex and gender,122but gender and sex
norms may also affect the perceptions of autistic people by
neurotypical people.
One qualitative study suggested that autistic females
recognized pressure to fulﬁl gender stereotypes, including
expected social skills, and that female groups were less for-giving of social ‘‘faux pas.’’123Similarly, in a mixed-methods
study, autistic girls were more likely to feel like victims in
friendship groups than autistic boys and neurotypical girls
and boys, and felt punished for not ‘‘getting it’’ socially.124
These studies predict that autistic females would experience
more stigma based on greater difﬁculty in aligning with gen-
der norms.
From the parent perspective, mothers of autistic chil-
dren may be more vulnerable to experiencing autism
stigma than fathers, including avoidance, hostile staring,and rude remarks from the public.15Again, this may relate
to gender stereotypes, with a higher threshold of expec-
tation set on mothers’ parenting. Typically, studies thatinclude gender do not consider the broader spectrum ofgender presentations, including transgender and nonbi-
nary, who are overrepresented in autistic popula-
tions,
125,126which is an important consideration for future
research.
Consideration should also be given to wider individual
differences beyond an autistic person’s sex or gender.Individual differences related to the expression of autism
are also relevant. For example, disruptive autistic behav-
iors lead to more stigma than withdrawn behaviors,14and
parents of violent or aggressive autistic children are more
likely to encounter stigma.15From a different perspective,
the autism stigma experienced by families may be greaterSTIGMA AND AUTISM 81

if their child’s autism is less visible compared with chil-
dren with more obvious additional needs, such as intel-
lectual disability.15
In terms of individual differences among the public, there
is converging evidence that females are less likely to have
stigmatized views about autism,13,48,119have higher levels
of acceptance of autistic people,119more positive attitudes,48
and greater willingness for social closeness with autistic
people.13,50Higher educational levels are also associated
with higher levels of acceptance119and lower levels of stig-
matized views.127However, education level is not a predic-
tor in all studies.29,48Age is generally not predictive of
autism-related attitudes and stigma.29,48,119,127Other rele-
vant individual differences predictive of lower autism stigmainclude openness to experience, and decreased acceptance
of inequality.106
The Impact of Stigma
The potential effect of stigma on autistic people and their
families is wide ranging and has an overarching impact on
well-being.3Well-being is a multidimensional construct,
with stable well-being occurring when individuals have thepsychological, social, and physical resources to meet a par-
ticular psychological, social, and/or physical challenge.128
The insidious effects of stigma may erode at some of these
resources, with deleterious consequences for well-being. Asillustrated in Figure 1, stigma can affect well-being by inﬂu-
encing a range of factors, including mental health, physi-
cal health, and social connectedness.129–131In addition,
we consider the impact of stigma on behaviors adopted by
autistic people to camouﬂage their behaviors, typically dri-
ven by a desire to ‘‘ﬁt in.’’132,133
Well-being
Recent research identiﬁed that greater awareness of stig-
matized status was related to lower levels of psychological
well-being in autistic adults.134The lower social standing of
stigmatized minority groups is believed to lead to exposureto more stressful life events, alongside fewer resources to
manage these events.3Autistic people have reported a wide
range of stressors common to minority groups, includingvictimization, violence, discrimination, rejection, and felt
stigma,3,35,135which predicted heightened psychological
distress, reduced well-being,3and reduced quality of life.135
Relatedly, only 7% of autistic adults felt accepted as an autis-
tic person within society, with feelings of acceptance pro-
tecting against depression.136These ﬁndings are particularly
relevant given the high prevalence of co-occurring mental
health conditions in autistic people.137
Felt and enacted stigma can lead to reduced access to
health care, with implications for both mental and physicalhealth.138,139For example, there is a suggestion that neg-
ative attitudes at university could stop autistic students
from approaching support services.53Stigma can also lead
to a reluctance to disclose an autism diagnosis in health
care settings,140–142as well as in the workplace,143despite
disclosure often being necessary for appropriate care orsupport.142,143Similarly, stigma can lead parents to resist a
diagnosis for their child.144Autistic people and fam-
ily members have identiﬁed stigma and negative percep-tions among health care professionals, alongside a lack ofﬂexibility and unwillingness to make autism-speciﬁc ad-
justments.142Therefore, stigma can affect the quality and
appropriateness of health and social care received, withconsequences for well-being.
The caregivers of autistic people are also adversely
affected, with afﬁliate stigma correlated with anxiety and
depression,37,145poorer physical health,42lower subjective
well-being,146and fewer working hours.39A recent theoret-
ical framework of the relationship between autism stigma and
caregiver mental health suggests that there are both change-able factors (e.g., caregiver burden, self-blame, social isola-
tion) and nonchangeable factors (e.g., culture, ﬁnancial
burden), both of which contribute to mental ill health andstigma.
145
Aside from mental and physical health, the social con-
nectedness that someone feels to their local and wider com-
munities is also an important dimension of well-being.147The
stigma and misconceptions of the neurotypical majority can
lead to autistic people becoming socially isolated.148A
dominant perception of autistic people is that they are notinterested in social relationships.148However, many autistic
people have a desire for meaningful friendships and rela-
tionships but struggle to obtain them.149–151
Dissatisfaction with social support,19less social con-
tact,152and less social connectedness153have all been asso-
ciated with the experience of loneliness for autistic people. Inturn, loneliness has been associated with depression andanxiety for autistic people across multiple studies,
131,152–154
as well as with poorer life satisfaction and self-esteem.131In
contrast, feelings of greater social connectedness, more timespent with friends, and greater levels of perceived social
support have all been associated with better well-being
among autistic college students.155However, the heteroge-
neity of autism means that assumptions should not be made
about the desire for social connectedness.
Those who want more social connectedness are arguably
more likely or able to voice their social preferences, so it is easyto forget those who are more passive and retiring, including
those who prefer aloneness and do not want intrusion. There
should be understanding and acceptance of autistic peopleregardless of their social style or preferences.
156
For family members, parents report friends asking them
not to bring their autistic children to social gatherings orjudging their parenting.157More generally, parents can ﬁnd
reactions from members of the public difﬁcult and have
reported feeling embarrassed in public when their autisticchild does not behave in a socially acceptable way.78These
experiences may partly explain why the degree of afﬁliate
stigma associates negatively with participation in communityevents for parents of autistic children,158as well as lead to
social disconnection from family and friends.39In summary,
autism stigma can have negative effects on the mental and
physical health of autistic people and their families, as well asleading to reduced social connectedness. These factors all
contribute to reducing well-being within autistic communities.
Camouﬂaging
Stigma may also be a driver of the behaviors that autistic
people choose to present to society, with a consequential
impact on mental health and identity. Deﬁned as ‘‘camou-ﬂaging,’’ some autistic people dampen down or mask their82 TURNOCK ET AL.

autistic traits to try and appear more neurotypical and better
manage social situations.132,133This relates to the concept
of ‘‘compensation’’ in autism, whereby some autistic peopleshow more ‘‘typical’’ social skills than their underlyingsocial cognitive difﬁculties would predict.
159–161
Compensating for underlying difﬁculties and camouﬂag-
ing certain behaviors is mentally taxing and may resultin fatigue,132,160,162poorer mental health,130,133,140,162–164
educational underachievement,162and suicidality.165The
drive to behave neurotypically can also delay diagnosis, notonly delaying access to support but also making the autistic
person vulnerable to stigma through being less well under-
stood.92,95,96,157,166Some motivations for camouﬂaging
appear to reﬂect the pursuit of fulﬁlment, such as the desirefor meaningful relationships.130,132,160However, other be-
haviors often relate to societal norms, including the fear of
rejection or bullying, a pressure to conform,160and awareness
of being in a ‘‘social minority.’’167
Camouﬂaging has resonance with the concept of ‘‘con-
cealment,’’ which is a way that stigmatized groups haveprotected themselves from discrimination.168Recently,
autistic people have described the camouﬂaging of their
autism as a direct response to concerns about experiencingstigma,33,169as well as feelings of shame, which reﬂects felt
stigma.130In this context, camouﬂaging behaviors have been
described as a ‘‘normalising artiﬁce’’ in which the stigma ofautism is transformed into the mask of autism.170
Reﬂecting this, a greater perception of autism stigma was
associated with greater camouﬂaging in a sample of autistic
adults, which has been interpreted through Social IdentityTheory as a way of associating with the higher-status neu-
rotypical majority.134However, although there is a relation-
ship between a stronger autistic identity and reducedcamouﬂaging, some autistic people experience an inconsis-
tency; being proud of and strongly identifying as autistic
while also camouﬂaging to ﬁt in.130,134,162Better under-
standing of this apparent paradox could be an importantavenue for future research. In summary, there is converging
evidence that camouﬂaging behaviors can have a deleterious
effect on mental health, and they are tightly coupled withprotecting the self from the negative consequences of autism
stigma.
Reducing Stigma
There are various approaches that may reduce the stigma
experienced by autistic people and their families, although
there has been relatively little investigation into their effec-
tiveness. In Figure 1, we have included examples of inter-ventions that may bring positive change for the autistic
community. For ease of illustration, we have focused the
impact of the interventions on contributors to enacted stigma:public and professional understanding of autism and ex-pressed autistic traits. However, these interventions are likely
to have a wider impact on, and interact with, other compo-
nents of the model.
Autism-friendly spaces
Autism-friendly spaces are ones in which the ‘‘person-
environment’’ ﬁt is enhanced,171–173including making a
space more socially comfortable (e.g., availability of a quietroom; agreed expectations about social interaction) orphysically comfortable (e.g., appropriate lighting) alongside
more generic adaptations such as improving the predictabil-
ity of an environment. A relevant overarching approach isUniversal Design, in which environments are developed asinclusive for all at their earliest conception, rather than being
subsequently modiﬁed.
174
Autistic people have reported that socializing can be partic-
ularly difﬁcult when neurotypical family and friends do not
consider their preferences, with some activities being inacces-
sible due to environmental challenges.167Further, the inappro-
priateness of many school environments has been described as a
barrier to inclusivity, including issues relating to unpredict-
ability, sensory experiences, and social pressures.74,175
Adaptations to environments give more opportunities for
neurotypical and autistic people to share spaces. Although yet to
be empirically tested, we argue that autism-friendly spaces can
improve understanding of and attitudes toward autism by en-abling autistic people to better integrate with the wider com-
munity. Further, autism-friendly spaces are less likely to invoke
distress, thus enabling autistic people to be their true selves. Weargue that this will enhance the quality of interactions with
autistic people, and consequently reduce stigma.
54,106Thus,
although the driver of autism-friendly environments is to makespaces more comfortable for autistic people, there may be wider
beneﬁts relating to inclusivity and stigma reduction.
Increased inclusive media representation
Knowing someone with autism is associated with more
positive attitudes toward autism11,48,53and less stigma.11,13,29
This ‘‘knowing’’ of autistic people could be partly achieved
by greater and better media representation. Negative report-
ing of autism is correlated with negative attitudes,176but
the media representation of autistic people is often nega-
tive.177–180There has a been a call for more accuracy in
portrayals of autism in the media, although achieving a bal-anced message is difﬁcult given the heterogeneity of
autism.181Positive portrayals are also beneﬁcial for autistic
people and their families.144Therefore, positive autistic role
models and representation of the diversity of autistic expe-rience are likely to improve understanding and reduce neg-
ative attitudes, ultimately reducing autism stigma. In
addition, positive media representations may support autisticpeople in expressing themselves and reduce the need for
camouﬂaging.
Educational and psychosocial training tools
Another approach is to formally educate the public and
professionals about autism. Online training using PowerPoint
has signiﬁcantly increased knowledge and decreased stigma
in students.13,50,182,183However, it is unknown whether these
positive changes would be sustained over time, nor whetherthe training would translate to real-life behaviors.
With respect to the impact of training on real life, a recent
study investigated the effect of an autism acceptance trainingvideo on young adult males who subsequently engaged in a
conversation with an autistic social partner.
184Both partners
reported more interest in spending time with each other com-pared with dyads where the neurotypical partner had not
had the training, suggesting that training had a relational ef-
fect. This supports a previous study where the video had apositive effect on reducing self-reported autism stigma inSTIGMA AND AUTISM 83

undergraduates.185However, the positive effects of the video
on real-life interactions did not extend to all measures of in-
teraction quality,184and the video did not affect an implicit bias
toward associating autism with stigma-related attributes.185
For children, the ‘‘Understanding Our Peers with Pablo’’
program encompasses story books and animations to teach
about autism and reduce autism stigma. It improved attitudestoward unfamiliar autistic peers but did not enhance attitudes
toward familiar autistic peers compared with a control
group.186In addition, behavioral intentions were not im-
proved and thus stigma still prevailed, which is consistent
with previous research that has used a similar intervention
with adolescents.187,188Therefore, although studies addres-
sing stigma can bring positive change, the outcome measureis an important consideration. An explicit shift in attitudes
may not be a sufﬁcient determinant of a more embedded
change in implicit beliefs or behaviors.
A recent survey of neurotypical people found that knowl-
edge of what it could be like to have autism predicated more
positive attitudes toward autism.48First-hand experience of an
autistic perspective may help neurotypical people understand
that their actions may align with an autistic person when they
have similar experiences,189reﬂecting the issue of double
empathy. Technological innovations offer opportunities for
providing this perspective. ‘‘Auti-Sim’’ is a simulation of
sensory overload designed to give neurotypical people a ﬁrst-person experience of the challenges that autistic people face.189
Using the simulation increased perspective taking com-
pared with watching a simulated experience or reading a
vignette, and heightened perspective taking was associatedwith greater emotional concern and helping intentions.
However, there was no difference in explicit attitudes toward
autism. Similar approaches include videos designed to illus-trate the ﬁrst-hand experiences of autistic people in their
everyday lives, e.g., during a short walk.
190
Looking forward, there may be mileage in drawing on
existing resources that target the implicit, or unconsci-ous, bias that individuals can hold toward marginalized
groups.191,192Further, comprehensive programs that include
whole organizations, such as the Welsh Government’sLearning with Autism whole-school training program,193
may engender greater attitude change due to the enhancedcapacity for a cultural shift. Importantly, participatory inputfrom autistic people in adapting an online training tool has
led to the tool being more effective at changing autism
knowledge, autism stigma, and attitudes toward inclu-sion, compared with a version of the training where there
was no participation.
182This underlines the value of
including autistic people in the development of training tools.
Neurodiversity
Arguably, autism stigma may be best reduced by a fun-
damental shift in the way autism is perceived by society. The
neurodiversity movement celebrates autism for the differ-ences it brings to society and for being an integral part of
autistic people’s identities, similar to race, sexuality, or
nationality.29,194The term ‘‘neurodiversity,’’ initially adop-
ted by members of the autistic community,195is now rec-
ognized by many other neurodivergent groups.196,197
Neurodiversity is encapsulated within the minority model
of disability, which emerged as a direct challenge to thebiomedical model of disability, with its focus on pathology
and cure.3,194,198A central tenant of the minority model is
that society’s restricted conceptualization of ‘‘normal’’ cre-ates disability.3It has close ties with a social-developmental
account of autism that argues the development and well-
being of autistic individuals is signiﬁcantly shaped by
misperceptions of the neurotypical majority.87In essence,
neurodiversity is the recognition of the range of natural di-
versity that is found within human development.199
Adopters of neurodiversity reject the medical model of
autism as ‘‘deﬁcit’’ in favor of autism as ‘‘difference,’’ which
contributes positive diversity to society.29,194Importantly,
the onus on embracing neurodiversity should not be placedsolely with autistic people and their families. Autistic peoplemay feel more positive self-identiﬁcation through identify-
ing with neurodiversity, but the power of neurodiversity to
engender meaningful societal change depends on its wideadoption. Recently, there has been a call to members of the
autism research community to engage with the tenants of
neurodiversity and bring about a paradigm shift in autismresearch.
199
Having views aligned with the neurodiversity model is as-
sociated with lower stigma toward autistic people.29Autistic
identiﬁcation is positively rel ated to positive self-esteem, as
well as lower levels of depression and anxiety.200The neuro-
diversity movement aligns with the ownership that many au-tistic people have taken of language used to describe them, withendorsement of identity-ﬁrst language.
194,201,202Identity-ﬁrst
language (e.g., autistic person) is considered less stigmatizing,
partially because person-ﬁrst language (e.g., person with au-tism) could imply the identity is shameful and partially because
person-ﬁrst language is not used in contexts outside of
disability.33,202,203However, not all autistic people or their
families prefer iden tity-ﬁrst language201and differences in
preference should be considered.
Alongside adoption of identity-ﬁrst language, there has
also been a call for researchers to avoid ableist language,which carries an implicit assumption that disabled people are
inferior to others,204and to adopt the term ‘‘autism spectrum
condition’’ over the potentially more stigmatizing ‘‘autismspectrum disorder.’’
It is important to note that identity with the autistic com-
munity can be ambivalent for some, with the beneﬁt ofﬁnding a sense of belonging existing alongside internali-
zation of the autism stigma.
101,170The visibility of positive
autism messages is, therefore, key and the embracing ofneurodiversity can be seen in narratives in which autistic peo-
ple call for acceptance of autistic behaviors, such as stim-
ming.81Other activities to support neurodiversity include
events that showcase the achievements of autistic people,particularly when designed by autistic people.190
The neurodiversity movement, therefore, has potential to
improve public and professional understanding of autism,while also creating a culture where autistic people feel more
able to express their true selves. It may also reduce the
need to camouﬂage autistic behaviors, bringing co-occurringimprovements in mental health.
Conclusion
Our synthesis of the literature has presented a model of
autism stigma designed to promote understanding and further84 TURNOCK ET AL.

research of the difﬁculties people within the autistic com-
munity may face in ﬁnding acceptance. A truly nuanced
exploration of autism stigma should take an intersectionalapproach, in which the wider social and cultural context andother forms of stigma can be accommodated.
205It is imper-
ative that future autism sigma research includes participa-
tion from those with lived experience,29,199,206,207not least
because to leave the autistic community out of the research
process perpetuates a ‘‘them’’ and ‘‘us’’ culture that rein-
forces stigma. Consideration must be given to including adiverse range of autistic community contributors, including
those who may not typically engage with research.208
Importantly, we are not assigning responsibility to the au-
tistic community for their stigma. Rather, we are reﬂectingtheoretical understanding that the development of stigma is
driven by the cultural framing of difference and the insidious
effects of labeling this difference.8For autism, decades of
converging research support the reality of patterns of social
communication differences and restricted and repetitive
behaviors, which can cause challenges in everyday life.However, when we refer to a label as a ‘‘condition’’ or ‘‘dis-
order,’’ we are locating the referent in the stigmatized person,
rather than recognizing that the label has evolved because of itssocial signiﬁcance and as a product of social processes.
8
There is clearly a value to labeling, not least because it
creates a shorthand for society to recognize and address anindividual’s needs. However, by labeling a ‘‘difference,’’ostensibly to provide support, we are creating challenges for
the labeled. There is no easy solution to this conundrum.
An interesting counterpoint to this has been the neurodi-
versity movement and the reclaiming of identity by autistic
people. Many autistic people are communicating that their
autism ‘‘is’’ them and not something separate,
202which at
face value is counter to approaches that advocate distancing
from a stigmatized label.8The neurodiversity movement
may, therefore, support a shift in both the power and valueof autism labels, with the potential to reduce autism stigma.In addition, neurodiversity may provide an important
framework in which to develop a novel program to challenge
and reduce felt stigma in autistic people.
Authorship Conﬁrmation Statement
C.R.G.J. and A.T. were involved in the conceptualization
of the article and wrote the original draft. C.R.G.J. led on
the development of the model. K.L. reviewed and edited
drafts of the article. All co-authors have reviewed andapproved of the article before submission. The article has
been submitted solely to this journal and is not published, in
press, or submitted elsewhere.
Acknowledgments
Thank you to Professor Sue Leekam for helpful comments
on an earlier draft.
Author Disclosure Statement
No competing ﬁnancial interests exist.
Funding Information
The authors did not receive any funding for this review.References
1. Major B, Dovidio JF, Link BG, Calabrese SK. Stigma and
its implications for health: Introduction and overview. In:
Major B, Dovidio JF, Link BG, eds. The Oxford Hand-
book of Stigma, Discrimination, and Health , New York:
Oxford University Press; 2018;3–28.
2. Oyserman D, Swim JK. Stigma: An insider’s view. J Soc
Issues. 2001;57(1):1–14.
3. Botha M, Frost DM. Extending the minority stress model
to understand mental health problems experienced by
the autistic population. Soc Ment Health. 2020;10(1):
20–34.
4. Bachmann CJ, Ho ¨fer J, Kamp-Becker I, et al. Internalised
stigma in adults with autism: A German multi-center
survey. Psychiatry Res. 2019;276:94–99.
5. Goffman E. Stigma: Notes on the Management of Spoiled
Identity. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall; 1963.
6. Shtayermman O. An exploratory study of the stigma
associated with a diagnosis of Asperger’s syndrome: The
mental health impact on the adolescents and young adults
diagnosed with a disability with a social nature. J Hum
Behav Soc Environ. 2009;19(3):298–313.
7. Thornicroft G, Rose D, Kassam A, Sartorius N. Stigma:
Ignorance, prejudice or discrimination? Br J Psychiatry.
2007;190(3):192–193.
8. Link BG, Phelan JC. Conceptualizing stigma. Annu Rev
Sociol. 2001;27(1):363–385.
9. Greenwald AG, Banaji MR. Implicit social cognition:
Attitudes, self-esteem, and stereotypes. Psychol Rev.
1995;102(1):4–27.
10. Flood LN, Bulgrin A, Morgan BL. Piecing together the
puzzle: Development of the societal attitudes towards
autism (SATA) scale. J Res Spec Educ Needs. 2013;13(2):
121–128.
11. Nevill REA, White SW. College students’ openness
toward autism spectrum disorders: Improving peer
acceptance. J Autism Dev Disord. 2011;41(12):1619–
1628.
12. Harnum M, Duffy J, Ferguson DA. Adults’ versus chil-
dren’s perceptions of a child with autism or attentiondeﬁcit hyperactivity disorder. J Autism Dev Disord. 2007;
37(7):1337–1343.
13. Gillespie-Lynch K, Brooks PJ, Someki F, et al. Changing
college students’ conceptions of autism: An online train-
ing to increase knowledge and decrease stigma. J Autism
Dev Disord. 2015;45(8):2553–2566.
14. Gillespie-Lynch K, Daou N, Obeid R, Reardon S, Khan S,
Goldknopf EJ. What contributes to stigma towards autistic
university students and students with other diagnoses?
J Autism Dev Disord. 2021(51):459–475.
15. Gray DE. ‘Everybody just freezes. Everybody is just
embarrassed’: Felt and enacted stigma among parents of
children with high functioning autism. Sociol Health Illn.
2002;24(6):734–749.
16. Corrigan PW, Watson AC. Understanding the impact of
stigma on people with mental illness. World Psychiatry.
2002;1(1):16.
17. Jacoby A. Felt versus enacted stigma—A concept
revisited—Evidence from a study of people with epilepsy
in remission. Soc Sci Med. 1994;38(2):269–274.
18. Bauminger N, Kasari C. Loneliness and friendship in
high-functioning children with autism. Child Dev. 2000;
71(2):447–456.STIGMA AND AUTISM 85

19. Ee D, Hwang YI, Reppermund S, et al. Loneliness in
adults on the autism spectrum. Autism Adulthood. 2019;1:
182–193.
20. Petrina N, Carter M, Stephenson J. The nature of friendship
in children with autism spectrum disorders: A systematic
review. R e sA u t i s mS p e c t rD i s o r d . 2014;8(2):111–126.
21. Rowley E, Chandler S, Baird G, et al. The experience of
friendship, victimization and bullying in children with an
autism spectrum disorder: Associations with child char-
acteristics and school placement. Res Autism Spectr
Disord. 2012;6(3):1126–1134.
22. Brede J, Remington A, Kenny L, Warren K, Pellicano E.
Excluded from school: Autistic students’ experiences ofschool exclusion and subsequent re-integration into
school. Autism Dev Lang Impair. 2017;2:1–20.
23. Shattuck PT, Narendorf SC, Cooper B, Sterzing PR,
Wagner M, Taylor JL. Postsecondary education and
employment among youth with an autism spectrum dis-
order. Pediatrics. 2012;129(6):1042–1049.
24. Black MH, Mahdi S, Milbourn B, et al. Multi-informant
international perspectives on the facilitators and barriers
to employment for autistic adults. Autism Res. 2020;13(7):
1195–1214.
25. Billstedt E, Gillberg C, Gillberg C. Autism after adoles-
cence: Population-based 13-to 22-year follow-up study of
120 individuals with autism diagnosed in childhood.
J Autism Dev Disord. 2005;35(3):351–360.
26. Howlin P, Goode S, Hutton J, Rutter M. Adult outcome
for children with autism. J Child Psychol Psychiatry.
2004;45(2):212–229.
27. Tobin MC, Drager KDR, Richardson LF. A systematic
review of social participation for adults with autism
spectrum disorders: Support, social functioning, and qual-
ity of life. Res Autism Spectr Disord. 2014;8(3):214–229.
28. Sasson NJ, Faso DJ, Nugent J, Lovell S, Kennedy DP,
Grossman RB. Neurotypical peers are less willing to in-
teract with those with autism based on thin slice judg-
ments. Sci Rep. 2017;7:40700.
29. Gillespie-Lynch K, Kapp SK, Brooks PJ, Pickens J,
Schwartzman B. Whose expertise is it? Evidence for
autistic adults as critical autism experts. Front Psychol.
2017;8:438.
30. Huws JC, Jones RSP. ‘They just seem to live their lives in
their own little world’: Lay perceptions of autism. Disabil
Soc. 2010;25(3):331–344.
31. Jensen CM, Martens CS, Nikolajsen ND, et al. What do the
general population know, believe and feel about individuals
with autism and schizophrenia: Results from a comparative
survey in Denmark. Autism. 2016;20(4):496–508.
32. Cage E, Di Monaco J, Newell V. Understanding, attitudes
and dehumanisation towards autistic people. Autism.
2018;23(6):1373–1383.
33. Botha M, Dibb B, Frost DM. ‘‘Autism is me’’: An inves-
tigation of how autistic individuals make sense of autism
and stigma. Disabil Soc. 2020:1–27. https://doi.org/10
.1080/09687599.2020.1822782.
34. Brownlow C, Lawson W, Pillay Y, Mahony J, Abawi D.
‘‘Just ask me’’: The importance of respectful relationships
within schools. Front Psychol. 2021;12:678264. https://
doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2021.678264.
35. Mantzalas J, Richdale AL, Adikari A, Lowe J, Dis-
sanayake C. What is autistic burnout? A thematic analysis
of posts on two online platforms. Autism Adulthood. 2021.
https://doi.org/10.1089/aut.2021.0021.36. Oti-Boadi M, Dankyi E, Kwakye-Nuako CO. Stigma and
forgiveness in ghanaian mothers of children with autism
spectrum disorders (ASD). J Autism Dev Disord. 2020;
50(4):1391–1400.
37. O ¨
zB ,Y u ¨ksel T, Nasirog ˘lu S. Depression-anxiety symp-
toms and stigma perception in mothers of children with
autism spectrum disorder. Arch Neuropsychiatry. 2020;
57(1):50.
38. Zuckerman KE, Lindly OJ, Reyes NM, et al. Parent per-
ceptions of community autism spectrum disorder stigma:
Measure validation and associations in a multi-site sam-
ple.J Autism Dev Disord. 2018;48(9):3199–3209.
39. Kinnear SH, Link BG, Ballan MS, Fischbach RL.
Understanding the experience of stigma for parents of
children with autism spectrum disorder and the role stig-
ma plays in families’ lives. J Autism Dev Disord. 2016;
46(3):942–953.
40. Liao X, Lei X, Li Y. Stigma among parents of children
with autism: A literature review. Asian J Psychiatr. 2019;
45:88–94.
41. Mitter N, Ali A, Scior K. Stigma experienced by families
of individuals with intellectual disabilities and autism: A
systematic review. Res Dev Disabil. 2019;89:10–21.
42. Song J, Mailick MR, Greenberg JS. Health of parents of
individuals with developmental disorders or mental health
problems: Impacts of stigma. Soc Sci Med. 2018;217:152–
158.
43. Lovell B, Wetherell MA. Afﬁliate stigma, perceived so-
cial support and perceived stress in caregivers of children
with autism spectrum disorder: A multiple mediation
study. Arch Psychiatr Nurs. 2019;33(5):31–35.
44. Broady TR, Stoyles GJ, Morse C. Understanding carers’
lived experience of stigma: The voice of families with a
child on the autism spectrum. Health Soc Care Commu-
nity. 2017;25(1):224–233.
45. Lovell B, Wetherell MA. Caregivers’ characteristics and
family constellation variables as predictors of afﬁliate
stigma in caregivers of children with ASD. Psychiatry
Res. 2018;270:426–429.
46. Jansen-van Vuuren J, Aldersey HM. Stigma, acceptance
and belonging for people with IDD across cultures. Curr
Dev Disord Rep. 2020;7(3):163–172.
47. Harrison AJ, Bradshaw LP, Naqvi NC, Paff ML, Camp-
bell JM. Development and psychometric evaluation of the
Autism Stigma and Knowledge Questionnaire (ASK-Q).
J Autism Dev Disord. 2017;47(10):3281–3295.
48. Kuzminski R, Netto J, Wilson J, Falkmer T, Chamberlain
A, Falkmer M. Linking knowledge and attitudes: De-
termining neurotypical knowledge about and attitudes
towards autism. PLoS One. 2019;14(7):e0220197.
49. Ling CYM, Mak WWS, Cheng JNS. Attribution model of
stigma towards children with autism in Hong Kong.
J Appl Res Intellect Disabil. 2010;23(3):237–249.
50. Obeid R, Daou N, DeNigris D, Shane-Simpson C, Brooks
PJ, Gillespie-Lynch K. A cross-cultural comparison of
knowledge and stigma associated with autism spectrum
disorder among college students in Lebanon and the United
States. J Autism Dev Disord. 2015;45(11):3520–3536.
51. Kitchin JL, Karlin NJ. Awareness and stigma of autism
spectrum disorders in undergraduate students. Psychol
Rep. 2021 [Epub ahead of print]; DOI: 10.1177/
00332941211014144.
52. Mac Ca ´rthaigh S, Lo ´pez B. Factually based autism
awareness campaigns may not always be effective in86 TURNOCK ET AL.

changing attitudes towards autism: Evidence from British
and South Korean nursing students. Autism. 2020;24(5):
1177–1190.
53. White D, Hillier A, Frye A, Makrez E. College students’
knowledge and attitudes towards students on the autism
spectrum. J Autism Dev Disord. 2019;49(7):2699–2705.
54. Gardiner E, Iarocci G. Students with autism spectrum
disorder in the university context: Peer acceptance pre-
dicts intention to volunteer. J Autism Dev Disord. 2014;
44(5):1008–1017.
55. Matthews NL, Ly AR, Goldberg WA. College students’
perceptions of peers with autism spectrum disorder.
J Autism Dev Disord. 2015;45(1):90–99.
56. van ‘t Hof M, van Berckelaer-Onnes I, Deen M, et al.
Novel insights into autism knowledge and stigmatizing
attitudes toward mental illness in Dutch youth and family
center physicians. Community Ment Health J. 2020;56(7):
1318–1330.
57. Tipton LA, Blacher J. Brief report: Autism awareness:
Views from a campus community. J Autism Dev Disord.
2014;44(2):477–483.
58. Mitchell GE, Locke KD. Lay beliefs about autism spec-
trum disorder among the general public and childcare
providers. Autism. 2015;19(5):553–561.
59. Wood C, Freeth M. Students’ stereotypes of autism.
J Educ Issues. 2016;2:131.
60. Heidgerken AD, Geffken G, Modi A, Frakey L. A survey
of autism knowledge in a health care setting. J Autism Dev
Disord. 2005;35(3):323–330.
61. Plumb AM, Plexico LW. Autism spectrum disorders:
Experience, training, and conﬁdence levels of school-
based speech-language pathologists. Lang Speech Hear
Serv Sch. 2013;44(1):89–104.
62. Khanna R, Jariwala K, Holmes ER, Ramachandran S.
Autism familiarity and knowledge among pharmacy stu-
dents. Curr Pharm Teach Learn. 2014;6(1):150–157.
63. Zerbo O, Massolo ML, Qian Y, Croen LA. A study of
physician knowledge and experience with autism in adults
in a large integrated healthcare system. J Autism Dev
Disord. 2015;45(12):4002–4014.
64. Crane L, Davidson I, Prosser R, Pellicano E. Under-
standing psychiatrists’ knowledge, attitudes and experi-
ences in identifying and supporting their patients on the
autism spectrum: Online survey. BJPsych Open. 2019;
5(3):e33.
65. Bono LK, Haverkamp CR, Lindsey RA, Freedman RN,
McClain MB, Simonsmeier V. Assessing interdisciplinary
trainees’ objective and self-reported knowledge of autism
spectrum disorder and conﬁdence in providing services.
J Autism Dev Disord. 2022;52(1):376–391.
66. Unigwe S, Buckley C, Crane L, Kenny L, Remington A,
Pellicano E. GPs’ conﬁdence in caring for their patients on
the autism spectrum: An online self-report study. Br J Gen
Pract. 2017;67(659):e445–e452.
67. Al-Sharbati MM, Al-Farsi YM, Ouhtit A, et al. Awareness
about autism among school teachers in Oman: A cross-
sectional study. Autism. 2015;19(1):6–13.
68. Haimour AI, Obaidat YF. School teachers’ knowledge
about autism in Saudi Arabia. World J Educ. 2013;3(5):
45–56.
69. Sanz-Cervera P, Ferna ´ndez-Andre ´s M-I, Pastor-Cerezuela
G, Ta ´rraga-Mı ´nguez R. Pre-service teachers’ knowledge,
misconceptions and gaps about autism spectrum disorder.
Teach Educ Spec Educ. 2017;40(3):212–224.70. Schwartz H, Drager KDR. Training and knowledge in
autism among speech-language pathologists: A survey.
Lang Speech Hear Serv Sch. 2008;39(1):66–77.
71. Young K, Mannix McNamara P, Coughlan B. Post-
primary school teachers’ knowledge and understanding of
autism spectrum disorders. Irish Educ Stud. 2017;36(3):
399–422.
72. Ballantyne C, Gillespie-Smith K, Wilson C. A comparison
of knowledge and experience of autism spectrum disorder
among teachers in the United Kingdom and China. Intl J
Disabil Dev Educ. 2019;68(8):1–12.
73. Segall MJ, Campbell JM. Factors relating to education
professionals’ classroom practices for the inclusion ofstudents with autism spectrum disorders. Res Autism
Spectr Disord. 2012;6(3):1156–1167.
74. Goodall C. ‘I felt closed in and like I couldn’t breathe’: A
qualitative study exploring the mainstream educational
experiences of autistic young people. Autism Dev Lang
Impair. 2018;3:2396941518804407.
75. Dillenburger K, McKerr L, Jordan J-A, Keenan M. Staff
training in autism: The one-eyed wo/man ..Int J Environ
Res Public Health. 2016;13(7):716.
76. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Sta-
tistical Manual of Mental Disorders 5th edition (DSM-5).
Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Association; 2013.
77. Schaaf RC, Toth-Cohen S, Johnson SL, Outten G, Benevides
TW. The everyday routines of families of children with au-
tism: Examining the impact of sensory processing difﬁculties
on the family. Autism. 2011;15(3):373–389.
78. Ryan S. ‘Meltdowns’, surveillance and managing emo-
tions; going out with children with autism. Health Place.
2010;16(5):868–875.
79. Grossman RB. Judgments of social awkwardness from
brief exposure to children with and without high-
functioning autism. Autism. 2015;19(5):580–587.
80. DeBrabander KM, Morrison KE, Jones DR, Faso DJ,
Chmielewski M, Sasson NJ. Do ﬁrst impressions of au-
tistic adults differ between autistic and nonautistic ob-
servers? Autism Adulthood. 2019;1(4):250–257.
81. Kapp SK, Steward R, Crane L, et al. ‘People should be
allowed to do what they like’: Autistic adults’ views and
experiences of stimming. Autism. 2019;23(7):1782–1792.
82. Jones R, Quigney C, Huws J. First-hand accounts of
sensory perceptual experiences in autism: A qualitative
analysis. J Autism Dev Disord. 2003;28(2):112–121.
83. Barnes C. Understanding the social model of disability:
Past, present and future. In: Watson N, Vehmas S, eds.
Routledge Handbook of Disability Studies. London:
Routledge; 2019;14–31.
84. Dachez J, Ndobo A, Ameline A. French validation of the
multidimensional attitude scale toward persons with dis-
abilities (MAS): The case of attitudes toward autism and
their moderating factors. J Autism Dev Disord. 2015;
45(8):2508–2518.
85. Cook A, Ogden J, Winstone N. The effect of school
exposure and personal contact on attitudes towards bul-
lying and autism in schools: A cohort study with a control
group. Autism. 2020;24(8):2178–2189.
86. Kim SY. College disability service ofﬁce staff members’
autism attitudes and knowledge. Remedial Spec Educ.
2021;43(1):15–26.
87. Mitchell P, Sheppard E, Cassidy S. Autism and the double
empathy problem: Implications for development and
mental health. Br J Dev Psychol. 2021;39(1):1–18.STIGMA AND AUTISM 87

88. Milton DEM. On the ontological status of autism: The
‘double empathy problem’. Disabil Soc. 2012;27(6):883–
887.
89. Crompton CJ, Sharp M, Axbey H, Fletcher-Watson S,
Flynn EG, Ropar D. Neurotype-matching, but not being
autistic, inﬂuences self and observer ratings of interper-
sonal rapport. Front Psychol. 2020;11:586171. https://doi
.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.586171.
90. Gray DE. Perceptions of stigma: The parents of autistic
children. Sociol Health Illn. 1993;15(1):102–120.
91. Corrigan P, Markowitz FE, Watson A, Rowan D, Kubiak
MA. An attribution model of public discrimination to-
wards persons with mental illness. J Health Soc Behav.
2003;44(2):162–179.
92. Sasson NJ, Morrison KE. First impressions of adults
with autism improve with diagnostic disclosure and in-
creased autism knowledge of peers. Autism. 2019;23(1):
50–59.
93. Austin JE, Zinke VL, Davies WH. Inﬂuencing perception
about children with autism and their parents using dis-
closure cards. J Autism Dev Disord. 2016;46(8):2764–
2769.
94. Austin JE, Galijot R, Davies WH. Evaluating parental
Autism disclosure strategies. J Autism Dev Disord. 2018;
48(1):103–109.
95. Brosnan M, Mills E. The effect of diagnostic labels on the
affective responses of college students towards peers with
‘Asperger’s Syndrome’and ‘Autism Spectrum Disorder’.
Autism. 2016;20(4):388–394.
96. Mogavero MC, Hsu K-H. Autism spectrum disorder and
harassment: An application of attribution theory. Int J
Criminol Sociol. 2018;7:260–274.
97. O’Connor C, Burke J, Rooney B. Diagnostic disclosure
and social marginalisation of adults with ASD: Is there a
relationship and what mediates it? J Autism Dev Disord.
2020;50(9):3367–3379.
98. Morrison KE, DeBrabander KM, Faso DJ, Sasson NJ.
Variability in ﬁrst impressions of autistic adults made
by neurotypical raters is driven more by characteristics of
the rater than by characteristics of autistic adults. Autism.
2019;23(7):1817–1829.
99. White R, Barreto M, Harrington J, Kapp SK, Hayes J,
Russell G. Is disclosing an autism spectrum disorder in
school associated with reduced stigmatization? Autism.
2020;24(3):744–754.
100. Thompson-Hodgetts S, Labonte C, Mazumder R, Phelan
S. Helpful or harmful? A scoping review of perceptions
and outcomes of autism diagnostic disclosure to others.
Res Autism Spectr Disord. 2020;77:101598.
101. Frost KM, Bailey KM, Ingersoll BR. ‘‘I just want them to
see me as .me’’: Identity, community, and disclosure
practices among college students on the autism spectrum.
Autism Adulthood. 2020;1(4):268–275.
102. Cage E, Troxell-Whitman Z. Understanding the relation-
ships between autistic identity, disclosure, and camou-
ﬂaging. Autism Adulthood. 2020;2:334–338.
103. Johnson TD, Joshi A. Dark clouds or silver linings? A
stigma threat perspective on the implications of an autism
diagnosis for workplace well-being. J Appl Psychol. 2016;
101(3):430–449.
104. Someki F, Torii M, Brooks PJ, Koeda T, Gillespie-Lynch
K. Stigma associated with autism among college students
in Japan and the United States: An online training study.
Res Dev Disabil. 2018;76:88–98.105. Yu L, Stronach S, Harrison AJ. Public knowledge and
stigma of autism spectrum disorder: Comparing China
with the United States. Autism. 2020;24(6):1531–1545.
106. Gillespie-Lynch K, Daou N, Sanchez-Ruiz M-J, et al.
Factors underlying cross-cultural differences in stigma
toward autism among college students in Lebanon and the
United States. Autism. 2019;23(8):1993–2006.
107. Grinker RR, Cho K. Border children: Interpreting autism
spectrum disorder in South Korea. Ethos. 2013;41(1):46–74.
108. McCabe H. Parent advocacy in the face of adversity:
Autism and families in the People’s Republic of China.
Focus Autism Other Dev Disabl. 2007;22(1):39–50.
109. Ha VS, Whittaker A, Whittaker M, Rodger S. Living with
autism spectrum disorder in Hanoi, Vietnam. Soc Sci Med.
2014;120:278–285.
110. Sangare M, Dembele B, Toure A, et al. Autism seminary
for public engagement: Evaluation of knowledge and at-
titudes of traditional medical practitioners in Mali [version
1; peer review: 1 approved, 1 approved with reservations,
1 not approved]. AAS Open Res. 2019;2(21). https://doi
.org/10.12688/aasopenres.12955.1.
111. Tilahun D, Hanlon C, Fekadu A, Tekola B, Baheretibeb
Y, Hoekstra RA. Stigma, explanatory models and unmet
needs of caregivers of children with developmental dis-
orders in a low-income African country: A cross-sectional
facility-based survey. BMC Health Serv Res. 2016;16:152.
112. Tekola B, Baheretibeb Y, Roth I, et al. Challenges and
opportunities to improve autism services in low-income
countries: Lessons from a situational analysis in Ethiopia.
Glob Ment Health. 2016;3:e21, 1–11. https://doi.org/10.
1017/gmh.2016.1.
113. Ellen Selman L, Fox F, Aabe N, Turner K, Rai D,
Redwood S. ‘You are labelled by your children’s
disability’—A community-based, participatory study of
stigma among Somali parents of children with autism
living in the United Kingdom. Ethn Health. 2018;23(7):
781–796.
114. Sritharan B, Koola MM. Barriers faced by immigrant
families of children with autism: A program to address the
challenges. Asian J Psychiatr. 2019;39:53–57.
115. Hussein AM, Pellicano E, Crane L. Understanding and
awareness of autism among Somali parents living in the
United Kingdom. Autism. 2019;23(6):1408–1418.
116. Fox F, Aabe N, Turner K, Redwood S, Rai D. ‘‘It was like
walking without knowing where I was going’’: A quali-
tative study of autism in a UK Somali Migrant Commu-nity. J Autism Dev Disord. 2017;47(2):305–315.
117. Dababnah S, Shaia WE, Campion K, Nichols HM. ‘‘We
had to keep pushing’’: Caregivers’ perspectives on autism
screening and referral practices of black children in pri-
mary care. Intellect Dev Disabil. 2018;56(5):321–336.
118. Burkett K, Morris E, Manning-Courtney P, Anthony J,
Shambley-Ebron D. African American families on autism
diagnosis and treatment: The inﬂuence of culture.
J Autism Dev Disord. 2015;45(10):3244–3254.
119. Kim SY. The Development and pilot-testing of the autism
attitude acceptance scale: An instrument measuring au-
tism acceptance. Autism Adulthood. 2020;2:204–215.
120. Lilley R, Sedgwick M, Pellicano E. Inclusion, acceptance,
shame and isolation: Attitudes to autism in aboriginal and
Torres Strait islander communities in Australia. Autism.
2020;24(7):1860–1873.
121. de Leeuw A, Happe ´F, Hoekstra RA. A conceptual
framework for understanding the cultural and contextual88 TURNOCK ET AL.

factors on autism across the globe. Autism Res. 2020;
13(7):1029–1050.
122. Lai MC, Lombardo MV, Auyeung B, Chakrabarti B,
Baron-Cohen S. Sex/gender differences and autism: Set-
ting the scene for future research. J Am Acad Child
Adolesc Psychiatry. 2015;54(1):11–24.
123. Bargiela S, Steward R, Mandy W. The experiences of late-
diagnosed women with autism spectrum conditions: An
investigation of the female autism phenotype. J Autism
Dev Disord. 2016;46(10):3281–3294.
124. Sedgewick F, Hill V, Pellicano E. ‘It’s different for girls’:
Gender differences in the friendships and conﬂict of
autistic and neurotypical adolescents. Autism. 2018;23(5):
1119–1132.
125. Van Der Miesen AIR, Hurley H, De Vries ALC. Gender
dysphoria and autism spectrum disorder: A narrative re-
view. Int Rev Psychiatry. 2016;28(1):70–80.
126. Glidden D, Bouman WP, Jones BA, Arcelus J. Gender
dysphoria and autism spectrum disorder: A systematic
review of the literature. Sex Med Rev. 2016;4(1):3–14.
127. Stronach S, Wiegand S, Mentz E. Brief report: Autism
knowledge and stigma in university and community
samples. J Autism Dev Disord. 2019;49(3):1298–1302.
128. Dodge R, Daly AP, Huyton J, Sanders LD. The challenge
of deﬁning wellbeing. Int J Wellbeing. 2012;2(3):222–235.
129. Steptoe A, Deaton A, Stone AA. Subjective wellbeing,
health, and ageing. Lancet. 2015;385(9968):640–648.
130. Cage E, Troxell-Whitman Z. Understanding the reasons,
contexts and costs of camouﬂaging for autistic adults.
J Autism Dev Disord. 2019;49(5):1899–1911.
131. Mazurek MO. Loneliness, friendship, and well-being in
adults with autism spectrum disorders. Autism. 2014;
18(3):223–232.
132. Hull L, Petrides KV, Allison C, et al. ‘‘Putting on my best
normal’’: Social camouﬂaging in adults with autism
spectrum conditions. J Autism Dev Disord. 2017;47(8):
2519–2534.
133. Lai M-C, Lombardo MV, Ruigrok ANV, et al. Quantify-
ing and exploring camouﬂaging in men and women with
autism. Autism. 2017;21(6):690–702.
134. Perry E, Mandy W, Hull L, Cage E. Understanding
camouﬂaging as a response to autism-related stigma: A
social identity theory approach. J Autism Dev Disord. 2021;
52:800–810.
135. Caron V, Jeanneret N, Giroux M, et al. Sociocultural
context and autistics’ quality of life: A comparison be-tween Que ´bec and France. Autism. 2021 [Epub ahead of
print]; DOI: 10.1177/13623613211035229.
136. Cage E, Di Monaco J, Newell V. Experiences of autism
acceptance and mental health in autistic adults. J Autism
Dev Disord. 2018;48(2):473–484.
137. Lai M-C, Kassee C, Besney R, et al. Prevalence of co-
occurring mental health diagnoses in the autism popula-
tion: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Lancet
Psychiatry. 2019;6(10):819–829.
138. Earnshaw VA, Quinn DM. The impact of stigma in
healthcare on people living with chronic illnesses.
J Health Psychol. 2012;17(2):157–168.
139. Gulliver A, Grifﬁths KM, Christensen H. Perceived bar-
riers and facilitators to mental health help-seeking in
young people: A systematic review. BMC Psychiatry.
2010;10:113.
140. Crane L, Adams F, Harper G, Welch J, Pellicano E.
‘Something needs to change’: Mental health experiencesof young autistic adults in England.
Autism. 2019;23(2):
477–493.
141. Nicolaidis C, Raymaker D, McDonald K, et al. Compar-
ison of healthcare experiences in autistic and non-autistic
adults: A cross-sectional online survey facilitated by an
academic-community partnership. J Gen Intern Med.
2013;28(6):761–769.
142. Walsh C, Lydon S, O’Dowd E, O’Connor P. Barriers to
healthcare for persons with autism: A systematic review
of the literature and development of a taxonomy. Dev
Neurorehabil. 2020;23(7):413–430.
143. Romualdez AM, Heasman B, Walker Z, Davies J,
Remington A. ‘‘People might understand me better’’:Diagnostic disclosure experiences of autistic individuals
in the workplace. Autism Adulthood. 2021;3(2):157–167.
144. Russell G, Norwich B. Dilemmas, diagnosis and de-stig-
matization: Parental perspectives on the diagnosis of au-
tism spectrum disorders. Clin Child Psychol Psychiatry.
2012;17(2):229–245.
145. Papadopoulos C, Lodder A, Constantinou G, Randhawa
G. Systematic review of the relationship between autism
stigma and informal caregiver mental health. J Autism
Dev Disord. 2019;49(4):1665–1685.
146. Werner S, Shulman C. Subjective well-being among
family caregivers of individuals with developmental dis-
abilities: The role of afﬁliate stigma and psychosocial
moderating variables. Res Dev Disabil. 2013;34(11):
4103–4114.
147. Linton M-J, Dieppe P, Medina-Lara A. Review of 99
self-report measures for assessing well-being in adults:
Exploring dimensions of well-being and developments
over time. BMJ Open. 2016;6(7):e010641.
148. John RPS, Knott FJ, Harvey KN. Myths about autism: An
exploratory study using focus groups. Autism. 2018;22(7):
845–854.
149. Jaswal VK, Akhtar N. Being versus appearing socially
uninterested: Challenging assumptions about social moti-
vation in autism. Behav Brain Sci. 2019;42:e82, 1–73.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X18001826.
150. Mu ¨ller E, Schuler A, Yates GB. Social challenges and
supports from the perspective of individuals with Asper-
ger syndrome and other autism spectrum disabilities.
Autism. 2008;12(2):173–190.
151. Skaﬂe I, Nordahl-Hansen A, Øien RA. Short report: Social
perception of high school students with ASD in Norway.
J Autism Dev Disord. 2020;50(2):670–675.
152. Schiltz HK, McVey AJ, Dolan Wozniak B, et al. The role
of loneliness as a mediator between autism features and
mental health among autistic young adults. Autism. 2021;
25(2):545–555.
153. Stice LV, Lavner JA. Social connectedness and loneliness
mediate the association between autistic traits and inter-
nalizing symptoms among young adults. J Autism Dev
Disord. 2019;49(3):1096–1110.
154. Han GT, Tomarken AJ, Gotham KO. Social and nonsocial
reward moderate the relation between autism symptoms
and loneliness in adults with ASD, depression, and con-
trols. Autism Res. 2019;12(6):884–896.
155. Bailey KM, Frost KM, Casagrande K, Ingersoll B. The
relationship between social experience and subjective
well-being in autistic college students: A mixed methods
study. Autism. 2020;24(5):1081–1092.
156. Scheeren AM, Koot HM, Begeer S. Stability and change
in social interaction style of children with autism spectrumSTIGMA AND AUTISM 89

disorder: A 4-year follow-up study. Autism Res. 2020;
13(1):74–81.
157. Farrugia D. Exploring stigma: Medical knowledge and
the stigmatisation of parents of children diagnosed with
autism spectrum disorder. Sociol Health Illn. 2009;31(7):
1011–1027.
158. Ng CKM, Lam SHF, Tsang STK, Yuen C, Chien C-W.
The relationship between afﬁliate stigma in parents of
children with autism spectrum disorder and their chil-
dren’s activity participation. Int J Environ Res Public
Health. 2020;17(5):1799.
159. Livingston LA, Colvert E, Social Relationships Study T,
Bolton P, Happe ´F. Good social skills despite poor theory
of mind: Exploring compensation in autism spectrum dis-
order. J Child Psychol Psychiatry. 2019;60(1):102–110.
160. Livingston LA, Shah P, Happe ´F. Compensatory strategies
below the behavioural surface in autism: A qualitative
study. Lancet Psychiatry. 2019;6(9):766–777.
161. Livingston LA, Happe ´F. Conceptualising compensation
in neurodevelopmental disorders: Reﬂections from autism
spectrum disorder. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2017;80:729–
742.
162. Halsall J, Clarke C, Crane L. ‘‘Camouﬂaging’’ by adoles-
cent autistic girls who attend both mainstream and spe-
cialist resource classes: Perspectives of girls, their mothers
and their educators. Autism. 2021;25(7):2074–2086.
163. Bernardin CJ, Lewis T, Bell D, Kanne S. Associations
between social camouﬂaging and internalizing symptoms
in autistic and non-autistic adolescents. Autism. 2021;
25(6):1580–1591.
164. Hull L, Levy L, Lai MC, et al. Is social camouﬂaging
associated with anxiety and depression in autistic adults?
Mol Autism. 2021;12(1):13.
165. Cassidy S, Bradley L, Shaw R, Baron-Cohen S. Risk
markers for suicidality in autistic adults. Mol Autism.
2018;9:42.
166. O’Connor C, Burke J, Rooney B. Diagnostic disclosure
and social marginalisation of adults with ASD: Is There a
relationship and what mediates it? J Autism Dev Disord.
2020;50(9):3367–3379.
167. Crompton CJ, Hallett S, Ropar D, Flynn E, Fletcher-
Watson S. ‘I never realised everybody felt as happy as I do
when I am around autistic people’: A thematic analysis of
autistic adults’ relationships with autistic and neurotypical
friends and family. Autism. 2020;24(6):1438–1448.
168. Meyer IH. Prejudice, social stress, and mental health in
lesbian, gay, and bisexual populations: Conceptual issues
and research evidence. Psychol Bull. 2003;129(5):674–
697.
169. Miller D, Rees J, Pearson A. ‘‘Masking is life’’: Experi-
ences of masking in autistic and nonautistic adults. Autism
Adulthood. 2021;3(4):330–338.
170. Schneid I, Raz AE. The mask of autism: Social camou-
ﬂaging and impression management as coping/normali-
zation from the perspectives of autistic adults. Soc Sci
Med. 2020;248:112826.
171. Lai MC, Baron-Cohen S. Identifying the lost generation of
adults with autism spectrum conditions. Lancet Psy-
chiatry. 2015;2(11):1013–1027.
172. Lai M-C, Anagnostou E, Wiznitzer M, Allison C, Baron-
Cohen S. Evidence-based support for autistic people
across the lifespan: Maximising potential, minimising
barriers, and optimising the person–environment ﬁt.
Lancet Neurol. 2020;19(5):434–451.173. Tola G, Talu V, Congiu T, Bain P, Lindert J. Built envi-
ronment design and people with autism spectrum disorder
(ASD): A scoping review. Int J Environ Res Public
Health. 2021;18(6):3203.
174. Milton D, Martin N, Melham P. Beyond reasonable ad-
justment: autistic-friendly spaces and Universal Design.
In: Milton D, Martin N, eds. Autism and Intellectual
Disabilities in Adults Vol. 1. Hove: Pavilion Publishing
and Media; 2016;81–85.
175. Pellicano L, Bo ¨lte S, Stahmer A. The current illusion of
educational inclusion. Autism. 2018;22(4):386–387.
176. Brewer N, Zoanetti J, Young RL. The inﬂuence of media
suggestions about links between criminality and autismspectrum disorder. Autism. 2017;21(1):117–121.
177. Tang L, Bie B. The stigma of autism in china: An analysis
of newspaper portrayals of autism between 2003 and
2012. Health Commun. 2016;31(4):445–452.
178. Holton AE, Farrell LC, Fudge JL. A threatening space?:
Stigmatization and the framing of autism in the news.
Commun Stud. 2014;65(2):189–207.
179. Bie B, Tang L. Representation of autism in leading
newspapers in China: A content analysis. Health Com-
mun. 2015;30(9):884–893.
180. Baeyens D, Moniquet A, Danckaerts M, van der Oord S.
A comparative study of the structural stigmatisation of
ADHD and autism spectrum disorder in Flemish news-
papers. Tijdschr Psychiatr. 2017;59(5):269–277.
181. Nordahl-Hansen A, Øien RA, Fletcher-Watson S. Pros
and cons of character portrayals of autism on TV and ﬁlm.
J Autism Dev Disord. 2018;48(2):635–636.
182. Gillespie-Lynch K, Bisson J, Saade S, et al. If you want to
develop an effective autism training, ask autistic students
to help you. Autism. 2021 [Epub ahead of print]; DOI:
10.1177/13623613211041006.
183. Saade S, Bean YF, Gillespie-Lynch K, Poirier N, Harrison
AJ. Can participation in an online ASD training enhance
attitudes toward inclusion, teaching self-Efﬁcacy and
ASD knowledge among preservice educators in diverse
cultural contexts? Int J Inclusive Educ. 2021:1–16. https://
doi.org/10.1080/13603116.2021.1931716.
184. Jones DR, Morrison KE, DeBrabander KM, Ackerman
RA, Pinkham AE, Sasson NJ. Greater social interest be-
tween autistic and non-autistic conversation partners fol-
lowing autism acceptance training for non-autistic people.
Front Psychol. 2021;12:739147. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fpsyg.2021.739147.
185. Jones DR, DeBrabander KM, Sasson NJ. Effects of autism
acceptance training on explicit and implicit biases toward
autism. Autism. 2021;25(5):1246–1261.
186. Morris S, O’Reilly G, Byrne MK. Understanding our
peers with Pablo: Exploring the merit of an autism spec-
trum disorder de-stigmatisation programme targeting
peers in Irish early education mainstream settings.
J Autism Dev Disord. 2020;50(12):4385–4400.
187. Staniland JJ, Byrne MK. The effects of a multi-component
higher-functioning autism anti-stigma program on adoles-
cent boys. J Autism Dev Disord. 2013;43(12):2816–2829.
188. Ranson NJ, Byrne MK. Promoting peer acceptance of
females with higher-functioning autism in a mainstream
education setting: A replication and extension of the ef-
fects of an autism anti-stigma program. J Autism Dev
Disord. 2014;44(11):2778–2796.
189. Sarge MA, Kim H-S, Velez JA. An auti-sim intervention:
The role of perspective taking in combating public stigma90 TURNOCK ET AL.

with virtual simulations. Cyberpsychol Behav Soc Netw.
2020;23(1):41–51.
190. Bonsu A. Keeping an open mind about autism. Lancet
Neurol. 2017;16(12):963.
191. Como DH, Florı ´ndez LI, Tran CF, Cermak SA, Stein
Duker LI. Examining unconscious bias embedded in
provider language regarding children with autism. Nurs
Health Sci. 2020;22(2):197–204.
192. Teal CR, Gill AC, Green AR, Crandall S. Helping
medical learners recognise and manage unconscious bias
toward certain patient groups. Med Educ. 2012;46(1):
80–88.
193. Government W. Refreshed Autistic Spectrum Disorder
Strategic Action Plan. In. Wales, United Kingdom;
2020.
194. Kapp SK, Gillespie-Lynch K, Sherman LE, Hutman T.
Deﬁcit, difference, or both? Autism and neurodiversity.
Dev Psychol. 2013;49(1):59.
195. Jaarsma P, Welin S. Autism as a natural human variation:
Reﬂections on the claims of the neurodiversity movement.
Health Care Anal. 2012;20(1):20–30.
196. Grifﬁn E, Pollak D. Student experiences of neurodiversity
in higher education: Insights from the BRAINHE project.
Dyslexia. 2009;15(1):23–41.
197. Armstrong T. The myth of the normal brain: embracing
neurodiversity. AMA J Ethics. 2015;17(4):348–352.
198. Smart J. Challenges to the Biomedical Model of Disability.
Advan Medical Psychother Psychodiag. 2006;12:1–4.
199. Pellicano E, den Houting J. Annual Research Review:
Shifting from ‘normal science’ to neurodiversity in autism
science. J Child Psychol Psychiatry. 2021 [Epub ahead of
print]; DOI: 10.1111/jcpp.13534.
200. Cooper K, Smith LGE, Russell A. Social identity, self-
esteem, and mental health in autism. Eur J Soc Psychol.
2017;47(7):844–854.
201. Kenny L, Hattersley C, Molins B, Buckley C, Povey C,
Pellicano E. Which terms should be used to describeautism? Perspectives from the UK autism community.
Autism. 2016;20(4):442–462.
202. Bury SM, Jellett R, Spoor JR, Hedley D. ‘‘It deﬁnes who
i am’’ or ‘‘it’s something i have’’: What language do
[autistic] Australian adults [on the autism spectrum]
prefer? J Autism Dev Disord. 2020 [Epub ahead of print];
DOI: 10.1007/s10803-020-04425-3.
203. Gernsbacher MA. Editorial perspective: The use of person-
ﬁrst language in scholarly writing may accentuate stigma.
J Child Psychol Psychiatry. 2017;58(7):859–861.
204. Bottema-Beutel K, Kapp SK, Lester JN, Sasson NJ, Hand
BN. Avoiding ableist language: suggestions for autism
researchers. Autism Adulthood. 2021;3(1):18–29.
205. Singh JS, Bunyak G. Autism disparities: A systematic
review and meta-ethnography of qualitative research.
Qual Health Res. 2019;29(6):796–808.
206. Corrigan PW, Shapiro JR. Measuring the impact of pro-
grams that challenge the public stigma of mental illness.
Clin Psychol Rev. 2010;30(8):907–922.
207. Fletcher-Watson S, Adams J, Brook K, et al. Making the
future together: Shaping autism research through mean-
ingful participation. Autism. 2019;23(4):943–953.
208. Pickard H, Pellicano E, den Houting J, Crane L. Partici-
patory autism research: Early career and established re-
searchers’ views and experiences. Autism. 2022;26(1):
75–87.
Address correspondence to:
Catherine R.G. Jones, PhD
School of Psychology
Cardiff University
Park Place
Cardiff CF10 3AT
United Kingdom
Email: jonescr10@cardiff.ac.ukSTIGMA AND AUTISM 91