This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript
This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service 
to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will 
undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its 
final form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could 
affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.Accepted Manuscript
Journal of the American Academy of Audiology
The Effectiveness of Unguided Internet-Based Cognitive Behavioral Therapy for 
Tinnitus for Patients with Tinnitus Alone or Combined with Hyperacusis and/or 
Misophonia: A Preliminary Analysis
Hashir Aazh, Lauren Taylor, Ali A Danesh, Brian C Moore. 
Affiliations below.
DOI: 10.1055/a-2087-0262 
Please cite this article as:  Aazh H, Taylor L, Danesh A A et al. The Effectiveness of Unguided Internet-Based Cognitive Behavioral Thera -
py for Tinnitus for Patients with Tinnitus Alone or Combined with Hyperacusis and/or Misophonia: A Preliminary Analysis. Journal of the 
American Academy of Audiology 2023. doi: 10.1055/a-2087-0262 
Conflict of Interest:  HA is the developer and owner of the iCBT(T) program. No conflicting interests are declared for the other authors. 
This study was supported by  Blakeley Foundation  
Abstract:
Background: In the UK, audiologist-delivered cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) is a key intervention to alleviate the distress 
caused by tinnitus and its comorbid hyperacusis.  However, the availability of face-to-face CBT is limited, and such therapy 
involves significant costs. CBT provided via the internet provides a potential solution to improve access to CBT for tinnitus. 
Purpose: The aim was to perform a preliminary assessment of the effect of a specific program of non-guided internet-based 
CBT for tinnitus, denoted iCBT(T), in alleviating the problems caused by tinnitus alone or tinnitus combined with hyperacusis.      
Research Design: This was a retrospective cross-sectional study.
Study Sample: The data for 28 people with tinnitus who completed the iCBT(T) program and answered a series of questions 
about their tinnitus and hearing status were included in the study. Twelve patients reported also having hyperacusis (including 
five also with misophonia). 
Data collection and analysis: The iCBT(T) program has seven self-help modules. Anonymous data were collected retrospectively 
from patients’ answers to the questions in the iCBT(T) initial and final assessment modules. Questionnaires administered wit-
hin the iCBT(T) program were: 4C Tinnitus Management Questionnaire (4C), Screening for Anxiety and Depression in Tinnitus 
(SAD-T), and the CBT Effectiveness Questionnaire (CBT-EQ). 
Results: Responses to the 4C showed a significant improvement from pre- to post-treatment, with a medium effect size. The 
mean improvement was similar for those with and without hyperacusis. Responses to the SAD-T questionnaire also showed a 
significant improvement from pre- to post-treatment with a medium effect size. The improvement was significantly greater 
for participants with tinnitus alone than for participants who also had hyperacusis. For both the 4C and the SAD-T, the impro -
vements were not significantly related to age or gender. Participants’ views of the effectiveness of the iCBT(T) program were 
assessed using the CBT-EQ. The mean score was 50 out of a maximum of 80, indicating moderately high effectiveness. CBT-EQ 
scores did not differ for those with and without hyperacusis.
Conclusions: Based on this preliminary analysis, the iCBT(T) program showed promising result in improving the ability to ma-
nage tinnitus and decreasing symptoms of anxiety and depression. Future studies with larger samples and control group(s) are 
required to further assess various aspects of this program.   
Corresponding Author: 
Dr. Hashir Aazh, The Royal Surrey County Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, Audiology, Egerton Road, GU2 7XX  Surrey, United Kingdom  Submission Date: 2022-08-21
 Accepted Date: 2023-01-10
 Accepted Manuscript online: 
2023-05-05

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript
This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service 
to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will 
undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its 
final form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could 
affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, hashir.aazh@nhs.net  
Affiliations: 
Hashir Aazh, The Royal Surrey County Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, Audiology, Surrey, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern 
Ireland
Lauren Taylor, University of Surrey, Guildford, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
Ali A Danesh, Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton, United States
Brian C Moore, University of Cambridge, CAMBRIDGE, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland

The Effectiveness of Unguided Internet-Based Cognitive Behavioral Therapy for 
Tinnitus for Patients with Tinnitus Alone or Combined with Hyperacusis and/or 
Misophonia: A Preliminary Analysis  
Hashir Aazh1,2,3 
Lauren Taylor4
Ali A. Danesh2
Brian C. J. Moore5 
1Hashir Clinics for Tinnitus, Hyperacusis and Misophonia, Farnham Road, Guildford, 
Surrey, UK
2 Department of Communication Sciences & Disorders, Florida Atlantic University, USA 
3Faculty of Engineering and Physical Sciences, University of Surrey, UK
4 School of Psychology, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Surrey, 
Guildford, Surrey, UK
5Cambridge Hearing Group, Department of Psychology, University of Cambridge, Downing 
Street, Cambridge, UK
Address for correspondence:  Dr. Hashir Aazh, Hashir Clinics for Tinnitus, Hyperacusis and
Misophonia, 1 Farnham Road Guildford, Surrey GU2 4RG, United Kingdom
E-mail: info@hashirtinnitusclinic.com 
Abstract
Background: In the UK, audiologist-delivered cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) is a key 
intervention to alleviate the distress caused by tinnitus and its comorbid hyperacusis.  
However, the availability of face-to-face CBT is limited, and such therapy involves 
significant costs. CBT provided via the internet provides a potential solution to improve 
access to CBT for tinnitus. 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript

Purpose: The aim was to perform a preliminary assessment of the effect of a specific 
program of non-guided internet-based CBT for tinnitus, denoted iCBT(T), in alleviating the 
problems caused by tinnitus alone or tinnitus combined with hyperacusis.      
Research Design: This was a retrospective cross-sectional study.
Study Sample: The data for 28 people with tinnitus who completed the iCBT(T) program 
and answered a series of questions about their tinnitus and hearing status were included in the
study. Twelve patients reported also having hyperacusis (including five also with 
misophonia). 
Data collection and analysis:  The iCBT(T) program has seven self-help modules. 
Anonymous data were collected retrospectively from patients’ answers to the questions in the
iCBT(T) initial and final assessment modules. Questionnaires administered within the 
iCBT(T) program were: 4C Tinnitus Management Questionnaire  (4C), Screening for Anxiety
and Depression in Tinnitus (SAD-T), and the CBT Effectiveness Questionnaire (CBT-EQ). 
Results: Responses to the 4C showed a significant improvement from pre- to post-treatment, 
with a medium effect size. The mean improvement was similar for those with and without  
hyperacusis. Responses to the SAD-T questionnaire also showed a significant improvement 
from pre- to post-treatment with a medium effect size. The improvement was significantly 
greater for participants with tinnitus alone than for participants who also had hyperacusis. For
both the 4C and the SAD-T, the improvements were not significantly related to age or 
gender. Participants’ views of the effectiveness of the iCBT(T) program were assessed using 
the CBT-EQ. The mean score was 50 out of a maximum of 80, indicating moderately high 
effectiveness. CBT-EQ scores did not differ for those with and without hyperacusis.
Conclusions: Based on this preliminary analysis, the iCBT(T) program showed promising 
result in improving the ability to manage tinnitus and decreasing symptoms of anxiety and 
depression. Future studies with larger samples and control group(s) are required to further 
assess various aspects of this program.    
Tinnitus is the perception of sound without any acoustic stimulus external to the body. It can 
significantly affect the sufferer’s mental health, and up to 60% of patients seeking help for 
their tinnitus show symptoms of anxiety and mood disorders (1). Hyperacusis is the 
perception of certain everyday sounds, such as domestic noise or noise in public places, as 
too loud or painful (2). Misophonia is the perception of certain sounds produced by human 
beings or animals, such as eating and breathing noises, as disgusting or offensive (3, 4). 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript

Hyperacusis and misophonia often lead to intolerance of certain day-to-day sounds and cause 
significant distress and impairment in the sufferers’ social, occupational, recreational, and 
other activities (5, 6). Tinnitus, hyperacusis and misophonia sometimes co-occur. Twelve 
percent or more of patients with misophonia also suffer from tinnitus (7, 8). Hyperacusis is 
present for about 40% of patients with moderately severe tinnitus and for up to 80% of those 
with severe tinnitus (9, 10).   
In the UK, audiologist-delivered cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) is a key intervention to 
alleviate the distress caused by tinnitus and its comorbid hyperacusis and misophonia (11-
16). CBT is often delivered over 6 to 14 face-to-face individual sessions. However, the 
availability of face-to-face therapy under the UK National Health Service is limited, and such
therapy involves significant costs. In many developing countries, tinnitus therapy is not 
available or is unaffordable. Even in developed countries, tinnitus therapy may not be  
covered by health insurance (15). CBT provided via the internet (iCBT) provides a potential 
solution to these issues. 
There are several different approaches to iCBT. However, they mostly use an internet 
platform similar to that for online educational training courses and utilize a mix of 
educational videos and audio recordings, text, puzzles, games, and assignments for 
participants to complete (17, 18). The contents are often developed based on existing self-
help materials or on methods that are used in face-to-face therapy sessions, modified for 
delivery in a self-help format. A recent meta-analysis that reviewed nine randomized 
controlled trials (RCT) of iCBT for tinnitus reported that iCBT led to a medium overall effect
size (ES) in reducing tinnitus-related distress, with Cohen’s d = 0.50 (95% confidence 
interval, CI: 0.37–0.63) over studies using both passive and active control groups (19).     
There are several guided and unguided iCBT approaches that have been used for treating 
people with bothersome tinnitus, with varied success (19). Participants who use guided iCBT 
benefit from additional support from a clinician or therapist who can encourage them and 
help them to engage with the program as well as answering questions. Unguided iCBT does 
not involve additional support from a therapist, and it appears to be somewhat less effective 
than guided iCBT (19). However, unguided iCBT is less costly and therefore has the potential
to be scaled up and used when face-to-face therapy is not easily accessible.    
Several studies have reported that patients who have tinnitus combined with hyperacusis or 
misophonia exhibit a more severe impact of their tinnitus and more marked symptoms of 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript

anxiety and depression than those with tinnitus alone (1, 8, 20, 21). Therefore, it is not clear if
iCBT for tinnitus is as effective for patients with comorbid hyperacusis and/or misophonia as 
for patients with tinnitus alone.   
This study assessed of a specific unguided iCBT program for tinnitus with seven self-help 
modules. Hereafter, the program is designated as iCBT(T). The program was developed by 
the first author in 2020, with input from the third and fourth authors (22). The aims of this 
study were: (1) to perform a preliminary assessment of the effectiveness of the iCBT(T) by 
retrospectively comparing pre- and post-treatment scores on self-report questionnaires that 
were integrated into the program; (2) to assess participant’s views about the effectiveness of 
the iCBT(T) program; and (3) to perform a preliminary comparison of the effectiveness of the
iCBT(T) program for participants with tinnitus alone and for those with tinnitus combined 
with hyperacusis or misophonia.   
  
Method  
Ethics
All participants agreed that their anonymized data could be used for service improvement and
research purposes. The study was approved by the University of Surrey ethics committee 
(Project ID: FHMS 21-22 147 EGA). 
Study Design and Participants 
This was an exploratory study with a retrospective cross-sectional design using anonymized 
data from 28 consecutive participants who completed the iCBT(T) program between October 
and December 2020. The participants were self-selected rather than being recruited by the 
authors. Presumably, the participants found the program via internet search or were directed 
to the iCBT(T) website by audiologists who were aware of the program. Anonymized data 
collection was built into the program in order to create personalized reports for the 
participants and to assess their feedback about the effectiveness of the iCBT(T) program. The
preliminary assessment of the effectiveness of the iCBT(T) program in this study was 
evaluated using these data. Anonymous d emographic data about the participants, 
characteristics of their tinnitus, ear and hearing history, and the outcomes of their self-report 
questionnaires were imported from their answers to the questions in the iCBT(T) initial and 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript

final assessment modules.       
The Content of the iCBT(T) Program
The iCBT(T) program (version 1.1, 2020) has seven modules that were designed based on a 
specialized CBT program for tinnitus management that has been used for over a decade by 
audiologists in the UK and elsewhere (11-14, 16, 23). Table 1 gives details of the content and
objectives of each module. Participants are advised to start from the first module 
(Assessment) and go on to completing the other modules in order. The amount of time 
needed for each module ranges from 45 to 90 minutes. Participants are informed that they 
need to allocate time to complete assignments between modules. The suggested interval 
between each of the first six modules is 3-4 days. This is intended to allow time to practice 
specific exercises between each module. The final assessment (module 7) needs to be 
completed one month after completing the iCBT(T) program. The iCBT(T) program is self-
explanatory and does not require any intervention from a therapist. Figure 1 illustrates the 
structure of the program. Audiologists or therapists also can choose to guide their patients in 
completing the modules if required, changing the program to guided iCBT. However, the data
included in this study are for a cohort of participants who completed iCBT(T) without 
guidance from a therapist.  
**insert Table 1 and Figure 1 here** 
For internet therapy programs, especially those for which a therapist or clinician is not 
providing additional support and guidance, it is important to use strategies to increase each 
participant’s engagement and willingness to persist. This can be facilitated by persuasive 
system design, which is a framework proposed by Oinas-Kukkonen and Harjumaa (24) . It 
includes 28 recommendations for making the design of an internet therapy program more 
persuasive and engaging. Examples of such principles are reducing complex behavior into 
simple tasks, personalized content, offering praise, reminders, and visually attractive design. 
Some of the persuasive system design principles are utilized in the iCBT(T) program and 
these are listed in Table 2. 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript

**insert table 2 here** 
Self-report Questionnaires 
All questionnaires described here were integral parts of the iCBT(T) program and were not 
chosen for the purpose of this study. The data collected using these questionnaires were 
analyzed retrospectively. In what follows we describe the questionnaires and the reasons why
they were included in the iCBT(T) program.     
There can be significant differences between paper and electronic versions of a given 
questionnaire (25, 26). Therefore, it is recommended to re-measure the reliability of a 
questionnaire when it is used in  different format (27). In this study, Cronbach's alpha was 
estimated for each of the online versions of the questionnaires incorporated in the iCBT(T) 
program.   
4C Tinnitus Management Questionnaire  
The 4C questionnaire was chosen for use in the iCBT(T) program because, in addition to 
being a validated measure of how well an individual is coping with their tinnitus (28), the 4C 
is intended to motivate the participant in engaging with the therapy process by encouraging 
them to think about how they can become more confident in managing their day-to-day life 
events despite having tinnitus. Unlike other commonly used tinnitus questionnaires, the 4C is 
focused on the individual’s ability to manage the problem. For example, instead of asking 
“How often did your tinnitus make it difficult to fall asleep or stay asleep?” which is a 
question from the Tinnitus Functional Index (TFI) (29), the 4C asks “How confident are you 
that you are able to rest and relax, even with tinnitus?”. Instead of asking “Does your tinnitus 
make it difficult to enjoy life?”, which is a question from the Tinnitus Handicap Inventory 
(THI) (30), the 4C asks “How confident are you that you can enjoy your life fully, even with 
tinnitus?”. The change in focus from the problem to the individual’s ability to manage the 
problem can help the patient to assess their strengths and weaknesses and to think about how 
to develop more confidence in dealing with the problem (31, 32). The 4C questionnaire is 
partly consistent with the Self-Efficacy for Tinnitus Management Questionnaire (SETMQ, 
(Smith & Fagelson 2011), which also focuses on assessing a participant’s confidence in their 
ability to control their reaction to their tinnitus and to implement tinnitus management 
strategies. However, the 4C has only 4 items compared to 40 items in the SETMQ. The 4C is 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript

designed to be used for CBT intervention  (28), while the SETMQ has items that are not 
relevant to CBT and are related to the use of masking and sound-generating devices.     
The 4C asks participants to select a number based on how they feel now for each question
(28). The 4C items are: (1) How confident are you that you are able to carry out your day-to-
day tasks, even with tinnitus? (2) How confident are you that you are able to rest and relax, 
even with tinnitus? (3) How confident are you that you can enjoy your life fully, even with 
tinnitus? (4) How confident are you that you can do all the above without using any 
avoidance behavior?  The response choice range is from 0 to 10. 0 means “Not confident at 
all” and 10 means “Very confident”. To calculate the overall score for the 4C questionnaire, 
the sum of the scores for the first three questions (Q1-Q3) is multiplied by the score for the 
fourth question (Q4). Then the result is divided by 3. The highest possible score is 100, so the
total score can be regarded as a percentage. 4C scores between 57 percent and 100 percent 
indicate a high level of confidence. Scores between 52 percent and 57 percent indicate a fair 
degree of confidence, scores between 37 percent and 52 percent indicate slight confidence, 
and scores between 0 and 37 percent indicate low confidence. Cronbach's alpha for the 4C 
questionnaire in pen and paper format is 0.91 (28). 
Screening for Anxiety and Depression in Tinnitus (SAD-T)
The SAD-T contains four items that match those for the physical health questionnaire (PHQ-
4; 33). Each item is rated on a four-point scale. Two items relate to experiences of anxiety 
and two relate to experiences of depression. The overall score ranges from 0 to 12. Scores ≥4 
indicate symptoms of anxiety and/or depression. Cronbach’s alpha for the SAD-T in pen and 
paper format is 0.91 (34). This questionnaire was used in the iCBT(T) program in order to 
identify participants who might benefit from further psychological evaluations and to make 
such a recommendation in their assessment reports for modules one and seven.   
CBT Effectiveness Questionnaire (CBT-EQ)  
The CBT-EQ has eight questions asking about the effectiveness of the iCBT(T) program and 
its components, as judged by the participant. This questionnaire was included in the iCBT(T) 
program to provide a measure of the effectiveness of the program and each of its components 
from the participant’s perspective. Seeking users’ feedback is common for most clinical 
services (35).   
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript

The pen and paper version of the CBT-EQ has been used in a study evaluating patients’ 
perspectives about the effectiveness of face-to-face CBT for tinnitus management (11). For 
each question, the participant is asked to choose a number between 0 and 10. The total score 
ranges from 0 to 80. The questions are:    
1) How effective was iCBT in helping you manage your tinnitus? Number 0 is “Not effective 
at all” and number 10 is “Very effective”.
2) Are you able to manage your tinnitus differently compared to before you started the iCBT?
Number 0 is “No” and number 10 is “Yes, a lot”.
Please rate the effectiveness of each of the iCBT modules in helping you manage your 
tinnitus? Number 0 is “Not effective at all” and number 10 is “Very effective”.
3) Doing a “Behavioral Experiment” and reflecting on its outcome. 
4) Filling in the “Diary of Thoughts” and reflecting on them.
5) Completing the Assessment & 4C questions.
6) Learning about Positive Psychology.
7) General learning about CBT for tinnitus.
8) Learning how to challenge your negative thoughts. 
  
Other Questions
Other questions that were included in the iCBT(T) program are shown in Table 1. 
Participant’s answers to these questions were needed to develop their module one assessment 
report. They responded by selecting among a range of response options. The questions were 
related to: whether they had hearing difficulties, hyperacusis and misophonia; when the 
tinnitus started relative to when they started the iCBT(T) program; where the tinnitus 
appeared to be located; what the tinnitus sounded like; and what the likely cause of the 
tinnitus was. 
Analysis 
Descriptive statistics, medians, means, standard deviations (SD), and 95% CIs of the scores 
for the self-report questionnaires are reported. The reliability of the 4C, SAD-T and CBT-EQ 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript

questionnaires were re-assessed using Cronbach’s alpha (36), which is a standard measure of 
reliability. To be considered as reliable, the value of alpha was required to be greater than 0.7.
Paired t-tests were used to compare pre- and post-treatment scores for the 4C and SAD-T 
questionnaires. Welch's t-tests (37) for unequal samples were used to compare the changes in 
4C and SAD-T scores and the scores for the CBT-EQ between patients with and without 
hyperacusis and/or misophonia, between males and females and between patients with a 
duration of tinnitus 1 month versus ≥6 months prior to enrolling in the iCBT(T) program.   
For ordinal data (i.e., categories of participants with abnormal SAD-T scores), Wilcoxon 
matched-pairs signed-ranks tests were used to compare the medians of the variables before 
and after treatment. Pearson correlation was used to assess factors related to changes in 4C 
and SAD-T scores (before and after treatment) as well as the CBT-EQ total scores (after 
treatment). 
ES values, Cohen’s d, were used to assess the changes in 4C and SAD-T scores pre- and 
post-treatment. These were calculated using equation 8 of Morris and DeShon (38) . This 
takes into account the correlation between pre- and post-treatment scores that occurs in a 
within-subjects design. The resulting ES values are called “corrected” ES values. ES values 
between 0.2 and 0.5 are considered as small, those between 0.5 and 0.8 as medium, and those
above 0.8 as large (39). The p-value required for statistical significance was set at p<0.05. 
The Stata program (version 13) (40) was used for statistical analyses. 
 
Results 
Characteristics of the Participants    
All 28 participants reported having bothersome tinnitus. Their a verage age was 52 years (SD 
= 16.5 years, range 18 to 75 years) and 17 were male. Based on their responses to questions 
10 and 11 listed in Table 1, twelve participants reported experiencing hyperacusis and five 
reported misophonia. All participants who reported misophonia also reported hyperacusis. 
Eighteen participants reported having some hearing difficulties in addition to their tinnitus.    
The following are the numbers of participants who reported hearing their tinnitus in the 
specified location(s): two outside their head; sixteen in both ears; two in one ear only; three in
the back of their head as well as in both ears; one in the back of their head as well as in their 
right ear; two in the front of their head in addition to both ears; one in the front of their head 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript

only; and one in the front and back of their head.  
None of the participants reported discharge from their ears. Three participants reported ear 
pain and three reported balance problems. Twenty-three participants reported that their 
tinnitus started six months or more prior to starting the iCBT(T) program. For the remaining 
five participants, the onsets of tinnitus relative to starting the iCBT(T) program were: one 
month for one participant, one week for two participants and in the last 24 hours for two 
participants. Participants were asked to select the likely cause of their tinnitus from several 
options. They were allowed to choose more than one option. The number of participants 
selecting each cause of tinnitus was sixteen for stress, eight for loud noise, eight for 
infections, six for drugs, five for ear wax, and one for an accident. Eight selected 
miscellaneous other causes, and nine reported that they did not know what might have caused
their tinnitus. 
Participants were asked to select from various options what their tinnitus sounded like. They 
were allowed to choose as many options as they liked. Twenty participants described their 
tinnitus as a high-pitched sound, nine as a hissing noise, eight as white noise, seven as 
buzzing, seven as ringing, five as a whistle, five as a pulsing sound, two as a humming noise, 
two as a heartbeat, one as clicks, one as beeps, and one as a plane taking off. Three 
participants did not find a description that matched their tinnitus and selected the option 
“others”.          
Depending on their responses, some participants were recommended to see their healthcare 
providers. The criteria used to generate a recommendation to seek medical help are 
summarized in Table 1, in the initial “Assessment” module.     
Sixteen participants had symptoms of anxiety and depression based on their scores for the 
SAD-T. They received a recommendation to discuss their mood with their healthcare 
provider and explore the possibility of being referred for psychological support (if they had 
not done that already). They were also given information about general mental health support
organizations in the UK, USA and Australia and were given the contact details of those 
organizations.   
   
Reliability of the Questionnaires Used in the iCBT(T) Program   
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript

Cronbach’s alpha was 0.98 for the CBT-EQ, 0.88 for the 4C, and 0.91 for SAD-T, indicating 
good internal consistency for all three questionnaires in online format, as used in the iCBT(T)
program. 
Pre- and Post-Treatment Comparison  
Table 3 shows the mean pre-and post-treatment scores for the 4C and SAD-T across all 
participants. Corrected ES values were medium in size and were significant for both 
questionnaires. The  differences between pre-and post-treatment in 4C scores were not 
significantly correlated with age ( r = 0.26, p = 0.18) or with pre-treatment SAD-T scores ( r = 
0.16, p = 0.42).  Similarly, the differences between pre-and post-treatment in SAD-T scores 
were not significantly correlated with age or pre-treatment 4C scores ( r = 0.09, p = 0.63; r = 
0.22, p = 0.26, respectively). There was no significant difference in the change in 4C and 
SAD-T scores between men and women ( p = 0.1 and 0.2, respectively).  
The number of participants who had scores ≥4 for the SAD-T, indicating symptoms of 
anxiety and depression, reduced from sixteen before treatment to nine after treatment, and a 
Wilcoxon signed-rank test showed that this difference was significant (Z = 2.11, p = 0.034). 
**insert Table 3 here** 
The change in SAD-T score was on average 2.5 points larger (95% CI: 0.35 to 4.6) for the 
sixteen participants with tinnitus alone than for the twelve who had tinnitus combined with 
hyperacusis, and this difference was significant ( p = 0.024).     
The mean changes in 4C and SAD-T scores for participants whose tinnitus started one month 
or less before starting the iCBT(T) program (N=5) were 33 (SD=25) and 4 (SD=2.5), 
respectively. These changes were larger than the changes for the participants whose tinnitus 
started six months or more before starting the iCBT(T) program (N=23), which were 13 
(SD=28) for the 4C and 1.4 (SD=2.9) for the SAD-T, but the differences in change were not 
significant (p = 0.16 and 0.075, respectively), possibly because of the small sample sizes.     
Participants’ Views About the Effectiveness of the iCBT(T) Program    
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript

The average total CBT-EQ score was 50 out of 80 (95% CI: 43 to 58). The average total 
CBT-EQ score for the twelve participants with tinnitus combined with hyperacusis was 52 
(SD = 21). This did not differ significantly ( p = 0.77) from the average score of 49.5 (SD = 
19) for the sixteen participants who had tinnitus alone. There was no significant difference in 
total CBT-EQ scores between men and women ( p = 0.2). 
CBT-EQ total scores were not significantly correlated with age ( r = 0.23, p = 0.24), pre-
treatment 4C scores ( r = 0.27, p = 0.16), or pre-treatment SAD-T scores ( r = 0.37, p = 
0.055). However, CBT-EQ total scores were significantly correlated with post-treatment 4C 
scores (r = 0.66, p = 0.0001) and post-treatment SAD-T scores ( r = 0.43, p = 0.02). 
For the question asking “How effective was iCBT in helping you manage your tinnitus?”, the 
median response was 6/10 (SD = 2.6). For the question asking “Are you able to manage your 
tinnitus differently compared to before you started the iCBT?”, the median response was 7/10
(SD = 3.0). The medians and SDs of responses to the questions asking for a rating of the 
effectiveness of each of the iCBT modules in helping them manage their tinnitus were: 6/10 
(SD = 2.5) for the “Behavioral Experiment”, 6/10 (SD = 2.6) for the “Diary of Thoughts”, 
5.5/10 (SD = 2.3) for the assessment module, 6/10 (SD = 2.5) for the “Positive Psychology” 
module, 7/10 (SD = 2.5) for general learning about CBT for tinnitus, and 7/10 (SD = 2.4) for 
learning how to challenge negative thoughts. 
Discussion 
The results of this study need to be interpreted bearing in mind its methodological limitations.
The analysis was retrospective and hence was limited to data collected as an integral part of 
the iCBT(T) program. We do not know how many people started the program without 
finishing it. This may have led to selection bias, since the analysis was based only on 
participants who completed the program (41). It is possible that only those who perceived 
some initial benefit from the program chose to continue to completion. Future studies should 
explore the dropout rate from the iCBT(T) program, reasons for dropouts, how much time 
was spent on each module, and if the participants completed the assignments and adhered to 
the program.  
The study lacked a control group. Therefore, it is difficult to assess the extent to which the 
measured improvements were produced specifically by the iCBT(T) as opposed to being a 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript

more general effect of receiving treatment (placebo effect) (42). Studies with an RCT design 
are required to assess the efficacy of iCBT(T) for the management of tinnitus. 
The study had a small sample size, so the lack of statistical significance for some of the 
analyses could reflect a type II error. Another limitation of this study is the fact it was 
conducted by the developer of the iCBT(T) program, although any biases introduced by this 
could not have influenced the responses of the participants. Future studies addressing these 
points and conducted independently of the developer of the iCBT(T) program are needed. 
Clinicians involved with the treatment of tinnitus often wonder why many of their patients 
have been told that “nothing can be done” for their tinnitus. It is unfortunate that, despite the 
enormous progress in tinnitus management, there are still patients who develop a great level 
of stress and anxiety about their tinnitus because someone, often a healthcare provider, told 
them it is not curable. For many patients with tinnitus, the cost of management is a significant
factor. In countries with insurance-based health system, tinnitus management is not covered 
by many insurance companies. The introduction of iCBT(T) is an important step in providing
a non-invasive, supportive and affordable method of tinnitus management. The results 
showed that the iCBT(T) program for tinnitus had a medium ES for improving participants’ 
confidence in managing their tinnitus as measured via the 4C and a medium ES for reducing 
symptoms of anxiety and depression as measured via the SAD-T. 
As noted above, part of these improvements may have been due to the “participation effect”
(43, 44) or placebo effect. It is known that almost any acceptable intervention for tinnitus 
tends to result in a reduction in the severity of tinnitus as assessed using questionnaires. The 
magnitude of the participation effect can be estimated by comparing ES values in improving 
tinnitus distress for iCBT studies involving inactive (passive) control groups (e.g., being put 
on a waiting list) and studies involving active control groups (involving some plausible type 
of treatment other than iCBT); the participation effect is likely to influence the former but not
the latter. In a meta-analysis of trials of iCBT, Beukes, Manchaiah (19)  found mean ES 
values for reducing tinnitus distress of 0.59 for studies with inactive control groups and 0.32 
for studies with active control groups. This suggests that the participation effect increased the
ES by about 0.27. The corrected ES for improvement in tinnitus distress as measured by the 
change in 4C scores in the present study was 0.69, which is much larger than would be 
expected from the participation effect alone. Hence it seems likely that a substantial part of 
the beneficial effect of the iCBT(T) program found in the present study was not caused by the
participation effect.  
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript

The magnitude of the ES found here for the SAD-T is comparable to those found in 
controlled trials of various forms of iCBT in the management of mental illness and chronic 
conditions. For example, Mehta, Peynenburg (45)  reviewed 25 RCTs that assessed the effects
of iCBT on anxiety and depression symptoms for participants with various chronic conditions
(tinnitus, fibromyalgia, pain, rheumatoid arthritis, cardiovascular disease, and diabetes). Their
meta-analysis showed that iCBT resulted in significant improvements in anxiety and 
depression scores, with small to medium ES. It seems likely that reduction of the distress 
caused by tinnitus resulting from participation in the iCBT(T) program led to the observed 
reductions in anxiety and depression. 
There was a non-significant trend for participants whose tinnitus started one month or less 
before commencing the iCBT(T) program to show greater improvements in their 4C and 
SAD-T scores than participants whose tinnitus started six months or more before 
commencing. This may partly reflect spontaneous recovery from tinnitus among those with a 
recent onset of tinnitus. Future studies should explore the effectiveness of the iCBT(T) 
program among participants with different durations of tinnitus, using a larger sample of 
participants.     
The improvement in SAD-T score was on average 2.5 points larger (95% CI: 0.3 to 4.6) for 
the sixteen participants with tinnitus alone than for the twelve who had tinnitus combined 
with hyperacusis, and this difference was significant. It is possible that the smaller 
improvement for the participants who had tinnitus combined with hyperacusis was a 
consequence of the fact that the iCBT(T) program was specifically targeted at helping the 
participant to deal with their tinnitus. It is likely that the iCBT(T) program did not markedly 
reduce the distress caused by hyperacusis and/or misophonia, and hence was less effective in 
producing overall reductions in anxiety and depression. Another explanation is that we relied 
on the single questions that were used in the iCBT(T) assessment module to detect 
hyperacusis and misophonia. Although  other researchers have also used single questions to 
diagnose hyperacusis and misophonia (10, 46), this is not ideal. To address this limitation, 
future studies should use validated measures to further explore the presence and severity of 
hyperacusis and misophonia and their relationships with treatment outcome.  
The improvement in scores for the 4C and SAD-T questionnaires produced by participating 
in the iCBT(T) program was not significantly related to the gender or age of the participants. 
Similarly, ratings of the effectiveness of the iCBT(T) program obtained using the CBT-EQ 
questionnaire were not significantly related to gender or age. These outcomes suggest that the
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript

iCBT(T) program seem to be equally effective for men and women and is effective regardless
of age over the range 18-75 years.
CBT-EQ total scores were significantly correlated with post-treatment 4C scores ( r = 0.66, p 
= 0.0001) and post-treatment SAD-T scores ( r = 0.43, p = 0.02). In other words, the better 
the final outcome as measured by the 4C and SAD-T questionnaires, the higher were the 
ratings of effectiveness of the iCBT(T) program. This supports the convergent validity of the 
CBT-EQ questionnaire. The modules of the iCBT(T) program that were judged as most 
effective were “general learning about CBT for tinnitus” and “learning how to challenge 
negative thoughts”, both of which received median scores of 7/10. The module judged least 
effective was the assessment module, which received a median score of 5.5/10. This is not 
surprising since the assessment module is not primarily about therapy, although it is intended 
to allow participants to see that they have made progress.
Several of the persuasive system design principles were used in the development of the 
iCBT(T) program, as shown in Table 2. McCall, Hadjistavropoulos (47)  reviewed 46 RCTs 
that used unguided iCBT for treatment of anxiety and depression symptoms. On average, the 
iCBT programs utilized about five of the persuasive design principles (the range was from 1 
to 13). The meta-analysis showed that use of a greater number of persuasive design principles
was associated with greater efficacy of iCBT for depression. Future studies should evaluate if
inclusion of more of the persuasive design principles will improve the efficacy of iCBT(T). 
The most frequent cause of tinnitus reported by the patients was stress. This may reflect the 
common observation that the distress caused by tinnitus becomes worse in stressful situations
(48). It seems unlikely that tinnitus is directly caused by stress, but it may be the case that 
some participants first became aware of their tinnitus when they were in a stressful situation 
or were first bothered by their tinnitus when they were stressed. 
Conclusions
This study had a small sample size, no control group, and the data collection was 
retrospective and hence limited to what was collected as an integral part of the iCBT(T) 
program. Therefore, the results need to be considered as exploratory and interpreted with 
caution. The results showed that the iCBT(T) program was moderately effective in improving
the ability to manage tinnitus as measured via the 4C questionnaire and in decreasing 
symptoms of anxiety and depression as measured via the SAD-T. The ES reported here for 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript

the iCBT(T) program are comparable to those found in controlled trials of various forms of 
iCBT in the management of mental illness and chronic conditions. 
From the participant’s perceptive the modules of the iCBT(T) program that were judged as 
most effective, as measured via the CBT-EQ questionnaire, were “general learning about 
CBT for tinnitus” and “learning how to challenge negative thoughts”, both of which received 
median scores of 7/10 (0 is “Not effective at all” and 10 is “Very effective”). 
Data Availability 
The raw data will be made available on reasonable request to the corresponding author.
Conflict of Interest
HA is the developer and owner of the iCBT(T) program. No conflicting interests are declared
for the other authors.
Acknowledgments 
This research was partially supported via a grant to AD from the Blakeley Foundation. We 
thank two reviewers for helpful comments on an earlier version of this paper.  
References 
1.Aazh H, Moore BCJ. Factors associated with depression in patients with tinnitus and 
hyperacusis. American journal of audiology. 2017;26:562-9.
2.Aazh H, McFerran D, Salvi R, Prasher D, Jastreboff M, Jastreboff P. Insights from the
First International Conference on Hyperacusis: causes, evaluation, diagnosis and treatment. 
Noise & health. 2014;16(69):123-6.
3.Jastreboff MM, Jastreboff PJ. Decreased sound tolerance and tinnitus retraining 
therapy (TRT). Australian and New Zealand Journal of Audiology. 2002;24(2):74-84.
4.Aazh H, Knipper M, Danesh AA, Cavanna AE, Andersson L, Paulin J, et al. Insights 
from the third international conference on hyperacusis: causes, evaluation, diagnosis, and 
treatment. Noise & health. 2018;20(95):162-70.
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript

5.Aazh H, Moore BCJ, Lammaing K, Cropley M. Tinnitus and hyperacusis therapy in a 
UK National Health Service audiology department: Patients' evaluations of the effectiveness 
of treatments. International journal of audiology. 2016;55(9):514-22.
6.Aazh H. Hyperacusis and Misophonia In: Deshpande AK, Hall III JW, editors. 
Tinnitus: Advances in prevention, assessment, and managment San Diego, USA: Plural 
Publishing, Inc. ; 2022. p. 287-310.
7.Rouw R, Erfanian M. A Large-Scale Study of Misophonia. Journal of clinical 
psychology. 2018;74(3):453-79.
8.Aazh H, Erfanian M, Danesh A, Moore BCJ. Audiological and other factors 
predicting the presence of misophonia symptoms among a clinical population seeking help 
for tinnitus and/or hyperacusis. Frontiers in neuroscience. 2022;16.
9.Aazh H, Moore BCJ. Factors related to Uncomfortable Loudness Levels for patients 
seen in a tinnitus and hyperacusis clinic. International Journal of Audiology 2017;56(10):793-
800.
10.Cederroth CR, Lugo A, Edvall NK, Lazar A, Lopez-Escamez J-A, Bulla J, et al. 
Association between Hyperacusis and Tinnitus. Journal of Clinical Medicine 2020;9(8):2412.
11.Aazh H, Bryant C, Moore BCJ. Patients’ perspectives about the acceptability and 
effectiveness of audiologist-delivered cognitive behavioral therapy for tinnitus and/or 
hyperacusis rehabilitation. American journal of audiology. 2020;28(4):973-85.
12.Aazh H, Moore BCJ. Proportion and characteristics of patients who were offered, 
enrolled in and completed audiologist-delivered cognitive behavioural therapy for tinnitus 
and hyperacusis rehabilitation in a specialist UK clinic. International journal of audiology. 
2018;57(6):415-25.
13.Aazh H, Moore BCJ. Effectiveness of audiologist-delivered cognitive behavioral 
therapy for tinnitus and hyperacusis rehabilitation: outcomes for patients treated in routine 
practice. American journal of audiology. 2018;27(4):547-58.
14.Aazh H, Landgrebe M, Danesh A, Moore BCJ. Cognitive behavioral therapy for 
alleviating the distress caused by tinnitus, hyperacusis and misophonia: Current perspectives. 
Psychology Research and Behavior Management 2019;23(12):991-1002.
15.Henry JA, Goodworth MC, Lima E, Zaugg T, Thielman EJ. Cognitive Behavioral 
Therapy for Tinnitus: Addressing the Controversy of Its Clinical Delivery by Audiologists. 
Ear and hearing. 2021;43(2):283-9.
16.Aazh H, Moore BCJ. Living Well with Tinnitus: A Self-help Guide Using Cognitive 
Behavioural Therapy: Little, Brown Book Group; 2022.
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript

17.Andersson G, Strömgren T, Ström L. Randomised controlled trial of Internet based 
cognitive behavior therapy for distress associated with tinnitus. Psychosomatic Medicine 
2002;64:810-6.
18.Beukes EW, Vlaescu G, Manchaiah V, Baguley DM, Allen PM, Kaldo V, et al. 
Development and technical functionality of an Internet-based intervention for tinnitus in the 
UK. Internet interventions. 2016;6:6-15.
19.Beukes EW, Manchaiah V, Allen PM, Baguley DM, Andersson G. Internet-Based 
Interventions for Adults With Hearing Loss, Tinnitus, and Vestibular Disorders: A 
Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Trends in hearing. 2019;23:1-22.
20.Aazh H, Moore BCJ. Usefulness of self-report questionnaires for psychological 
assessment of patients with tinnitus and hyperacusis and patients' views of the questionnaires.
International journal of audiology. 2017;56(7):489-98.
21.Schecklmann M, Landgrebe M, Langguth B, TRI Database Study Group. Phenotypic 
characteristics of hyperacusis in tinnitus. PloS one. 2014;9(1):e86944.
22.Aazh H, Danesh A. Internet-based Cognitive Behavioral Therapy for Tinnitus: 
Insights from Health Care Professionals The Hearing Journal. 2021;74(2):20-2.
23.Aazh H, Allott R. Cognitive behavioural therapy in management of hyperacusis: a 
narrative review and clinical implementation. Auditory and Vestibular Research. 
2016;25(2):63-74.
24.Oinas-Kukkonen H, Harjumaa M. Persuasive systems design: Key issues, process 
model, and system features. Communications of the Association for Information Systems. 
2009;24(1):486-500.
25.Juniper EF, Langlands JM, Juniper BA. Patients may respond differently to paper and 
electronic versions of the same questionnaires. Respir Med. 2009;103(6):932-4.
26.Caro JJ, Sr., Caro I, Caro J, Wouters F, Juniper EF. Does electronic implementation 
of questionnaires used in asthma alter responses compared to paper implementation? Quality 
of life research : an international journal of quality of life aspects of treatment, care and 
rehabilitation. 2001;10(8):683-91.
27.Bowling A, Ebrahim S. Handbook of health research methods: investigation, 
measurement and analysis: McGraw-Hill International; 2005.
28.Aazh H, Kartsonaki C, Moore BCJ. Psychometric evaluation of the 4C Tinnitus 
Management Questionnaire Using a Clinical Population of Adult Patients with Tinnitus 
Alone or Combined with Hyperacusis. International journal of audiology. 2022;[under 
review]   
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript

29.Meikle MB, Henry JA, Griest SE, Stewart BJ, Abrams HB, McArdle R, et al. The 
tinnitus functional index: development of a new clinical measure for chronic, intrusive 
tinnitus. Ear and hearing. 2012;33(2):153-76.
30.Newman CW, Sandridge SA, Jacobson GP. Psychometric adequacy of the Tinnitus 
Handicap Inventory (THI) for evaluating treatment outcome. Journal of the American 
Academy of Audiology. 1998;9(2):153-60.
31.Miller WR, Rollnick S. Motivational Interviewing: Helping People Change. 3rd ed. 
New York, London: The Guilford Press; 2013.
32.Ryan RM, Deci EL. Self-determination theory: Basic psychological needs in 
motivation, development, and wellness: Guilford Publications; 2017.
33.Kroenke K, Spitzer RL, Williams JB, Lowe B. An ultra-brief screening scale for 
anxiety and depression: the PHQ-4. Psychosomatics. 2009;50(6):613-21.
34.Aazh H, Hayes C, Moore BCJ, Danesh AA, Vitoratou S. Psychometric Evaluation of 
the Hyperacusis Impact Questionnaire (HIQ) and Sound Sensitivity Symptoms Questionnaire
(SSSQ) Using a Clinical Population of Adult Patients with Tinnitus Alone or Combined with 
Hyperacusis. Journal of American Academy of Audiology. 2022;[Online ahead of print](Feb 
23).
35.Aazh H, Ballinger J, Hayes C, Pepler A, Lammaing K, Moore BCJ, et al. 
Psychometric Evaluation of a Patient Experience Questionnaire (PEQ) for Outpatient 
Appointments: Analysis Using Data from a UK National Health Service Audiology 
Department. Journal of the American Academy of Audiology. 2022.
36.Cronbach LJ. Test reliability; its meaning and determination. Psychometrika. 
1947;12(1):1-16.
37.Delacre M, Lakens D, Leys C. Why psychologists should by default use Welch’s t-
test instead of Student’s t-test. International Review of Social Psychology. 2017;30(1):92-
101.
38.Morris SB, DeShon RP. Combining effect size estimates in meta-analysis with 
repeated measures and independent-groups designs. Psychological Methods 2002;7(1):105-
25.
39.Cohen J. Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences. New Jersey: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates, Inc. Publishers; 1988.
40.StataCorp. Stata Statistical Software: Release 13. TX, USA: StataCorp LP; 2013.
41.Pannucci CJ, Wilkins EG. Identifying and avoiding bias in research. Plastic and 
reconstructive surgery. 2010;126(2):619-25.
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript

42.Pocock SJ. Clinical trials: a practical approach. UK: Wiley Chichester; 1983.
43.McCambridge J, Kypri K, Elbourne D. Research participation effects: a skeleton in 
the methodological cupboard. Journal of clinical epidemiology. 2014;67(8):845-9.
44.Aazh H. Patients' experience of motivational interviewing for hearing aid use: A 
qualitative study embedded within a pilot randomised controlled trial. Journal of Phonetics & 
Audiology. 2016;2(1):1-13.
45.Mehta S, Peynenburg VA, Hadjistavropoulos HD. Internet-delivered cognitive 
behaviour therapy for chronic health conditions: a systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Journal of behavioral medicine. 2019;42(2):169-87.
46.Jaswal SM, De Bleser AKF, Handy TC. Misokinesia is a sensitivity to seeing others 
fidget that is prevalent in the general population. Scientific reports. 2021;11(1):17204.
47.McCall HC, Hadjistavropoulos HD, Sundström CRF. Exploring the Role of 
Persuasive Design in Unguided Internet-Delivered Cognitive Behavioral Therapy for 
Depression and Anxiety Among Adults: Systematic Review, Meta-analysis, and Meta-
regression. Journal of medical Internet research. 2021;23(4):e26939.
48.Elarbed A, Fackrell K, Baguley DM, Hoare DJ. Tinnitus and stress in adults: a 
scoping review. International Journal of Audiology 2021;60(3):171-82.
Figure 1. Flowchart illustrating the structure of the iCBT(T) program. The program 
comprises assessment and therapy modules. The program automatically develops email 
reports for users at different stages of the treatment. The typical structure of the therapy 
modules is shown under “iCBT Modules”. The two assessment modules are shown in boxes 
with gray coloring. 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript

Table 1. Summary of the interventions provided in each iCBT(T) module.  
Modules Description 
Assessment The assessment module comprised a list of questions about tinnitus, ear and 
hearing problems, and two short questionnaires: the 4C tinnitus management and 
the screening for anxiety and depression in tinnitus (SAD-T). 
After completing the assessment module, a report is developed automatically and
sent to the email address that the participant provided. The report contains 
recommendations for further medical evaluations and/or psychological support 
(if indicated based on their answers to the questions). The criteria used to 
generate a recommendation for seeking medical help are described below. A 
recommendation to seek help from mental health professionals is generated when
the SAD-T score is ≥ 4, indicating symptoms of anxiety and/or depression. 
The questions in the assessment module are listed below: 
Demographic questions 
Age and gender
Tinnitus questions 
1-When did your tinnitus start? 
For this question, if the answer is less than 6 months, then the following 
recommendation is included in the report:   
“Given the relatively recent onset of your tinnitus, if you have not seen an Ear, 
Nose and Throat (ENT) specialist recently then we would recommend you to 
arrange an appointment with them in order to discuss the underlying cause(s) of 
your tinnitus.” 
2-What do you think caused your tinnitus? 
3-What does your tinnitus sound like?  
If the answer is clicks, pulsing, or heartbeat, then the following recommendation 
is included in the report:   
“Tinnitus that sounds like clicks, pulsing, or heartbeat may be related to 
problems associated with the muscles or blood vessels in the head and neck. If 
you have not seen an Ear, Nose and Throat (ENT) specialist recently then we 
recommend you to arrange an appointment with them in order to discuss the 
underlying cause(s) of your tinnitus.”       
4-Where is your tinnitus perceived? 
If the answer is in one ear only then the following recommendation is included in
the report: 
“Tinnitus which is only perceived in one ear may be associated with some 
disorders of the auditory system. If you have not seen an Ear, Nose and Throat 
(ENT) specialist recently then we recommend you to arrange an appointment 
with them in order to discuss the underlying cause(s) of your tinnitus.” 
Ear and hearing questions 
5-Do you suffer from ear pain?  
6-Do you have any ear discharge? 
7-Do you have any balance problems? 
8-Do you feel that you have any hearing difficulties? 
If the answer to any of the above questions is “yes” then the following 
recommendation is included in the report:   
“If you have not seen an Ear, Nose and Throat (ENT) specialist recently then we 
recommend you to arrange an appointment with them in order to discuss your 
*the item(s) chosen from the above list*.”   
9-Do you have any medical conditions that might be relevant to your 
tinnitus? 
If the answer is “yes” then the following recommendation is included in the 
report: 
“If you have not seen a medical doctor about this relevant medical history then 
we recommend you to do so.”      
10-Do you have hyperacusis? 
Hyperacusis is intolerance of certain everyday sounds. The sounds may be 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript

perceived as uncomfortably loud, painful, frightening or annoying.   
11-Do you have misophonia? 
Misophonia is a strong emotional reaction to certain sounds, such as sounds 
created by chewing food, swallowing, tapping, breathing, lip smacking, nose 
sniffing, and other man-made noises.       
Introduction to CBT for 
tinnitusIn this module, patients learn about CBT and its relevance to tinnitus distress. 
Objectives
By the end of this session, the participant should be able to:
•Describe what tinnitus is.
•Describe CBT and its relevance to tinnitus distress.   
•Apply a simple CBT model to tinnitus distress.    
•Differentiate between events, thoughts and emotions.  
•Create a CBT model explaining their own experience of tinnitus distress
and describe how this model can be used in guiding their tinnitus management.    
Behavioral experiment 
for tinnitusThis module provides an opportunity to explore and challenge tinnitus-related 
negative thoughts by testing out different behaviours and how they influence any 
anxiety and negative emotions. This module has two sections. When section one 
has been completed, an email is sent to the participant with a link to section two.
Objectives
By the end of this session, participants should be able to:
•Describe what a behavioural experiment is.
•Explore their irrational thoughts and predictions about tinnitus and its 
impact on them. 
•Analyse the link between automatic thoughts and emotions.     
•Differentiate between literal facts and thoughts. 
•Design a behavioural experiment to test the validity of their tinnitus-
related thoughts.
•Challenge their unhelpful thoughts.    
•Create some counter-statements (more helpful and rational thoughts).  
•Use the counter-statements in real life scenarios.      
Challenge your negative 
thoughtsIn this module participants learn about common forms of cognitive distortions 
and develop the skills to identify errors of judgment in their own tinnitus-related 
thoughts.
Objectives 
By the end of this module, participants should be able to: 
•Describe the relationship between tinnitus, anxiety and negative 
thoughts. 
•Differentiate the levels of thoughts: automatic thoughts, rules of life and
core beliefs. 
•Explain the mechanism by which tinnitus perception can lead to distress 
based on the level of thoughts.         
•List the 10 common forms of cognitive distortion. 
•Differentiate different forms of cognitive distortion.
•Identify errors of judgment in their own tinnitus-related thoughts. 
Diary of thoughts and 
feelings This module provides a tool for combining the different techniques that have 
been learned in the previous modules so as to identify and challenge negative 
automatic thoughts.
Objectives
By the end of this module, participants should be able to 
•Identify tinnitus-related distress in their day-to-day life.  
•Distinguish between tinnitus-related distress and the distress caused by 
other underlying psycho-social and medical factors. 
•Explore and record what goes through their mind when they are 
bothered by their tinnitus. 
•Identify their thought distortions.
•Identify and record their emotional reactions to tinnitus-related thoughts.
•Develop a wide range of counter-statements that can substitute for 
tinnitus-related negative thoughts.           
Positive psychology in The idea of this module is to use the power of positive psychology in generating 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript

tinnitus management realistic optimism, which is important for improving mental health.
Objectives
By the end of this module, participants should be able to 
•Describe how acceptance can help them in managing their tinnitus.  
•List common human character strengths and virtues.  
•Identify their own character strengths and discuss how they can help 
them in accepting of tinnitus.  
•Use their character strengths in generating optimism and resilience.   
Final assessment The final assessment module helps to (1) establish the progress each participant 
has made in tinnitus management, and (2) enhance their confidence and 
motivation in using CBT skills for tinnitus management. 
The SAD-T and 4C tinnitus management questionnaires are administered again 
in this module. 
Participants also complete a questionnaire exploring their views about the 
effectiveness of the iCBT(T) program.   
Table 2.     Recommendations of the persuasive systems design framework (15 categories) 
used in the iCBT(T) program. 
Categories Description How these are met in iCBT(T) 
Reduction A system that reduces complex behavior 
into simple tasks helps users perform the 
target behavior, and it may increase the 
benefit/cost ratio of a behavior.Each module introduces one task. For 
example, developing a dairy for 
tinnitus-related thoughts or performing 
a behavioral experiment.   
Tunneling Using the system to guide users through a 
process or experience provides 
opportunities to persuade along the way.Each module has an introductory video 
that guides the participant on what to 
do. 
Personalization A system that offers personalized content 
or services has a greater capability for 
persuasion.The program takes into consideration 
the participant’s answers to the 
questions. For example, the 4C module 
ask questions about the reasons for the 
choices and what can help them to make
an improvement.  
Self-monitoring A system that keeps track of one’s own 
performance or status supports the user in 
achieving goals.Participants can monitor their progress 
by comparing the assessment and 
treatment progress reports.  
Rehearsal A system providing means with which to 
rehearse a behavior can enable people to 
change their attitudes or behavior in the 
real world.The behavioral experiment module 
helps the participant to test the results of
a change in a particular behavior. 
Praise By offering praise, a system can make 
users more open to persuasion.The program acknowledges the correct 
answers in quizzes.  
Reminders If a system reminds users of their target 
behavior, the users will more likely 
achieve their goals.After completing each module, a 
reminder is sent to the participant with a
summary of the tasks that they need to 
complete before moving on to the next 
module. 
Suggestion Systems offering fitting suggestions will 
have greater persuasive powers.The program gives examples and 
suggestions about how to analyze and 
modify tinnitus-related thoughts and 
behaviors. 
Liking A system that is visually attractive for its 
users is likely to be more persuasive.Most pages in the program have images 
that are matched with the text. 
Trustworthiness A system that is viewed as trustworthy will
have increased powers of persuasion.The program is designed by a trusted 
source. 
Expertise A system that is viewed as incorporating 
expertise will have increased powers of The program is designed by experts in 
tinnitus field. 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript

persuasion.
Surface credibility People make initial assessments of the 
system credibility based on a firsthand 
inspection.The program is designed based on 
audiologist-delivered CBT for tinnitus, 
which has been tested in several 
research studies and used for treating 
thousands of tinnitus participants in the 
UK and elsewhere in the world.   
Real-world feel A system that highlights people or 
organization behind its content or services 
will have more credibility.The creator and collaborators of the 
program are introduced at the beginning
of each module. 
Authority A system that leverages roles of authority 
will have enhanced powers of persuasion.The program is designed by experts in 
tinnitus field.
Recognition By offering public recognition for an 
individual or group, a system can increase 
the likelihood that a person/group will 
adopt a target behavior.The program issues a certificate of 
completion after each module. 
Table 3.  Means (SDs) of scores for the 4C tinnitus management questionnaire and screening 
for anxiety and depression in tinnitus (SAD-T) before and after undertaking the iCBT(T) 
program. The p values and corrected effect sizes (ES) are also reported. 
QuestionnairePre-treatment
Mean (SD)Post-treatment
Mean (SD)p valueCorrecte
d ES
4C 24.4 (25)41.0 (31.5)0.004-0.6
SAD-T 4.8 (3.9)3.0 (3.5)0.0030.62
 
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.
Accepted Manuscript