Berger et al. 2023 (preprint)   1  
A social cognition p erspective on misophonia  
Joel I. Berger,1* Phillip E. Gander,1,2 and Sukhbinder Kumar1*
1 Department of Neurosurgery, University of Iowa, Iowa City, 52242 USA  
2 Division of Nuclear Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, 52242 USA  
* Correspondence should be addressed to J.I.B. (joel-berger@uiowa.edu) or S.K. (sukhbinder-kumar@uiowa.edu) 
 The current dominant perspective on misophonia considers this disorder to be related to emotional sound processing, in 
which a “trigger sound” initiates a strong reaction in the perceiver. However, a sound processing model cannot explain all 
aspects of our growing understanding of the phenomenology and empirical findings in misophonia, such as the importance 
of context, coping strategies used, and lack of trigger-specific au ditory cortical activation. In this article, we argue that a  
complete model of misophonia must include the context within which a sound is perceived and the emotional reaction 
triggered. We review the current behavioural and neuroimaging literature, which lends support to this idea. Based on the 
current evidence, we propose that misophonia should be unders tood within the broader context of social perception and 
cognition, and not restricted within the narrow domain of being a disorder of auditory processing. We discuss the evidence 
in support of this hypothesis, as well as the implications for potential treatment approaches.  
 
Introduction 
Misophonia is a disorder characterised by an intense emo-
tional reaction and often physical discomfort to everyday sounds, such as other people  eating, drinking, nasal and 
throat sounds (Edelstein et al., 2013; Schroder et al., 2013; 
Wu et al., 2014). Although th e condition was named and re-
ferred to in the early 2000s (Jastreboff, 2000; Jastreboff and 
Jastreboff, 2001), scientific research into the condition has 
only begun in recent years. Based on the limited evidence available, the prevalence of clinically-relevant misophonia 
is suggested to be anywhere from 5 to 20% (Wu et al., 2014; 
Zhou et al., 2017; K ılıç et al., 2021; Vitoratou et al., 2023), 
indicating its wide prevalence where further research is 
necessary. Misophonia can lead to severe social isolation 
and withdrawal from familial ac tivities (Hadjipavlou et al., 
2008), and is highly distressing to those that experience it on a frequent basis, even leading to suicidal thoughts in up 
to ~20% of sufferers (R ouw and Erfanian, 2018). 
 
Current model of misophonia 
 
At present, neurophysiological or psychological models of 
misophonia are in their infancy, partly due to a lack of re-
search in the area until recent years. Thus far, the dominant 
current model, put forward by Jastreboff and Jastreboff (2003, 2023), considers sounds as the main driving factor 
of misophonic distress and reaction. The model proposes 
that the negative emotional reaction in misophonia is 
caused specifically by the trigger sounds, after being pro-
cessed in auditory brain regions, which in turn causes aber-
rant activity in brain regions involved in emotion pro-cessing. Importantly, this model makes a distinction be-tween hyperacusis and misophonia: while the negative re-action in hyperacusis (increased sense of loudness discom-
fort) depends on the acoustic features such as spectral en-
ergy of the sound, misophonia is affected by the acoustic pattern and meaning, not on the intensity of sound. It was, therefore, suggested that the negative reaction in misopho-nia was not primarily due to abnormal processing in the auditory pathways, as is the case for hyperacusis, but re-
lated to aberrant processing in the ‘limbic’ system which 
processes emotion-related information of the sound. Alt-
hough in its latest version (Jastreboff and Jastreboff, 2023) 
the model mentions that the emotional reaction in misopho-nia depends on the context – for example, a sound from a 
particular person in a situation or place is a trigger but not 
from other people/places/situations – sound remains the 
most important component in driving the emotional reac-
tion. Indeed, even the origin of the word misophonia is de-
rived from the Greek words for “hate” and “sound”, alt-
hough it is worth acknowledging that a literal interpretation 
of this definition as a basis for misophonia should be 
avoided (Jastreboff and Jastreboff, 2023).  
 
Limitations of a sound-centric model 
1. A sound-centric model ignores the source of sound 
Although sound is its primary focus, a key issue with a 
sound-centric model is that  it does not give due 
consideration to the source that generates the sound. There are a number of studies which show that the source of 
sound is important for setting the context within which 
sound is perceived. For example, Reuter et al. (2011) 
presented the sound of chalk on a chalkboard, which is 
typically perceived as aversive by most (Kumar et al., 2008), and asked a group of participan ts to rate the aversiveness 
of the sounds. Half of these participants were told the true source of sounds and the othe r half were made to believe 
that the sound was part of contemporary music. It was 
found that the same sound was rated less aversive and 
registered a lower skin conductance response by the ‘musical-source’ group of participants compared to ‘chalkboard-source’ group, indicating that knowledge of the source of sounds shapes the perception and physiological 
response to aversive sounds. In another similar experiment, 
Samermit et al. (2019) asked participants to rate discomfort 
and unpleasantness of typical aversive sounds, such as a 
knife grating on glass, when these were presented alone or presented in association with a silent video. The silent video 
could either be the original source of the sound or a video

A social cognition perspective of misophonia 
 
Berger et al. 2023 (preprint)   2source with positive attributes (e.g., silent video of bird 
chirping presented with a sound of knife grating on glass). 
Importantly, the video source with positive attributes was 
temporally-synchronise d with the sound, so that the sound 
was more likely to be attribut ed to the visual source. The 
results showed that sounds that were synchronised to videos with positive attributes were rated less unpleasant, 
caused less discomfort, and re duced the intensity of bodily 
sensations, indicating again that the perceived source of a 
sound can modulate the reaction  to that sound. A similar 
finding was also demonstrated by Cox et al. (2008) using 
static images, highlighting that biasing towards a particular expected context, without the temporal dynamics that 
videos include, can influence the perceived sound. 
In relation to misophonia, recent work shows that the 
source of a sound plays a crucial role in determining the 
reaction triggered by the sound.  Edelstein et al. (2020) asked misophonia subjects to  rate human eating/chewing 
sounds, which are typical trigger sounds in misophonia. In 
addition to the rating, subjects were also asked to guess the 
source of the sound. Interestingly, misophonia subjects 
rated the correctly-identified sounds as more aversive 
compared to incorrectly-identified sounds (e.g., human eating sounds misidentifie d as non-eating sounds). 
Furthermore, non-eating sounds incorrectly identified as 
human eating sounds were rated as more aversive 
compared to correctly identified non-eating sounds. These 
findings of sound source identification playing a role in 
modulating the trigger reaction in misophonia have been 
further confirmed by more recent studies (Heller and Smith, 2022; Savard et al., 2022; Siepsiak et al., 2023). The 
importance of social context has also been highlighted in the 
recent consensus definition of misophonia (Swedo et al., 
2022). All of these studies highlight an important 
implication for understanding misophonia: the perceived source of a sound is important for whether and to what degree a particular sound is experienced as a trigger sound, even in cases of incorrectly identified sound sources, 
emphasising that the sounds per se are not the driving 
factor in misophonia. 
2. Trigger sounds activate brain areas which process social 
emotions and interpersonal stimuli  
Within a sound-centric model, activation of ‘limbic’ 
areas of the brain by trigger sounds is highlighted as being 
one of the most important factors in the trigger reaction in 
misophonia. Although the term ‘limbic’, in general, has been 
criticised (Kotter and Stephan, 1997; Pessoa, 2008) for being vague and often contradict ory in its description of the 
emotional system, it typically includes brain structures like 
the amygdala, hippocampus, thalamus, hypothalamus, basal 
ganglia, and cingulate gyrus. Of the few neuroimaging 
studies of misophonia that exist, there is only limited 
evidence for the involvement of commonly-defined ‘limbic’ structures, such as increased activation to trigger sounds in 
the anterior cingulate cortex in  a single study (Schroder et 
al., 2019) and structural abnormalities in the amygdala in 
misophonia participants (Eijsker et al., 2021), although the 
Schröder et al study did not find any differences in 
amygdala activation between misophonia participants and 
controls. Contrastingly, a brain structure that has been found to 
be consistently involved in misophonia studies is the 
anterior insula. In the very fi rst fMRI study of misophonia, 
Kumar et al. (Kumar et al., 2017) showed stronger 
activation of anterior insula in misophonia subjects 
specifically for trigger sounds . Furthermore, the anterior 
insula had stronger functional connectivity to areas of the 
default mode network, including ventromedial prefrontal 
cortex (vmPFC) and posterior cingulate. Using audiovisual 
stimuli, the findings of anterior insula by Kumar et al. 
(2017) have been replicated in two other fMRI studies 
(Schroder et al., 2019; Cerliani and Rouw, 2020, preprint). Although the precise role of anterior insula in misophonia 
remains unknown, there is now a large body of evidence 
which links anterior insula to social processing in general 
and processing of social emotions in particular (for a 
review, see Lamm and Singer, 2010). Social emotions refer to processes that are generated because of interactions with other people. For example, anterior insula is activated not 
only by the experience of self-emotions but also by 
observing the emotional expressions of others (Wicker et 
al., 2003; Bastiaansen et al., 2009). In addition to processing 
of social emotions, anterior insula is also involved in pain experienced after social reje ction (Eisenberger, 2015), 
social compliance (Bellucci et  al., 2018), and recognition of 
social cues (Rogers-Carter and Christianson, 2019). Taken 
together, these results suggest that a comprehensive 
theoretical model of misophonia should account for the 
activation of brain structures implicated in social 
processing. 
3. Hyperactivation of motor cortex to trigger sounds is not 
explained within a sound-centric model  
In addition to the insula, as highlighted in the previous 
section, another brain region that has been consistently 
shown to have stronger activation to trigger sounds in misophonia subjects is the motor cortex. For example, 
Kumar et al. (2021) showed stronger activation of ventral 
premotor cortex (vPMC) in misophonia subjects specifically 
in response to trigger sounds, while another imaging study 
in preprint (Cerliani an d Rouw, 2020) also found 
involvement of vPMC using audiovisual trigger stimuli. One 
might argue that the activa tion of motor cortex in 
misophonia is due to the moto r component of the emotional 
response, for example, stronger facial muscle activation due 
to feelings of anger/disgust, in response to trigger sounds 
in misophonia subjects. Howeve r, stronger connectivity of 
the motor cortex to both visual  and auditory cortex in the 
resting state, i.e., when no explicit stimuli were presented, do not support this argument (Kumar et al., 2021). Using a 
small sample of subjects, Hansen et al. (2022) also 
replicated this finding. Thus, involvement of motor cortex in 
mediating responses to trigger sounds in misophonia runs 
counter to the prediction of a sound-centric model, which posits processing in auditory and limbic areas as the basis 
of misophonia. 
4. Lack of differential activation in auditory cortex to trigger 
sounds is hard to explain within a sound-centric model  
If we are to place misophonia within a model that 
considers the sound itself as the main driving factor, then one would expect that there would be some involvement of

A social cognition perspective of misophonia 
 
Berger et al. 2023 (preprint)   3the auditory cortex. Contrasting with this idea, in two fMRI 
studies of misophonia subjects, Kumar et al. (2017; 2021) 
demonstrated that there were no differences in auditory 
cortex activation to trigger sounds between misophonia 
sufferers and controls. Similarly, a recent study utilising 
auditory brainstem responses to examine the subcortical 
auditory pathway found no differences between 
misophonia participants and controls (Aryal and Prabhu, 
2023). It should be noted that the results of Kumar et al. 
(2017; 2021) seemingly contrast with Schroder et al. 
(2019), wherein activity in the posterior portion of right 
superior temporal cortex was increased in misophonia subjects. However, in the Schr oder et al. study activity in 
this area did not correlate with the severity of misophonia 
symptoms as may be expected, although this itself could be 
a consequence of the low number of trials in the study. More 
importantly, in Schroder et al. (2019) this region did not 
correspond to primary auditory cortex but a higher-order area, specifically posterior superior temporal gyrus/sulcus, 
which are known to be multi-modal areas activated by 
moving visual stimuli and impor tant for social perception 
(Pitcher and Ungerleider, 2021). Thus, the lack of 
differential activation indicates that trigger sounds are not processed differently in core auditory cortex in misophonia 
subjects when compared to controls. 
5. A high prevalence of mimicry in misophonia  
Potentially the strongest beha vioural evidence to move 
beyond a purely sound-centric interpretation of misophonia comes from anecdotal reports of a high incidence of mimicry in misophonia sufferers. Even in some 
of the earliest published case studies of misophonia, 
mimicry was mentioned as an important feature of the condition (Hadjipavlou et al., 2008). Early self-report 
evidence suggested an incidence of mimicry in 
approximately 55% of misophonia sufferers, although the 
sample size was small (n = 11; Edelstein et al., 2013). Recent 
evidence from a large-scale online study (n = 676) found a 
similar incidence of mimicry in those with misophonia (>45%; Ash et al., 2023). Moreover, in this study, the 
tendency to mimic increased with increasing misophonia 
severity, with the severity of misophonia predicting the 
likelihood of mimicry. Compar ed to environmental sounds 
and other human-produced sounds, orofacial sounds 
(eating and chewing) were more likely to result in 
mimicking behaviour, and mimicry provided some relief from distress to individual s with misophonia. Why do 
misophonia subjects mimic in response to trigger sounds, 
and why does this act often provide relief when used as a 
coping strategy? These questions are hard to explain within 
a sound-centric model of misophonia, arguing for a revision of the theoretical and concep tual model of misophonia. 
 
Misophonia: From sound perception to action 
perception 
 
Using an integrated framework, where both trigger sounds 
and their social source are considered together, a different picture of misophonia emerges. Since the most common trigger sounds, for example someone eating/chewing, are associated with an action (e.g., orofacial movement) of an-
other person, it could be the ca se that misophonic distress is due to the perceived action of others and not due to the 
sound per se, which is a by-product of that action. There is 
now overwhelming evidence that the psychological/neural 
processes involved in social signals are different compared 
to non-social signals (for reviews see Adolphs, 2010; Mola-
pour et al., 2021). In social cogn ition and neuroscience, it is 
well known that the mere observation or hearing the 
sounds of actions of other leads to ‘mirroring’ or ‘mimick-
ing’ of the same actions by the perceiver, without any inten-
tion or awareness to do so (Chartrand and van Baaren, 
2009; Heyes, 2011; Chartrand an d Lakin, 2013). In this sce-
nario, mimicry is commonly un derstood within the frame-
work of a ‘perception-action’ link, which posits that perceiv-
ing the action of others auto matically activates representa-
tions of that action in the perceiver which, in turn, executes 
movements that are congruent to the perceived actions. 
With respect to the underlying brain function, the percep-tion-action link is suggested to be instantiated as communi-cation between sensory areas and the motor areas of the 
brain. Thus, with emphasis on the actions of the trigger-per-
son, could it be that the perception-action link is relatively 
stronger in misophonia which is activated by the sight or 
sounds of action? This would appear to be supported by the results of Kumar et al (2021) showing stronger resting state 
connectivity of both auditory and visual cortex to motor 
cortex. 
The phenomenon of imitation and mimicry has been 
commonly studied within a social perception/cognition 
framework. Thus, given the high incidence of mimicry in 
misophonia highlighted above, when considering misophonia from a social cognitive perspective it is useful 
to examine the role of imitation and mimicry within the 
wider social cognition literature. Non-conscious mimicry 
can often occur in a social setting, involving matching of 
others’ behaviours, such as particular mannerisms or gestures of those with whom the mimicker is interacting. This type of mimicry is termed the “chameleon effect”, and has been shown to potentially increase liking between 
individuals and facilitate smoother interactions (Chartrand 
and Bargh, 1999), although the specific effects of mimicry can depend on the social context in which it takes place e.g. Stel et al., 2010), or even the specific orientation of the mimicked actions (C asasanto et al., 2020). The chameleon 
effect has been shown to be stronger in people that show a 
higher disposition of empathy (Chartrand and Bargh, 1999). 
The main types of empathy can be broadly defined as 
cognitive, affective, and motor (Blair, 2005), which may 
have distinct neural correlates (Blair, 2005; Moore et al., 2015). The specific role of empathy within misophonia is 
yet to be explored. Research examining this may elucidate 
whether mimicry potentially reflects other heightened 
cognitive processes in these individuals, or alternatively if 
it is a byproduct of the underlying neural mechanisms of misophonia, or an effective coping strategy to attempt to inhibit activity in insular cortex. Interestingly, the anterior insula, which is particularly hyperactive in misophonia, has 
been long implicated as a neurobiological marker of 
empathy (e.g. Singer et al., 2004; Jabbi et al., 2007; Saarela et al., 2007). Therefore, an other possibility of hyper-
activation in the insula is that it reflects a greater degree of a specific type of empathy in individuals with misophonia.

A social cognition perspective of misophonia 
 
Berger et al. 2023 (preprint)   4As yet, a role for differing degrees of a particular subtype of 
empathy in misophonia has not been tested, though it is 
worth noting that the model we  are positing here considers 
the concept of motor empathy to be a crucial one, rather 
than necessarily the cognitive or affective construct of 
empathy, at least based on current evidence. 
There is already neuroimaging evidence highlighting 
regions that may underlie the importance of mirroring and 
context in the role of misophonia. As mentioned earlier, early auditory areas such as primary auditory cortex do not show a difference between misophonia sufferers and controls (Kumar et al., 2017; Schroder et al., 2019; Kumar et al., 2021). The earliest level in the hierarchy that appears to 
show any difference in misophonia sufferers is in the 
posterior superior temporal region (Schroder et al., 2019). Importantly, this area is also commonly implicated in imitation of others, through a proposed perception-action link mechanism (Molenberghs et al., 2010). When combined 
with evidence of the high incidence of mimicry in 
misophonia, it is suggestive of the possibility that “hyper-
mirroring” may underlie the pres ence of the condition, as 
proposed by Kumar et al. (2021). 
On the basis of the evidence presented above, we outline 
a simplified neural model for a social perspective of 
misophonia in Figure 1. From this perspective, auditory signals are conveyed through the lemniscal auditory 
pathways to motor regions as well as higher levels of the auditory system, such as superior temporal sulcus, transforming the stimulus into a motor representation. Indeed, increased connectivity is evident between the 
auditory system and motor regions in misophonia subjects 
(Kumar et al., 2021). Depending on the context of the auditory stimulus, this aberrant signal is then communicated to the insula, as evidenced by increased functional connectivity between motor regions and insula (Kumar et al., 2021), causing increased activation in this 
region (Kumar et al., 2017). Relevant to this, neuroimaging 
data show that anterior insula is engaged when countering a mirrored action, i.e. either deliberately or unintentionally performing an opposite imit ative movement (Campbell et 
al., 2018), suggestive of an erro r signal being conveyed to 
this region. The insula then in turn may communicate this 
signal to the amygdala, resulting in an emotional response, as well as areas involved in autonomic reactions, such as 
periaqueductal gray, causing previously observed changes 
in physiology (e.g., heart rate, galvanic skin response; 
Kumar et al., 2017; Grossini et al., 2022). This neurobiology 
of misophonia involving a perception-action network 
highlights a potential explanation for the high incidence of 
mimicry, which may involve either unconscious or deliberate imitation, in an attempt to provide relief to the 
person experiencing misophonia and thus inhibit a 
hyperactive insula. 
A potential therapeutic implication of a model 
incorporating the social cognitive aspects of misophonia would be to consider whether the underlying 
neurobiological or physiological responses to trigger 
sounds are changed by an altered context of the stimulus, in 
a similar manner to the premise of Samermit et al. (2019). 
That is, if a person with misophonia experiences a trigger sound re-framed in a different context, does this diminish the severity of their response ? In the context of a social 
cognitive model of misophonia, one may assume that 
training subjects to re-frame  the context of the stimulus 
could provide relief and act as a treatment strategy. Relevant to this, in a study of non-misophonia participants, galvanic skin responses – an indicator of stress – caused by ‘nails screeching’ on a blackboard were diminished and auditory stimuli were rated less unpleasant if subjects were 
under the false impression that the stimulus was from a 
piece of contemporary musi c (Reuter and Oehler, 2011). 
Additionally, any therapies based around a model that places a greater emphasis on the context of the stimulus, rather than the stimulus per se, would likely be 
generalisable to the visual analog of misophonia, i.e. 
misokinesia, of which to-date - to our knowledge - only two 
dedicated studies exist (Jas wal et al., 2021; Webb, 2022). 
Indeed, preliminary evidence suggesting some efficacy from 
cognitive behavioural therapy for misophonia is based on 
the premise that context is a critical component of the 
aversive response (Bernstein et al., 2013; Roushani and 
Mehrabizadeh Honarmand, 2021). 
There are clearly a number of as yet untested 
hypotheses laid out here. The precise neural mechanisms of 
action perception in general is still under considerable 
debate, although the role of mirror neurons in underlying Figure 1: Simplified outline of proposed model.  Simplified outline o f
proposed model. Sounds travel from the ear through lemniscal and non-
lemniscal pathways auditory pathways, to be processed by higher levelauditory cortex. Additionally, this signal is transmitted to motor regions
to form a motor representation, which in the case of trigger sounds in
misophonia is conveyed by an aberrant signal to the insula, causing hy-peractivation of this region. The insula in turn communicates this to the
amygdala, causing an emotional response and heightened autonomic
processes (e.g., increased heart rate). Red arrows indicate part of path-
way along which current evidence points to an aberrant signal being
conveyed. Importantly, although we have implied unidirectionality in this
model, there are likely bidirectional processes (such as those posited bypredictive coding frameworks), that are as yet unknown and need fur-ther studies to explore.

A social cognition perspective of misophonia 
 
Berger et al. 2023 (preprint)   5imitation – defined as neurons that fire both when 
observing and executing an action – is  supported even by 
the most prominent critics (Heyes, 2011; Hickok, 2014). 
Further exploration of the role of the perception-action 
system in mimicry in people with and without misophonia 
will help to inform the underl ying neural basis of mimicry, 
both as it relates to this condition and also in a broader 
social cognitive framework. Furthermore, it is likely that 
further refinements of this model – or indeed any other 
models - will need to attemp t to account for heterogeneity 
of trigger types in the condition. As is evident with other 
conditions, such as tinnitus, a homogenous approach that ignores the non-uniformity of a particular condition can 
often result in overlooking certain treatment strategies for 
particular subtypes, due to these same strategies not 
working for other su btypes of the particular condition 
(Cederroth et al., 2019; Hansen et al., 2022). With such a strategy, treatments can then be developed to attempt to 
alleviate misophonia on an individualised basis and 
hopefully minimise variatio n in treatment response. 
In summary, how does considering misophonia within a 
social perception/cognition  framework overcome the 
limitations of a sound-centric model? One, shifting the focus from sounds to the underlying action of the trigger person 
emphasis the importance of social context in misophonia. 
Two, the action perception framework also explains why 
brain structures such as anterior insula, which processes 
social signals, are activated in misophonia. Third, since 
mere observation of action of others is known to activate 
motor cortex (e.g. Buccino et al., 2001), the action perception framework accounts for the involvement of 
motor cortex in misophonia. Fourth, this model does not 
posit involvement of the auditory system beyond normal 
processes. Lastly, since the phenomenon of mimicry is 
common within social contex ts, the high prevalence of 
mimicry in misophonia can be understood within this framework. 
References 
Adolphs R (2010) Conceptual Challenge s and Directions for Social Neuro-
science. Neuron 65:752-767. 
Aryal S, Prabhu P (2023) Auditory brainstem functioning in individuals 
with misophonia. J Otol 18:139-145. 
Ash PA, Benzaquén E, Gander PE, Berger JI, Kumar S (2023) Mimicry in 
misophonia: A large-scale survey of prevalence and relationship with trigger sounds. J Clin Psychol In press. 
Bastiaansen JACJ, Thioux M, Keysers C (2009) Evidence for mirror systems 
in emotions. Philos T R Soc B 364:2391-2404. 
Bellucci G, Feng CL, Camilleri J, Eickhoff SB, Krueger F (2018) The role of 
the anterior insula in social norm compliance and enforcement: Evi-
dence from coordinate-based and functional connectivity meta-anal-
yses. Neurosci Biobehav R 92:378-389. 
Bernstein RE, Angell KL, Dehle CM (2013) A brief course of cognitive be-
havioural therapy for the treatment of misophonia: a case example. 
The Cognitive Behaviour Therapist 6:e10. 
Blair RJ (2005) Responding to the emot ions of others: dissociating forms 
of empathy through the study of ty pical and psychiatric populations. 
Conscious Cogn 14:698-718. 
Buccino G, Binkofski F, Fink GR, Fadiga L, Fogassi L, Gallese V, Seitz RJ, Zilles 
K, Rizzolatti G, Freund HJ (2001) Action observation activates premo-tor and parietal areas in a somatotopic manner: an fMRI study. Eur J Neurosci 13:400-404. 
Campbell MEJ, Mehrkanoon S, Cunni ngton R (2018) Intentionally not imi-
tating: Insula cortex engaged for to p-down control of action mirror-
ing. Neuropsychologia 111:241-251. Casasanto D, Casasanto LS, Gijssels T, Hagoort P (2020) The Reverse Cha-
meleon Effect: Negative Social Consequences of Anatomical Mimicry. 
Front Psychol 11:1876. 
Cederroth CR, Gallus S, Hall DA, Kleinjung T, Langguth B, Maruotti A, Meyer 
M, Norena A, Probst T, Pryss R, Searchfield G, Shekhawat G, Spiliopou-lou M, Vanneste S, Schlee W (2019) Editorial: Towards an Under-standing of Tinnitus Heterogeneity. Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience 11. 
Cerliani L, Rouw R (2020) Increased orbitofrontal connectivity in misopho-
nia. bioRxiv:2020.2010.2029.346650. 
Chartrand TL, Bargh JA (1999) The Chameleon effect: The perception-be-
havior link and social interactio n. J Pers Soc Psychol 76:893-910. 
Chartrand TL, van Baaren R (2009) Human mimicry. In: Advances in ex-
perimental social psychology, Vol 41., pp 219-274. San Diego, CA, US: 
Elsevier Academic Press. 
Chartrand TL, Lakin JL (2013) The Antecedents and Consequences of Hu-
man Behavioral Mimicry. Annual Review of Psychology, Vol 64 
64:285-308. 
Cox TJ (2008) The effect of visual stimuli on the horribleness of awful 
sounds. Appl Acoust 69:691-703. 
Edelstein M, Brang D, Rouw R, Ra machandran VS (2013) Misophonia: 
physiological investigations and case descriptions. Front Hum Neuro-sci 7:296. 
Edelstein M, Monk B, Ramachandran VS, Rouw R (2020) Context influences 
how individuals with misophonia respond to 
sounds.2020.2009.2012.292391. 
Eijsker N, Schroder A, Smit DJA, van Wingen G, Denys D (2021) Structural 
and functional brain abnormalities in misophonia. Eur Neuropsycho-
pharmacol 52:62-71. 
Eisenberger NI (2015) Social Pain and the Brain: Controversies, Questions, 
and Where to Go from Here. Annu Rev Psychol 66:601-629. 
Grossini E, Stecco A, Gramaglia C, De Zanet D, Cantello R, Gori B, Negroni D, 
Azzolina D, Ferrante D, Feggi A, Carriero A, Zeppegno P (2022) Miso-
phonia: Analysis of the neuroanatomic patterns at the basis of psychi-
atric symptoms and changes of the orthosympathetic/ parasympa-
thetic balance. Front Neurosci 16:827998. 
Hadjipavlou G, Baer S, Lau A, Howard A (2008) Selective sound intolerance 
and emotional distress: what every clinician should hear. Psychosom Med 70:739-740. 
Hansen HA, Stefancin P, Leber AB, Saygin ZM (2022) Neural evidence for 
non-orofacial triggers in mild misophonia. Front Neurosci 
16:880759. 
Heller LM, Smith JM (2022) Identification of Everyday Sounds Affects Their 
Pleasantness. Frontiers in Psychology 13. 
Heyes C (2011) Automatic Imitation. Psychol Bull 137:463-483. 
Hickok G (2014) The myth of mirror neurons: The real neuroscience of 
communication and cognition. New York, NY, US: W W Norton & Co. 
Jabbi M, Swart M, Keysers C (2007) Empathy for positive and negative 
emotions in the gustatory cortex. Neuroimage 34:1744-1753. 
Jastreboff MM, Jastreboff PJJINL (2 001) Components of decreased sound 
tolerance: hyperacusis, miso phonia, phonophobia. 2:1-5. 
Jastreboff PJ (2000) Tinnitus habituation therapy (THT) and tinnitus re-
training therapy (TRT). In: Tinnitus handbook (Tyler RS, ed), pp 357–376: London: Singular Publishing Group. 
Jastreboff PJ, Jastreboff MM (2003) Ti nnitus retraining therapy for patients 
with tinnitus and decreased sound tolerance. Otolaryngol Clin North 
Am 36:321-336. 
Jastreboff PJ, Jastreboff MM (2023) The neurophysiological approach to 
misophonia: Theory and treatment. Front Neurosci 17:895574. 
Jaswal SM, De Bleser AKF, Handy TC (2 021) Misokinesia is a sensitivity to 
seeing others fidget that is prevalent in the general population. Sci 
Rep 11:17204. 
Kılıç C, Öz G, Avano ğlu KB, Aksoy S (2021) The prevalence and character-
istics of misophonia in Ankara, Turkey: population-based study. 
BJPsych open 7:e144. 
Kotter R, Stephan KE (1997) Useless or helpful? The "limbic system" con-
cept. Rev Neurosci 8:139-145. 
Kumar S, Forster HM, Bailey P, Griffiths TD (2008) Mapping unpleasant-
ness of sounds to their auditory representation. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 124:3810-3817. 
Kumar S, Dheerendra P, Erfanian M, Benzaquen E, Sedley W, Gander PE, 
Lad M, Bamiou DE, Griffiths TD (2021) The motor basis for misopho-
nia. J Neurosci. 
Kumar S, Tansley-Hancock O, Sedley W, Winston JS, Callaghan MF, Allen M, 
Cope TE, Gander PE, Bamiou DE, Griffiths TD (2017) The Brain Basis 
for Misophonia. Curr Biol 27:527-533.

A social cognition perspective of misophonia 
 
Berger et al. 2023 (preprint)   6Lamm C, Singer T (2010) The role of anterior insular cortex in social emo-
tions. Brain Struct Funct 214:579-591. 
Molapour T, Hagan CC, Silston B, Wu H, Ramstead M, Friston K, Mobbs D 
(2021) Seven computations of the social brain. Soc Cogn Affect Neu-rosci 16:745-760. 
Molenberghs P, Brander C, Mattingley JB, Cunnington R (2010) The role of 
the superior temporal sulcus and the mirror neuron system in imita-tion. Hum Brain Mapp 31:1316-1326. 
Moore RC, Dev SI, Jeste DV, Dziobek I, Eyler LT (2015) Distinct neural cor-
relates of emotional and cognitive empathy in older adults. Psychiatry 
Res 232:42-50. 
Pessoa L (2008) On the relationship between emotion and cognition. Na-
ture Reviews Neuroscience 9:148-158. 
Pitcher D, Ungerleider LG (2021) Evidence for a Third Visual Pathway Spe-
cialized for Social Perception. Trends Cogn Sci 25:100-110. 
Reuter C, Oehler M (2011) Psychoacoustics of chalkboard squeaking. The 
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 130:2545-2545. 
Rogers-Carter MM, Christianson JP (2019) An insular view of the social de-
cision-making network. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 103:119-132. 
Roushani K, Mehrabizadeh Honarmand M (2021) The Effectiveness of Cog-
nitive-behavioral Therapy on Anger in Female Students with Miso-phonia: A Single-Case Study. Iran J Med Sci 46:61-67. 
Rouw R, Erfanian M (2018) A Large-Sc ale Study of Misophonia. J Clin Psy-
chol 74:453-479. 
Saarela MV, Hlushchuk Y, Williams ACD, Schürmann M, Kalso E, Hari R 
(2007) The compassionate brain:: Humans detect intensity of pain 
from another's face. Cerebral Cortex 17:230-237. 
Samermit P, Saal J, Davidenko N (2 019) Cross-Sensory Stimuli Modulate 
Reactions to Aversive Sounds. Multisens Res 32:197-213. 
Savard MA, Sares AG, Coffey EBJ, Deroche MLD (2022) Specificity of Affec-
tive Responses in Misophonia Depends on Trigger Identification. 
Front Neurosci-Switz 16. 
Schroder A, Vulink N, Denys D (2013)  Misophonia: Diagnostic Criteria for 
a New Psychiatric Disorder. Plos One 8. 
Schroder A, van Wingen G, Eijsker N, San Giorgi R, Vulink NC, Turbyne C, 
Denys D (2019) Misophonia is associ ated with altered brain activity 
in the auditory cortex and salience network. Sci Rep 9:7542. 
Siepsiak M, Vrana SR, Rynkiewicz A, Ro senthal MZ, Dragan WL (2023) Does 
context matter in misophonia? A multi-method experimental investi-gation. Front Neurosci-Switz 16. Singer T, Seymour B, O'Doherty J, Kaube H, Dolan RJ, Frith CD (2004) Em-
pathy for pain involves the affective but not sensory components of 
pain. Science 303:1157-1162. 
Stel M, Blascovich J, Mccall C, Mastop  J, Van Baaren RB, Vonk R (2010) Mim-
icking disliked others: Effects of liking on the mimicry-liking link. Eur J Soc Psychol 40:867-880. 
Swedo SE, Baguley DM, Denys D, Dixon LJ, Erfanian M, Fioretti A, Jastreboff 
PJ, Kumar S, Rosenthal MZ, Rouw R, Schiller D, Simner J, Storch EA, 
Taylor S, Werff KRV, Altimus CM, Raver SM (2022) Consensus Defini-
tion of Misophonia: A Delphi Study. Front Neurosci 16:841816. 
Vitoratou S, Hayes C, Uglik-Marucha N, Pearson O, Graham T, Gregory J 
(2023) Misophonia in the UK: Prevalence and norms from the S-Five 
in a UK representative sample. PLoS One 18:e0282777. 
Webb J (2022) beta-Blockers for the Treatment of Misophonia and Misoki-
nesia. Clin Neuropharmacol 45:13-14. 
Wicker B, Keysers C, Plailly J, Royet JP, Gallese V, Rizzolatti G (2003) Both 
of us disgusted in My insula: the common neural basis of seeing and 
feeling disgust. Neuron 40:655-664. 
Wu MS, Lewin AB, Murphy TK, Storch EA (2014) Misophonia: Incidence, 
Phenomenology, and Clinical Correlates in an Undergraduate Student Sample. J Clin Psychol 70:994-1007. 
Zhou X, Wu MS, Storch EAJJoO-C, Disorders R (2017) Misophonia symp-
toms among Chinese university students: Incidence, associated im-pairment, and clinical correlates. 14:7-12. 
Acknowledgements 
The authors wish to thank Paris Ash, Ben Berger, Rachel Desmarest, Alexa 
Friesen-Haarer and Timothy Griffiths for helpful discussions around this 
topic. Figure 1 was created using BioR ender. J.I.B., P.E.G and S.K. are all 
funded by the Misophonia Research Fund . J.I.B. is additionally funded by a 
Medical Research Council grant (MR-T032553-1).  
Author contributions 
J.I.B, P.E.G. and S.K. conceptualized the paper, J.I.B. and S.K. wrote the initial 
draft. J.I.B., P.E.G and S.K. all edited the final version. 
Competing interest statement 
No competing interests declared.