Journal of Medicine and Philosophy   ,  34 :  328 – 349, 2009
 doi:10.1093/jmp/jhp027 
Advance Access publication on June 22, 2009
© The Author 2009. Published by Oxford University Press, on behalf of the Journal of Medicine and Philosophy Inc. 
All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org               Foucauldian Diagnostics: Space, Time, and the 
Metaphysics of Medicine    
  JEFFREY P.     BISHOP       
 Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee, USA 
             This essay places Foucault’s work into a philosophical context, 
recognizing that Foucault is difﬁ  cult to place and demonstrates 
that Foucault remains in the Kantian tradition of philosophy, even if 
he sits at the margins of that tradition. For Kant, the forms of 
intuition — space and time — are the a priori conditions of the pos-
sibility of human experience and knowledge. For Foucault, the a 
priori conditions are political space and historical time. Foucault 
sees political space as central to understanding both the subject 
and objects of medicine, psychiatry, and the social sciences. 
Through this analysis one can see that medicine’s metaphysics is a 
metaphysics of efﬁ  cient causation, where medicine’s objects are 
subjected to mechanisms of efﬁ  cient control.   
 Keywords:     Foucault   ,    Kant   ,    metaphysics   ,    space       
 I.       INTRODUCTION 
 Our thinking becomes almost immediately mechanical because it is our habit 
to think instrumentally. Old habits are hard to break, preventing us from 
thinking differently; not that thinking differently is impossible, just difﬁ  cult. 
Preventing our practices in medicine from becoming thoughtless, thus, 
means that we must once again turn to how we think about what it is that 
we do. But then thinking differently about what we do, paradoxically per-
haps, calls for us to realize that all thinking is also a kind of doing.  Theoria   
and  praxis   and subjects and objects are strictly thought separable in the 
West. In a way, it is a false division, but it is a division that continues to ﬂ  our-
ish in our practices and our thinking. Some thinkers, like  Nietzsche (1999)  
and  Heidegger (1996) , believe these lines sit at the very heart of the history 
 Address correspondence to: Jeffrey P. Bishop, MD, Center for Biomedical Ethics and Society, 
Vanderbilt    University, 2525 West End Ave., 4th Floor, Suite 400, Nashville, TN 37203, USA. E-mail: 
jeffrey.bishop@Vanderbilt.Edu

Foucauldian Diagnostics 329
of the West, or perhaps these lines between subject and object and theoria 
and praxis are just an aberration of late Western Scholasticism, as held by 
 Milbank (2003 ,  2006 ) or  Pickstock (1998) , or are lines drawn at the Enlight-
enment, as held by  MacIntyre (1984 ,  1990 ). If we accept Foucault’s position, 
we know that there are various kinds of practices implicit in all theoretical 
endeavors, and at the same time, there are implicit theoretical stances in all 
that we do. 
 In this essay, I shall do two things. The ﬁ  rst is to place Foucault into a 
philosophical context. The ﬁ  rst claim is that Foucault sits in the Kantian tra-
dition of philosophy, even while sitting at the margin of that tradition. Like 
Kant, he too is concerned with the a priori of time and space but not as 
transcendental time and space. For Foucault, they are oxymoronically a pri-
ori, no longer transcendentals but fully immanent. No longer are we dealing 
with time and space as pure forms of intuition, they are now conceived as 
historical time and political space. 
 The second claim that I shall make in this essay is that it is because Fou-
cault sees deeply into the metaphysical position of the West that his work on 
medicine remains relevant even today because medicine continues to de-
ploy, in the name of care and concern, the same metaphysical violences 
over and over again. No one dares to acknowledge these violences. It is hard 
for us to accept that our practices continue to repeat these violences, even 
while they are meant to do good, to bring good effects into the world. 
 Medicine as a discipline is mostly concerned with the effects it brings 
about in the world and how to pragmatically produce or cause those effects 
in the world. It is perhaps in this sense that medicine has become thought-
less as it is mostly about pragmatic doing, utilitarian maximization, and efﬁ  -
cient control. Or, as Carl  Elliott (1999)  points out, medicine collapses into an 
unthinking pragmatism. It is the possibility of controlling the world that justi-
ﬁ es information as knowledge, to be able to do something with it. Medi-
cine’s metaphysical stance then is a metaphysics of efﬁ  cient causality, 
concerned with the empirical realm of effects and the rational working out 
of their causes for the purposes of bringing about some good. Among Aris-
totle’s four causes, efﬁ  cient causality took precedence and reigns supreme in 
all technological thinking. At least since Bacon, it has been understood that 
knowledge is power gained to relieve the human condition ( Bacon, 2000 , 
60, 221/Book I, LXXIII, Book II, LII). That is to say, true knowledge can do 
things with the real world, and the real world is what can be manipulated 
with real power/true knowledge. The purpose of knowing — the end of 
knowing — is to bring about effects in the world. Yet, medicine seems to 
deny having a metaphysics and thus gives no thought to its metaphysics. 
Thus, for Western medicine, indeed perhaps all scientiﬁ  c and technological 
thought, the important bit about the world is how to manipulate it in order 
to get the effects that we desire. It is in this sense that Eric  Krakauer (1998)  
has said that medicine is the standard bearer of Western metaphysics. The

Jeffrey P. Bishop 330
world stands before us as a manipulable object and all thinking about the 
world becomes instrumental doing, and to be good and to do good, we must 
manipulate the world and show our effects. 
 In this essay, then, I argue that Foucault’s insights are adequate to his 
analysis of medicine precisely because he sees the metaphysical structure at 
the heart of the West. Foucault’s place in philosophy and history is a subject 
of some controversy for a myriad of reasons, but his method sees deeply 
into the thinking that animates medical practices and brings into relief medi-
cine’s metaphysics. Thus, his method is central to the thesis of this essay 
because he recognizes that medicine’s thinking about doing is related to the 
metaphysical thinking of the West. Method cannot be taken as separable 
from metaphysics, for Foucault notes — in a vein similar to the Kantian tradi-
tion in philosophy — that notions of space and time, subjects and objects, 
stasis and ﬂ  ux, and bounded and unbounded freedom relate to how we 
conceive doing in the West. And it is this insight that Foucault brings in his 
analysis of the rise of medicine in France, and how for medicine, the dead 
body becomes the normative body, and how for the allied social sciences, 
the disciplinary power of expertise is deployed.   
 II.       FOUCAULT’S PROJECT 
 As with any project that begins by taking up a thesis of Michel Foucault, one 
must ﬁ  rst place Foucault himself. But this is no little foray into Foucault’s 
method simply to deﬁ  ne my methodology. Foucault’s method is adequate 
to his inquiries into both medicine and the human sciences. But engaging 
Foucault is no easy task. Foucault has occupied a questionable place as both 
historian ( Rousseau, 1972 ;  Megill, 1987 ) and philosopher ( Tallis, 1999 ). His-
torians often reject him as a historian but are willing to entertain him as a 
philosopher; and philosophers often reject him as a philosopher but enter-
tain his work as a historian. I embrace him as both a philosopher of histo-
ry — where history becomes a philosophical category of analysis — and as an 
historian of philosophy — where philosophy is understood as an endeavor to 
understand what animates very particular practices in very particular places 
at very particular times. Yet, Foucault refuses the manacle of historian of the 
great ideas (Gutting, 1994   ) and, instead of writing histories of great ideas, 
writes the histories of the others of those great ideas. He writes histories of 
thought about problems ( Foucault 1978 ,  1984a ). He takes for himself the 
moniker of historian of thought or historian of problematizations ( Foucault, 
1984a ). These are the sorts of distinctions that Foucault makes in the endless 
interviews published after his death — distinctions that drove contemporaries 
of Foucault — and for that matter distinctions that continue to drive scholars 
today — mad. Yet, even those who ﬁ  nd Foucault maddening cannot dispute 
his inﬂ  uence or the complexity of his work. As pointed out by Gutting

Foucauldian Diagnostics 331
(1994), Foucault’s writing, for all of its modernist reservations, demands in-
terpretation. Thus, it is difﬁ  cult to embrace his methodology or take up a 
thesis from Foucault without ﬁ  rst placing his work in some sort of context. 
  Dreyfus and Rabinow (1983)  present Foucault as both historical and philo-
sophical; they think of Foucault as offering an interpretative analytics. Fou-
cault is analytic in the Kantian sense as he searches out the conditions for 
the possibility of unreason in  Madness and Civilization   (1988) 1 ; of medicine 
in  The Birth of the Clinic   (1991); and of life, language, and labor in  The Order 
of Things   (1994); but he also searches out the sources and legitimate uses of 
our various knowledges. His work is interpretative in that it seeks a prag-
matic reading of the coherence of our practices — practices in which our 
knowledges are instantiated. 
 Gutting, on the other hand, does not wish to look for easy ways to make 
Foucault’s work to cohere. For instance, Gutting separates Foucault’s works 
into three distinct eras: (1) Archaeology of discourse –  – including  History of 
Madness   ( 2006 ),  The Birth of the Clinic   (1991),  The Order of Things   (1994), 
and  The Archaeology of Knowledge   (1991); (2) Genealogy of power relations —
 including  Discipline and Punish (1995) and The history of sexuality, Volume 
I  (1978); and (3) The problematization of ethics –  – including  The Use of Plea-
sure  ( 1990 ) and  The Care of the Self   ( 1988c ) –  – (Gutting, 1994   , 2). 
 In other words, to say that Foucault has a project, it is almost an un-
Foucauldian position to take. As Gutting notes, Foucault was prone to inter-
preting his own works differently at different times. Taking the early works 
up to  Order of Things   as an instance, Gutting notes that in 1969 Foucault 
claims that these works were imperfect sketches of an archaeological 
method. In 1976, Foucault claims that these early works are about power 
relations, and then in 1982 he claims that they are not about power relations 
but about the subject (Gutting, 1994, 4). Thus, even for Foucault, the idea of 
a project is at best a moving target if not an outright fabrication. 
 Moreover, in the interviews and writings in  Power-Knowledge  , Foucault 
clearly refuses to be hemmed-in by labels or categories or roles. For in-
stance, he questions the practice of trying to ﬁ  nd the unifying authority at 
the core of an essay or of a book — an  oeuvre  , a work — or at the core of a 
body of works; that is to say, he questions the practice of trying to ﬁ  nd the 
author, the essential originary    point of the work ( Foucault, 1984b ) and thus 
the original intention or meaning of the work. As Jon  Simons (1995)  points 
out, Foucault would object to the placing of his work as either his or as a 
body of work. His writings suggest that to create the work or to put the 
works together so as to capture the thinker is to render that thinker as a 
subject or to perpetuate the author function — a kind of essential ground of 
authority ( Foucault, 1984b ), when in fact works are open to interpretation. 
In an effort to remain antiessentialist — as having no essential core — Foucault 
resisted being made that kernel of origin of any one work, and he resisted 
pulling all his works together and ﬁ  nding FOUCAULT, writ large, as the origin

Jeffrey P. Bishop 332
( Foucault, 1980a ). Thus, any attempt to unify Foucault through creating him 
in the mode of an author is to render him in the terms of modernity, which 
goes counter to his work. 
 It is clear that Foucault realizes that he has been thrown into the world in 
a particular place and at a particular time. It is also clear that he thinks that 
the  polis  and the history into which he is thrown is already ongoing and that 
this particular place and this particular history form the conditions for the 
possibility of his work. Thus, Foucault is as much a product of his place and 
time as he is a free agent, author, or subject who writes about the conditions 
of his time and place. And Foucault, writing philosophical histories, neces-
sarily writes of particular times and of particular places — time and space. 
 Thus, as Gutting states in no uncertain ter ms, each of the works should be 
read as idiosyncratic, as a work unto itself (Gutting, 1994, 2). Indeed,  Foucault 
(1984c)  hints at the need for idiosyncratic studies as central to both under-
standing the Enlightenment and ourselves. Foucault himself in his lifetime 
refused to be reduced to an author with originary intention ( 1984b , 101 – 2) 
or to allow himself to be categorized according to various ideologies —
 Marxist, liberal, or humanist — or to a particular discipline — intellectual histo-
rian or philosopher ( 1980a ,  1980b ,  1984a ). Foucault’s  “ analyses are effective 
precisely because they are speciﬁ  c to the particular terrain of the discipline 
he is challenging, not determined by some general theory or methodology ”  
(Gutting, 1994, 3). Gutting goes on to say that none of Foucault’s major 
works refer to one another, this despite the fact that both  History of Madness   
and  The Birth of the Clinic   share a similar space — medicine. 
 Gutting seems correct at one level but incorrect at another. True,  History 
of Madness   does not seem to have an agenda or cause, even while — as 
noted by those who translated it in its entirety into English only very recently —
 the ﬁ  rst translators of it into  Madness and Civilization   had an agenda in 
psychiatry. Yet,  History of Madness   is not so much an examination of the 
birth of the discipline of psychiatry but rather as a particular occasion to re-
ﬂ ect on the notion of reason and its other, unreason. It serves as a chance to 
capture the ﬂ  uid movement of an unreasonable object — madness or the per-
son suffering madness — in terms of a reasonable subject whose position of 
power stands as relation to the power of medicine and the state. Reason and 
unreason are deﬁ  ned one against the other. But reason, that Nietzschean 
mask for the will to power, has the power to deﬁ  ne its object. Reason, with 
its ﬁ  xed power, comes to ﬁ  x the ﬂ  uidity of unreason, to deﬁ  ne it as an ob-
ject. Thus,  History of Madness   is a work on reason and power as the condi-
tions of possibility for a new object — unreasonableness/madness/mental 
illness — to appear on the scene. It is a work examining the interplay of the 
Apollonian and the Dionysian elements in the post-Enlightenment land-
scape, not unlike Nietzsche’s  Birth of Tragedy   (1999). 
 The task of  The Birth of the Clinic   is not just an examination of the birth 
of a discipline so much as it is an examination of the discontinuities of history

Foucauldian Diagnostics 333
(Foucault, 1973, xvi – xviii) — where ideas and practices with different histo-
ries are joined together. It is an occasion to see once again the excess that 
language betrays and begets but oddly also delimits (Foucault, 1973, xvi – -
xviii). It is the occasion to see how medical practice missed the idea that the 
gap between signiﬁ  ers and the signiﬁ  ed create the need to endlessly com-
ment upon commentary (Foucault, 1973, xvi – xviii), and how medical prac-
tice conceived signs as speaking their truth without remainder or excess; no 
interpretation necessary (Foucault, 1973, xvii and 88 – 106). In another sense, 
it is also a reﬂ  ection on the task of the historian and upon the intractability 
of writing and interpreting. Thus, Foucault’s projects are broad and yet, 
strangely, speciﬁ  c. His work operates on many different levels and, in that 
way, is philosophical. 
 In this very broad sense, then, Foucault is a philosopher. On the one hand, 
I am in agreement with those who would keep us from reducing Foucault to 
a subject position (Foucault, 1972, 54 – 5) or author function ( Foucault, 1984b ) 
or from reducing Foucault to a Marxist or a liberal or a philosopher. Not only 
does Foucault reject such easy categorization in the interviews but the vari-
ous works themselves, taken individually or in aggregate, also resist such 
easy labeling. I am in agreement with those who would point out to us that 
to reduce the idiosyncratic nature of Foucault’s various works is to stiﬂ  e and 
indeed to kill the very object of inquiry. Yet, at the same time, it seems odd 
to me to think that somehow Foucault would have objected to the work of 
the archaeologist or genealogist in examining a major ﬁ  gure of our present 
moment, namely, this Foucault ﬁ  gure, who wished to remain an ephem-
eral ghost rather than a substantial object. Indeed, it was only as an ephem-
eral ghost that he could remain free against the tide of history and the 
political spaces that had come to shape his works on both our thinking 
and our practices, including our practices of thinking and our thinking on 
our doing. 
 Although it indeed sounds odd to deﬁ  ne a Foucauldian project, it is odder 
still to think that one ought not to search for the historical and political condi-
tions of the possibility of the works of this ghostly Foucault ﬁ  gure, this phe-
nomenon that appears on the scene in late modernity. On Foucault’s view, 
we are becoming subjects historically constituted by power/knowledge 
structures — even if those structures are subliminally operative — even while 
we might be freely engaged in aesthetical and ethical self-creation ( Foucault, 
1988b ). Thus, the endeavor to ﬁ  nd the task that engaged Foucault and pro-
duced his writings — even when he resists our making him into an author, 
historian, or Marxist (a role, a member of a discipline, or an ideologue) — is 
itself to do what Foucault does. The task of the historian of the present is 
always a task to ﬁ  nd the historical and political conditions for the possibility 
of what we ﬁ  nd interesting about our time and about ourselves. 
 It is this interest in ourselves that Foucault says is unique to the 
Enlightenment — its concern with the present, the history of the present, and

Jeffrey P. Bishop 334
why things are the way they are for us — why things appear to us in the ways 
that they do ( Foucault, 1984b ). We are concerned with what is present — near 
to us in space; after all, that is the task of the scientist to look at things pres-
ent in front of us. We are concerned with what is present — near to us in time; 
after all that is the task of the social scientist to look at the behaviors of this 
object called society and to describe what is happening in real time. Thus, 
Foucault is concerned with objects — madness and disease — and subjects —
 doctors, historians, and authors. He is concerned with time (genealogy) and 
space (archaeology). In this way, Foucault plays within the ﬁ  eld created by 
Enlightenment ﬁ  gures. In this way, he sees deeply into the metaphysics of 
the West.   
 III.       FOUCAULT AND THE PROBLEMS OF THE KANTIAN TRADITION 
 If one takes a note from the pseudonymous Maurice Florence, one might 
ﬁ nd the general area of thought that occupied Foucault:  “ If Foucault is in-
deed perfectly at home in the philosophical tradition, it is within the criti-
cal tradition of Kant, and his undertaking could be called  A Critical History 
of Thought   ”  ( Florence, 1994, 314 ). If we take Foucault at his word — for 
Foucault wrote this about himself as Maurice Florence — then we shall have 
to say that insofar as he is a philosopher, Foucault is a Kantian. That is to say, 
he falls within the Kantian tradition. By  “ tradition ”  I mean what MacIntyre 
means. Tradition is not some sort of longing for a romantic past — the good 
old days. Rather, a tradition is a dynamic set of practices, which may even 
be practices of intellectual and theoretical inquiry. Traditions have  telei , ends, 
and purposes, as well as notions of their origins and starting points; and 
traditions have notions for what counts as rational. But even within a par-
ticular tradition, origins,  telei , and rationality can be contested by insiders or 
outsiders to the tradition. Someone can call into question one’s origins, the 
 telos , or even what counts as rational –  – including what counts as rational 
argumentation. Depending on how convincing the arguments are, those 
who participate in the tradition might change their practices or their beliefs 
about the origins or  telos  of that tradition, or indeed, they might even change 
what counts as rational. Traditions are moving in space and time, according 
to MacIntyre. 
 Yet, problematic for my claim that Foucault operates in the Kantian tradition —
 as deﬁ  ned by MacIntyre — is that  MacIntyre (1990)  opposes tradition to ge neal-
ogy, a task that engaged Foucault. In  Three Rival Versions of Moral Enquiry  , 
MacIntyre notes that those modes of thinking and knowing born out of the 
Enlightenment, explicitly opposed themselves to tradition, abandoning it, 
throwing it off, and indeed, as noted above, rejecting traditional metaphysics 
for a metaphysics of efﬁ  cient causality. Instead, the thinkers of the Enlighten-
ment attempted to ground their projects not in the authority of what had 
gone before but instead grounded them in the new empiricism ( Hume, 1977 ;

Foucauldian Diagnostics 335
 Locke, 1996 ;  Bacon, 2000 ), rationalism ( Descartes, 1980 ), rational and skepti-
cal empiricism, the sciences, or Kantian reason. 
 According to MacIntyre, the various Enlightenment projects gave rise to 
what he calls  “ encyclopedic efforts ” ; that is to say, efforts to catalogue knowl-
edge, including ethical knowledge. Foucault does not fall within the ency-
clopedic mode of inquiry on MacIntyre’s reading. Rather, Foucault takes up 
the Nietzschean banner of genealogy that exploration of the  “ history of those 
social and psychological formations in which the will to power is distorted 
and concealed by the will to truth ”  ( MacIntyre, 1990 , 39). MacIntyre thinks 
that Nietzsche fails in his attempt to abandon standards of moral inquiry 
because the  Genealogy of Morals   is precisely his attempt to make the argu-
ment according to the standards of the very academy against which Nietz-
sche is writing ( MacIntyre, 1990 , 44). Nietzsche moves from the professoriate 
to become a homeless wanderer. But, oddly, claims MacIntyre, Foucault be-
gins without a home (is he historian, philosopher, or someone wandering 
around outside of the academy?) and makes his way to the professoriate and 
not just at the College de France. He becomes a professor to the world, hold-
ing appointments in Lille, Warsaw, California, Brazil, and Tunisia, with con-
cerns about China and Iran. Foucault becomes the professor of professors. 
Moreover, claims MacIntyre, Foucault’s style becomes rather more academic 
in the series of books on the  History of Sexuality   and submits itself to these 
rather more mundane academic standards. MacIntyre reads this as Foucault’s 
abandonment of genealogy and asks if genealogy is even a sustainable 
task. 
 Thus, adding to the oddity of my claim that Foucault has a project, it is 
odder still for me to claim that Foucault is operating within a tradition. Yet, 
he does end up as a quintessential ﬁ  gure in the academy. Just as noted by 
MacIntyre, traditions are not static but are instead ongoing interpretations 
and readings of practices, and these traditions happen upon new events and 
challenges in time. A tradition often must search out its authorities and 
sources, whether historical or scientiﬁ  c, when it butts up against an impasse. 
And I believe that Foucault is himself doing the same sort of inquiry. It 
seems to me that Foucault is attempting to offer answers to the problems 
presented to us after Kant, particularly the incoherencies within Kant’s  Cri-
tiques  . For both Foucault and MacIntyre, what animates thought is the solv-
ing of problems. Foucault calls them  “ problematizations of thought ” ; 
MacIntyre calls them  “ epistemological crises. ”  
 So, as noted by MacIntyre, Foucault begins outside the University. He be-
gins writing  Histoire de la folie à l ’ âge classique   while he worked in Sweden 
as a cultural attaché and initially had proposed it as a doctoral dissertation at 
the University of Uppsala, where it was rejected ( Macey, 1993 , 78 – 80). In 
addition, at the Sorbonne, where the thesis was accepted, even the  souten-
ance  committee criticized points where it thought Foucault had lapsed in his 
academic rigor ( Macey, 1993 , 110 – 3). Even after its publication, Foucault

Jeffrey P. Bishop 336
received mixed reviews, some positive, many negative, and most were not 
directed at the thesis of the book itself but at its lack of the accepted aca-
demic standards. Philosophy and history, not to mention other of the sci-
ences, had become great encyclopedic efforts to catalogue the world 
( MacIntyre, 1984 , 264 – 78,  1990 , 9 – 31); yet, despite Nietzsche’s work, the 
institutions of philosophical inquiry remained intact. Foucault rejected the 
grand unifying themes in philosophy, which had been designed to catalogue 
the world, knowledge, metaphysics, and other typically philosophical en-
deavors. Foucault looked at very narrow, particular sets of practices and 
how these instantiated thought. Foucault’s endeavor is a threat to a philo-
sophical discipline that sees itself as sharpening the mind for accurate analy-
ses, for saying what might be said that is true at all times and in all places. 
 Yet, Foucault — who would note that even truth has a history — cannot help 
but be shaped by Kant, who is looking for the a priori conditions for the 
possibility of knowledge. Kant seeks those features of knowledge that exist 
prior to our experience of whatever occupies our attention. As is so widely 
known, those a priori features are the pure forms of the intuition — space and 
time. As noted by Beatrice Han in her exhaustive treatment of  Foucault’s 
Critical Project   (2002), Foucault needed to settle a problem presented 
by Kant, namely the exact moment when the transcendental theme — the a 
priori of space and time — came to coincide with the studies of man — studies 
that occupied so much of Foucault’s later work. In fact, Foucault’s comple-
mentary thesis of 1961, which was not published during his lifetime, is a com-
mentary on Kant’s  Anthropology from a Practical Point of View   ( Foucault, 
2008 ). Thus, his complementary thesis becomes central in forming Foucault’s 
questions, for this is precisely the point very early in Foucault’s studies that 
he began to seek a relationship between Kant’s  Anthropology   and the 
 Critiques  . Where the critiques are seeking to articulate the transcendental 
conditions for the possibility of knowledge, in Kant’s  Anthropology  , Foucault 
already sees ambivalence between the transcendental constituting subject 
and the already constituted object. Han states:  “ The object of the  Anthropol-
ogy  would therefore be neither the  ‘ subject in itself ’  of the Second Critique, 
nor the  ‘ pure I ’  as studied in the ﬁ  rst, but an  ‘ object-I ’  — also  ‘ subject ’  —
 in other words, man in his paradoxical identity as determined and determin-
ing ”  ( Han, 2002, 20 ). This idea of the constituted subject and the constituting 
subject — the empirical – transcendental doublet — would be more clearly 
articulated by Foucault in Order of Things. The  “ I ”  that knows that I experi-
ence myself having an experience is the transcendental  “ I ” . The subject is 
empirical because it recognizes itself in its experiences and transcendental in 
that it forgets itself in experiencing itself. So, early on in his studies, we 
see Foucault at play in the terrain mapped out by Kant, but Foucault is 
addressing the  “ crises ”  or  “ problematizations ”  created by Kant and which 
manifest themselves in the practices of psychiatry, medicine, and other of 
the social sciences.

Foucauldian Diagnostics 337
 Moreover, in Foucault’s  Introduction to Kant’s Anthropology  , we even be-
gin to see some of the problems associated with genealogical studies. He 
notes that Kant’s  Anthropology   developed over a 30-year period and be-
moans the fact that there are not earlier versions of the manuscript available 
( Foucault, 2008 , 17 – 23). We even see the outlines of Foucault’s method 
when he states,  “ it is impossible to make a clear distinction between the 
genetic perspective and the structural method in analysis of [Kant’s 
 Anthropology  ] ”  ( Foucault, 2008 , 22 – 3). In other words, in this very early 
work, we see that Foucault not only concerns himself with the subject that 
becomes its own object of investigation, creating the Kantian problematic, 
but also with his own method of discovering the conditions of possibility for 
this problem to emerge as a problem. In other words, we see in a very cur-
sory form the outlines of the intersections of Foucault’s genealogical (genetic 
perspective) and archaeological (structural method) studies. In this way, 
Foucault has a project that plays itself out within the Kantian tradition, pre-
cisely because he is concerned with subjects and objects, and what consti-
tutes certain kinds of objects and subjects, and the prior conditions of 
possibility for our present situation. 
 In addition, Han notes that if Foucault has a project, there needs to be an 
organizing question. According to Han, that question is: How is it possible 
to have true knowledge, and what are the necessary conditions of that 
knowledge? ( Han, 2002 , 2). It is this question that animates Foucault’s work, 
and it is this question that is Kantian. Foucault is at play at the margins of the 
ﬁ eld demarcated by Kant. Furthermore, Han notes that Foucault attempts to 
solve the problem of subjectivity while avoiding the transcendental reduc-
tion. So the organizing question is about the conditions of the possibility for 
true knowledge, but to get at that Foucault keeps butting up against ques-
tions about subjects and objects and their constitution but now not in terms 
of the pure forms of intuition — space and time — and categories of knowl-
edge but in terms of historical time and political space. Foucault is not inter-
ested in pure theoretical knowledge per se but in how that knowledge is 
instantiated in various practices. 
 Foucault, thus, is solving certain problems and incoherencies of Kantianism, 
particularly around supposed stable objects: madness ( History of Madness  ), 
notions of the subject ( The Birth of the Clinic  ), the subject being the doctor, 
and the subject that becomes its own object — the transcendental – empirical 
doublet ( The Order of Things  ). He is showing how objects are produced by 
a supposedly static reason, with the quintessential object being the other of 
reason, namely unreason. He is showing how the subject — the doctor — is 
produced in a ﬁ  eld of political circumstances and how the good citizen be-
comes the healthy citizen in Republican France. He takes a little foray into 
the human sciences in  The Order of Things  , examining life, labor, and 
language — biology, economics, and linguistics — looking at the oddities of 
man who becomes his own object, that is to say, when the empirical subject

Jeffrey P. Bishop 338
becomes object to the transcendental subject. This problem of the doublet 
self, the self that comes to know itself as object — in other words, the self that 
is both constituting and constituted — does not get solved by Foucault except 
in some sort of mystical disappearance of man-the-subject, that will be 
erased,  “ like a face drawn in the sand at the edge of the sea ”  (Foucault, 
1970, 387). 
 The  Archaeology of Knowledge   is an attempt to ﬁ  nd a new way into the 
problematics of subjects and objects and of the historical and political con-
stitution of subjects and objects. In this work on methodology, Foucault ex-
pounds on an insight gained in the  Birth of the Clinic  , namely that one does 
not have to do deep genealogical studies in order to see how perspectives 
change. Where the genealogist digs deeply into the past — into time — looking 
for hidden continuities, the archaeologist takes a good look around the space 
in a very narrow time period. The genealogist looks for continuities; the ar-
chaeologist sees discontinuities. The genealogist sees how old things shape 
new things. The archaeologist sees how new things appear on the scene 
because of the immediate conditions in that very narrow time period. The 
genealogist is more concerned with time; the archaeologist is more con-
cerned with space. New objects emerge not only because they are begotten 
by the past but also because of the space in which they emerge. 
  Discipline and Punish   returns to the subject but now not the self-
constituting subject. He examines the prisoner, that form of being that is 
subjected to the forces of surveillance and how surveillance itself comes to 
produce conformity in the bodies of prisoners to the will of those in power. 
The inside casts out the prisoner; but then the outside comes to shape the 
interior lives of outcasts.  Discipline and Punish  , then, is about the produc-
tion of subjects. Foucault notes how prisons and judges take on a therapeu-
tic model of incarceration where bodies and minds are normalized so that 
they can return to society. The power inevitably becomes internalized by 
those subjected to the categories created by those in power and how those 
in power are informed by the psychological and sociological disciplines. 
Although power no longer manifests itself in the direct subjugation of the 
body — as in the graphic depiction at the beginning of  Discipline and Punish   —
 those in power control bodies through more subtle means. Thus,  Discipline 
and Punish   serves as the  “ historical background to various studies of power 
of normalization and the formation of knowledge in modern society ”  
( Foucault, 1995 , 308). And thus Foucault’s interest in power/knowledge is 
born. Through the internalization and habituation of dispersed power/
knowledges, the subject is created. 
 Yet, although there are certainly oppressive forces at work that come to 
subjugate the body of the criminal — himself a creation of society — Foucault 
begins to see that power/knowledge is not only oppressive but at the same 
time opens onto new possibilities, new vitalities, and freedoms. Like Kant, 
whose ethics — on my reading — is attempting to carve out a space for human

Foucauldian Diagnostics 339
freedom in the face of determinative heteronymous forces, Foucault is trying 
to ﬁ  nd a place for human freedom in a world of historical and political deter-
minism. Foucault attempts to ﬁ  nd a little freedom for the self somewhere be-
tween the determining and determined subject. As pointed out by Jon Simons, 
power is, for Foucault, not so much about oppression in his later works as it 
is about that which forms the conditions for the possibilities that shape our 
forms of life ( Bishop, 2008 ). We oscillate between the unbearable heaviness 
of being constituted by those powers that would rigidly oppress us and the 
unbearable lightness of being if those powers are not structured enough. 2  As 
noted by Han, Foucault is trying to ﬁ  nd freedom without appeal to the tran-
scendental ( Han, 2002 , 174 – 96). In later Foucault, however, we ﬁ  nd that the 
self either accepts or resists the power structures into which she is thrown, 
and it is this self-creating that deﬁ  nes authentic subjectivity for Foucault. It is 
here between the lightness and heaviness of being that Foucault tries to carve 
out a space of freedom for self-creation, the freedom of becoming. 
 Yet, those spaces of freedom are only carved out of the forces that shape 
and mold the uses of the body and the forces that shape and mold psyches. 
That is to say, those forces, those powers, are not merely social or political 
powers instantiated in the state but also the powers that shape the forms of 
life itself, such as medicine, psychiatry, and other of the human sciences. 
This is a power of expertise, the power of knowledge. And part of Foucault’s 
point is that knowledge is not discovered so much as it is created. The pow-
erful forces of politics are not merely placed in the hands of the Sovereign 
but in those forces that both oppress and sustain our forms of life. In this 
sense, Foucault begins to talk about a biopolitics.   
 IV.       HEIDEGGER, FOUCAULT; TIME AND SPACE 
 So far I have mostly covered epistemological points about Foucault’s work. We 
can see, therefore, how Foucault understands that human life is not just some 
sort of object awaiting discovery by scientists. Life, and even the scientiﬁ  c study 
of life, is shaped not only by history but also by the coincidence of factors in 
the surrounding space, each having their own historical development. Sure, 
there are continuities, but there are also discontinuities. And the coincidence 
of continuities and discontinuities form the conditions for the possibility of the 
truth claims, whether made by scientists, by doctors, or by social scientists. 
Foucault therefore plays within the ﬁ  eld demarcated by Kant, even if at the 
margins of that ﬁ  eld. He is looking at the powers of constitution and at what is 
constituted. He is concerned with objects and subjects, and the a priori condi-
tions necessary for knowledge. He is concerned with marking out a zone of 
freedom, all the while attempting to steer clear of Kant’s transcendentals. He is 
also concerned with space and time, now political space and historical time. 
 Edward  Casey (1987)  and Charles  Scott (1987)  both bring into relief the 
importance of space in relation to time in Foucault. Both draw our attention

Jeffrey P. Bishop 340
to the importance of space for Foucault’s  Birth of the Clinic  ; indeed I would 
argue for the whole of his work, and I shall illustrate this by looking at 
Foucault’s relationship to Heidegger. Hubert Dreyfus notes similarities 
between Foucault’s notion of biopolitics and Heidegger’s notion of technol-
ogy. Dreyfus notes that Foucault uses power in a way similar to the way that 
Heidegger uses Sein. For Heidegger, there are epochs of the history of Being; 
for Foucault, there are regimes of truth in the history of power. Where 
Heidegger is interested in the way things appear for us in the clearing that 
both opens and limits what can show up, Foucault is interested in the way 
people act in relation to power that both limits the ﬁ  eld of possibility and 
makes it possible ( Dreyfus, 1992 ). 
 Dreyfus further describes similarities between  Seinsgeschichte   and geneal-
ogy. For Heidegger, there is in the  “ age of the world-picture ”  –  – that is to say, 
in the age of representation –  – something that fundamentally changes meta-
physics and gives birth to modernity. It is with his analyses of  Las Meninas   
that Foucault begins his analysis of representation and the transition to mo-
dernity in  The Order of Things  . Heidegger notes that man becomes both the 
source of meaning of objects and an object in the world; Foucault notes that 
man is both the constituting subject and the constituted subject in the world. 
And both Heidegger and Foucault look forward to the death of humanism, 
man being the source and object, the central ﬁ  gure in all of thinking. Yet, 
both thinkers in their mature work come to realize that man is produced by 
technology for Heidegger and by biopower for Foucault. 
 Dreyfus further notes that Foucault is interested almost exclusively in peo-
ple, and Heidegger is interested in things. Both are concerned with represen-
tation and man as the origin of things (Heidegger referring to Kant) and man 
as the origin of  ‘ man ’  (Foucault referring to Kant). We are once again back 
to the old problem of subjects and objects. Heidegger: How do things appear 
for us? Foucault: How is it possible for man to appear as his own object? 
Both are concerned for how we are thrown into time (Heidegger) and place 
(Foucault) and how our times and places produce things and people. 
 Time and space then link both Heidegger and Foucault back to Kant. Kant 
gave us the pure forms of the intuition: space and time. Kant notes in the 
 Critique of Pure Reason  :
  This schematism of our understanding with regard to appearances and their mere 
form is a hidden art in the depths of the human soul, whose true operations we 
can divine from nature and lay unveiled before our eyes only with difﬁ  culty. ( Kant, 
1998 , 273, A141/B180 – 1)  
Kant continues:
  The schemata are therefore nothing but a priori time-determinations in accordance 
with rules, and these concern, according to the categories, the time-series, the con-
tent of time, the order of time, and ﬁ  nally the sum total of time in regard to all pos-
sible objects. ( Kant, 1998 , 275, A145/B184 – 5)

Foucauldian Diagnostics 341
Time is the form of intuition that determines the imagination — the  “ depths 
of the human soul ”  ( Kant, 1998 , 273, A141/B180 – 1). Out of this form of in-
tuition, Kant holds that the time series, the order of time, and other objective 
measures of time are possible and that time is the form of intuition of the 
interior life of the mind, the  “ depths of the soul ”  ( Kant, 1998 , 273, A141/
B180 – 1). 
 This point about the centrality of the schematism and the depths of the 
human soul are speciﬁ  cally noted by Heidegger in  Being and Time   — a ques-
tion and problem from which Kant shrinks according to Heidegger.  “ As pure 
intuition, time is that which furnishes an aspect prior to all experience, ”  
Heidegger says about Kant and time ( Heidegger, 1996 , 21). However, the 
point of  Being and Time   is that time is operative for all categorizations of 
ordinary and scientiﬁ  c time and for the appearance of all objects, but not as 
pure intuition, not as the pure form. Time, for Heidegger, is not univocal. 
There are a myriad of times that structure our ways of experiencing those 
things that appear for us. One’s time in history is a kind of time into which 
one is thrown and which structures the kinds of projects in which one en-
gages. Where Heidegger’s claim is that time can be experienced but not 
represented, he seems to be claiming that death can be represented but not 
experienced in itself. Thus, death itself, as the end of one’s time, also struc-
tures one’s experience allowing certain kinds of objects or things or even 
projects to come into relief. Thus, all forms of objective marking of time rest 
on the existential running into the future, toward death, toward the end of 
time. Death time structures our experience, the objects that emerge for us, 
and the projects in which we are engaged. Thus, like Kant in the schema-
tism, Heidegger grants a priority to time over subjects, objects, and space, 
even while time takes on a very different kind of meaning for Heidegger. 
And Foucault turns that around and grants priority of space over time. 
 Catherine Pickstock has also noted this priority of space over time in Western 
thinking and brings into relief several points that are central to the thesis of 
this essay and further emphasizes points made by Foucault. Pickstock tracks 
this shift through Descartes and undercuts the well-known claim that Des-
cartes grounds knowledge in subjectivity. Pickstock’s point is that Descartes ’  
 cogito   is a regulative spatialization. For Descartes, singularity and homogene-
ity are preferred to multiplicity and diversity ( Pickstock, 1998 , 58). There is 
little doubt that Descartes believes science is best done without the opinions 
of many, but by the one shut up in a room, left alone to converse with him-
self ( Pickstock, 1998 , 52;  Descartes, 1980 , 6). Pickstock notes that the second 
half of the  Discourse on Method   uses the notion of the city — a politics — as the 
analogy for his organization of knowledge, knowledge that is unassailable 
from enemies. Cities designed by a single planner are more proportionate 
and more efﬁ  cient than those that have developed over time and with a 
myriad of craftsmen. And Pickstock notes that Descartes cites Sparta as an 
example of the well-designed city because it was designed along military

Jeffrey P. Bishop 342
lines for the  “ defence of its own absolute interior ”  ( Pickstock, 1998 , 59). Thus, 
for Descartes, the impure, which must be excluded from the city and from 
knowledge, is that which bears  “ traces of time, multiplicity, and difference ”  
( Pickstock, 1998 , 59). Thus, claims Pickstock, prior to Descartes ’   cogito   is a 
well-deﬁ  ned interior space, unassailable from the outside, and from this space 
of the unassailable interior, time might emerge in a more orderly fashion of 
time determinations. For our purposes, and as noted above, Kant claims that 
time is the form of intuition operative in the depths of the soul ( Kant, 1998 , 
273, A141/B180 – 1). Time is the pure form of the interior life. Thus, time, even 
for Kant, is not prior to the space of the depths of the human soul. Even for 
Kant, then, Descartes ’  interior space — the depths of the soul — is prior to the 
intuition of time. Time, even for Kant, has been spatialized. 
 This priority of space over time, then, has repercussions for our under-
standing of things and people and objects and subjects, including medical 
objects — mental illness, disease, and life — and medical subjects — doctors, 
nurses, social workers, and psychologists. In the classical and early middle 
ages, things were thought to be real and to exist prior to knowledge. It was 
also held that something true could be said about things, even though there 
was no sense in which the thing in its entire truth could be completely grasp-
able by the human mind. And neither could the mind exhaust the myriad of 
presentations of the thing. In other words, in classical thought, there is the 
sense that things exceeded the categories into which the human mind tried to 
place them. Yet, with the rise of Cartesian spatialization and mathesis, as de-
scribed by Pickstock and by Foucault, we begin to see representation and 
epistemology as prior to ontology and prior to the things and people emer-
gent from a chaotic reality in ﬂ  ux. Thus, the mind becomes its own absolute 
interior space demarcated from the ﬂ  ux of time, from the complexity and di-
versity of reality, and from things outside itself — things which we cannot be 
sure exist because they are outside of that absolute interior. It is an act of the 
mind that acts to stabilize those things of ﬂ  ux and diversity, ﬁ  xes them so that 
they can be known. 
  “ There arises, therefore, an epistemological circuit whereby knowledge is 
based entirely on objects, whose  ‘ being ’  does not exceed the extent to which 
they are known ”  ( Pickstock, 1998 , 63). In this way, after Descartes, what is 
measurable becomes the standard for what is  “ knowable, ”  which in turn 
becomes the standard for what  “ is ” . Pickstock concludes that prior to the 
subject is a schema of the  “ internally mapped spatialized city: there will fol-
low absolute divisions between the mind and body newly conceived as  ‘ ar-
eas, ’  and the mind itself conceived as the spatial traverse of an inevitable 
order of intuited deductions ”  ( Pickstock, 1998 , 61). 
 Thus, things have ceased being things that appear of their own accord, 
lending themselves to interpretation in time. After Descartes, things become 
objects that have extension according to the measurable interiority of the 
subject, the mathesis, the mathematization — a spatialization, as it is called by

Foucauldian Diagnostics 343
Pickstock. For our purposes, two important themes emerge from this history 
told by both Pickstock and Foucault. First, the body becomes an object that 
must submit to the measure of the gaze. Making this measuring difﬁ  cult is 
that this body, as alive, is in constant ﬂ  ux. But the dead body is more stable, 
more knowable, and, as a kind of template for knowing, more transferable 
to other bodies in the space of the polis. 
 Second, not only is mathesis applied to the dead body of the individual but 
also is applicable to the bodies within the space of the polis. Hobbes would 
come to describe a city set up according to a geometer king, the king who 
builds society according to the rules of geometric space. But, objects — bodies —
 manifest themselves in other mathematical modes, such as in statistics and 
probabilities. With the work of Petty and Graunt in the seventeenth century, 
we see the rise of statistical thinking and measuring for the beneﬁ  t of 
the King, who must know the state of his dominion ( Porter, 1986 ,  1995 ; 
 Desrosières, 1998 ). The long development of probability and statistics would 
ﬁ nd fruition in the work of Sir Francis Galton, whose work not only inﬂ  u-
enced what in his day was called eugenics and today is called sociobiology 
but also psychology and sociology and evidence-based medicine as well. 
These disciplines use statistics to make stable what is in reality unstable 
within political space, and these forced stabilities have come to shape not 
only medicine but also other of the human sciences. 
 Thus, the mathematical table, the geometric rules, and the mathematical 
statistical models are the unmoving, timeless certainties on which the ﬂ  ux 
and ﬂ uidity of the chaos of real things can be mapped, for what is mapped 
becomes stable as knowable. Through the process of mathesis, the chaotic 
reality of things and people — giving themselves in appearance and open to 
interpretation — becomes the stable objects of knowledge. Spatialization is an 
attempt to control the chaos and to deﬁ  ne the boundaries, the interiors and 
exteriors, and what can be tossed out, and what can be left in. Space takes 
priority for Foucault as a mode of analysis, precisely because so much of our 
thinking after Descartes and Kant places priority on the dead, immovable 
space of interiority. 
 Thus, what begins as an essay on Foucauldian method ends as an essay on 
metaphysics; for our methods are derived to get at something about the 
world, whether that be space, time, violence, or death. Our apparatuses for 
knowing the world are built out of how we think reality is. Our methods are 
believed to be adequate to the world; the world is subjected to our measure-
ment. And for the medicine and the science of the eighteenth and early nine-
teenth centuries, the world is exhausted through measurement and through 
a medical language, which, as noted by Foucault, comes to capture disease 
and people in its truth. Medical language became a kind of mathematics spo-
ken by those who were initiated into the space of the clinic (Foucault, 1973, 
107 – 23). But insofar as medicine could efﬁ  ciently manipulate things within a 
delimited and controlled space, it deploys a metaphysics.

Jeffrey P. Bishop 344
 And this is precisely Foucault’s point in  Birth of the Clinic  . The book be-
gins,  “ This book is about space ”  (Foucault, 1973, ix). Foucault documents 
how different spaces came to inﬂ  uence the practice of medicine for the pur-
poses of controlling bodies, diseases, and death. There was the intellectual 
abstract space of formal medicine, bent on the formal arrangements of 
knowledge in tables; there was the qualitative space of the disease and how 
it manifests itself in qualities of the body; there was the tertiary spaces of the 
home and society and the natural space for the occurrence of both disease 
and healing. And ﬁ  nally, there is the space of the body, which became pos-
sible due to a mutation in medical thinking. The space carved out by the 
clinic is a coming together of each of these; each of these spaces described 
in  Birth of the Clinic   has a separate genealogy, and each arrives on the scene 
in the political space surrounding the French revolution in the late eigh-
teenth and early nineteenth centuries.  The Birth of the Clinic   is an archaeol-
ogy because it takes this moment in time when all these histories — these 
ideas with different histories in time — come together. Foucault cuts trans-
versely through that time period to see how this little space of the clinic 
came to be. Foucault himself is concerned with taking a good look around 
the space in which different histories came together to create the new space 
of the clinic. Foucault’s method of analysis of the clinic matches the meta-
physical beliefs of the clinic. 
 What does he ﬁ  nd in the space of the clinic? Foucault notes that the politi-
cal space of Republican France inﬂ  uenced the development of medicine by 
providing the stability of the body politic and a means to control disease. 
The good citizen is the healthy citizen, and the drive for good health begins 
with the drive for good government ( Foucault, 1991 , 33). Moreover, the ﬂ  ux 
of time, the ﬂ  ux of life itself, prevents medicine from having a stable object 
of knowledge. Death is the zero point, the point where that ﬂ  ux of life be-
comes static, where true knowledge becomes possible in medicine. That 
stasis can be found, according to  The Birth of the Clinic  , in the space of the 
body. The body had to be opened up as close to the time of death — as close 
to death time — as possible, so that true knowledge of death could be seen 
clearly in the light of reason (Foucault, 1973, 124 – 48). In medicine, claims 
Foucault, it is space that holds primacy over time; or, perhaps better, time 
and space coincide in the dead body. Time is spatialized in the dead body, 
ﬁ xed in the moment of death in the space of the body. The ﬂ  ux of life ceases 
with death, and the new medicine is born. But, Foucault is not only con-
cerned with the object of the dead body but also concerned with the gaze 
of the subject and how that subject is transformed by its new object and how 
the space of the clinic shapes what is possible for those whose bodies be-
come ill and are subjected to medicine. 
 Thus, it is not so much that Foucault’s analyses are focused on space or 
that they are done from the perspective of space, but that in his researches 
he notices the priority of space over time in the various disciplines — from

Foucauldian Diagnostics 345
psychology to medicine to other of the human sciences — especially in 
the elaborate tables created for the encyclopedic classiﬁ  cation of disease 
(Foucault, 1973, 3 – 21) and in the biological classiﬁ  cations schemes, like 
those of Linnaeus, in which living organisms are classiﬁ  ed by genus and 
species ( Foucault, 1994 , 250 – 302). Thus, what something is depends on how 
it is classiﬁ  ed within the space of the table. 
 Space is about organizing, about placing living beings into classiﬁ  catory 
tables — and this is precisely what the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of 
Mental Disorders (DSM IV, American Psychiatric Association, 1994)    is for 
modern psychiatry. This person is a depressive; that person is a schizo-
phrenic; he is a homosexual, as if there is something essential, some onto-
logical characteristic that deﬁ  nes that person, qua diagnostic category 
( Pickstock, 1998 , 49 – 57). 3  Space — the space of the table, for instance — thus 
organizes knowledge and provides the conditions of power over those things 
or people in the table. 
 In  The Order of Things   (1970), Foucault makes the claim that medicine is 
the queen of the human sciences. What he means by this is that medicine —
 at the time of his writing in 1976 — tended to order the other human sciences, 
to decide which of the sciences were important to human thriving generally, 
as well as in the particular circumstances of particular patients. Foucault 
would later think of this relationship between the individual and the social 
in terms of a biopolitics ( Bishop, 2008 ) — the  “ politics of life itself ”  as one 
commentator ( Rose, 2007 ) has called it — where the body and soul of the 
individual are shaped by the historical and political circumstances of the 
society into which he is born. In retrospect, Foucault’s work seems prophetic 
because shortly after the publication of  The Order of Things  , we ﬁ  nd medi-
cine rethinking itself in response to a crisis with the publication of George 
Engel’s  “ The Need for a New Medical Model ”  ( 1977 ). In this model, exper-
tise, and thus power, is diffused out to those sociologists and psychologists 
who come to deﬁ  ne human thriving in psychosocial medicine and into the 
even newer and more comprehensive medicine — biopsychosociospiritual 
medicine ( Bishop, Rosemann, and Schmidt, 2008 ;  Bishop, 2009 ). Thus, the 
human will is no free agent acting to fulﬁ  ll her desires but instead is a being 
delimited by the sum of the comprehensive caregivers. 
 Radically reinterpreting freedom, Foucault’s essay  What is enlightenment?   
clearly takes up the mantle from Kant’s  Was ist Äufklarung?   Rereading Kant’s 
answer to the question, Foucault begins to articulate what the contemporary 
scholar does that is similar to Kant’s  Was ist Äufklarung?   In this little reﬂ  ec-
tion, Foucault reads Kant as arguing that Enlightenment is the freeing of the 
self in private matters but binding oneself in public matters. It is this tradition 
in which Foucault seems to be working, hoping to open up a modicum of 
freedom for the self in private matters, even while bound by powerful forces 
that constitute that subjectivity, all the while avoiding the problems pre-
sented by the various humanisms — where man is both subject and object of

Jeffrey P. Bishop 346
knowledge — and the various liberalisms — where man is both Sovereign and 
subject to that sovereignty. 
 Where Kant attempts to ﬁ  nd the place of freedom in the transcendental 
subject, Foucault attempts to navigate a space between the historical and 
the transcendental. In other words, Foucault’s works emerge on the histori-
cal scene like any other work — on the historical scene of Kantian philoso-
phy. No longer are we dealing with time and space as pure forms of 
intuition, but now we are dealing with historical time and political space. 
Thus, Foucault is concerned with the historical and political production of 
subjects. In the  Birth of the Clinic  , Foucault works out the production of the 
subject — the doctor — in relation to the dead body. In  The Order of Things  , 
Foucault turns his attention to relationship of subjectiﬁ  cation — the produc-
tion of subjects — and objectiﬁ  cation — the production of objects, and the 
production of man that is both the subject and object of the human sciences 
( Foucault, 1994 , 303 – 43). 
 Thus, I am arguing a thesis not dissimilar to those theses of Gerald  McKenny 
(1997) , Carl  Elliott (2003) , and Brent  Waters (2007) . In my estimation, these 
thinkers are saying that the problematic of our time, especially with regard 
to medicine and its technologies, is the tension between the individual and 
society, where the will of the individual seeks to enact its desires through 
manipulating the body or realizing the true desires of a deep and essential 
self. As Milbank points out, this is also the paradigmatic relationship of West-
ern politics — the  “  ‘ bodily ’  mediation between the unlimited sovereignty of 
the State and the self-will of the individual ”  ( Milbank, 2006 , 103). The battle 
lines of the culture wars — the so-called culture of life and culture of death —
 are then around when the individual is free to do what she desires and when 
society can curb her freedom. When can Sovereign society subject the indi-
vidual, with her own absolutely interior life, to its demands, and when does 
that excursion of the social into the desires of the individual violate the sov-
ereignty of the individual? 
 I am saying something only slightly different. The expert knowledges of 
the various disciplines — that is to say, disciplinary power — comes to shape 
those desires in very subtle, but powerful ways. Biopsychosociospiritual 
medicine is one of those mechanisms that shapes the forms of our lives. The 
trajectory of contemporary medicine begins in biomedicine — a medicine of 
doctor – disease relations — that mutates into a medicine of doctor – body rela-
tionships, then into doctor – patient, and then into a biopsychosociospiritual 
medicine. Yet, the biopsychosociospiritual medicine of doctor – patient rela-
tionships remains a medicine of subject – object relationships, precisely be-
cause of the priority of space over time. The static object — the dead 
body — and the stable subject — the dead gaze — cross one another in the 
clinic, where not only the bodies are totalized but also the psychosocial, and 
indeed the spiritual, comes to ﬁ  nd its place in the ordering space of the clinic. 
The doctor, the psychiatrist, the social worker, and the hospital chaplain, all

Foucauldian Diagnostics 347
seek to manipulate bodies for the beneﬁ  t of those bodies and psyches that 
are manipulated. Thus, by taking a Foucauldian look at medicine, one can see 
medicine at work, where bodies and psyches are efﬁ  ciently and effectively 
molded, manipulated, controlled, and even coerced, by surgery, drugs, tech-
nologies, and techniques deployed by physicians, surgeons, machines, psy-
chologists, social workers, and chaplains. The metaphysics of medicine is a 
metaphysics of efﬁ  cient causation.   
 NOTES 
    1  .   Note that  Madness and Civilization   is a translation of the 1964 abridged French version of his 
larger work  Folie et déraison. Histoire de la folie à l’âge classique  , published in 1961. It has only recently 
been translated into English as  History of Madness   (2006).  
   2  .   Simons borrows Kundera’s felicitous phrase — the unbearable lightness of being — in order to 
show that if the structures that bound us are too oppressive, the subject succumbs to the heaviness of 
oppression. But likewise, if we free ourselves totally, we suffer from the lightness of life without direction 
or purpose or meaning.  
   3  .   Pickstock makes several key points about how Peter Ramus, a sixteenth-century logician, oper-
ates on the spatialization of knowledge. She shows how that space of tables becomes a regulative space, 
which in turn comes to be thought of as essential to uncovering supra-real realities, a deeper reality than 
the one that is available to someone who experiences the world without aid of the table. That space 
becomes a regulative space. It is not true knowledge if it is not able to be represented spatially.  
    REFERENCES 
   American Psychiatric Association  .   1994.   Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disor-
ders,     4th ed  .   Washington, DC  :   American Psychiatric Association  .   
     Bacon  ,   F    .   2000  .   The New Organon    , ed.    M.     Silverthorne    .   Cambridge  :   Cambridge University 
Press  .   Originally published as Novum Organum in 1620  .   
     Bishop  ,   J. P    .   2008  .   Biopolitics, Terri Schiavo, and the sovereign subject of death  .   Journal of 
Medicine and Philosophy      34  :  338   –   57  .   
    —  —  —   .   2009  .   Culture wars: Biopsychosociospiritual medicine and other political schemes  . 
  Christian Bioethics    15  .   Forthcoming     .   
     Bishop  ,   J. P.   ,    P.     Rosemann   , and    F.     Schmidt      .   2008  .   Fides ancilla medicinae: On the ersatz liturgy 
of death in biopsychosociospiritual medicine  .   Heythrop Journal XLIX      20   –   43  .   
     Casey  ,   E    .   1987  .   The place of space in The Birth of the Clinic  .   Journal of Medicine and Philosophy    
  12  :  351   –   6  .   
     Descartes  ,   R.         1980  .   Discourse on method  . In   Rene descartes: Discourse on method and medi-
tations on ﬁ  rst philosophy    (pp.   1   –   42  ), Trans.     Donald A.     Cress       Indianapolis,   IN:   Hackett 
Publishing  .   Originally published in French in 1637     .   
     Desrosières  ,   A    .   1998  .   The politics of large numbers: The history of statistical reasoning  , Trans. 
    Camille     Naish    .   Cambridge, MA  :   Harvard University Press  .   Originally published by Édi-
tions La Décourverte in 1993 as La politique des grands nombres: histoire de la raison 
statistique  .   
     Dreyfus  ,   H.       1992  .   On the ordering of things: Being and power in Heidegger and Foucault  . In 
  Michel Foucault, philosopher   ,    ed.    F.     Ewald    , Trans.     Timothy J.     Armstrong    ,   New York  : 
  Routledge  .   Originally published in 1989 in French by Éditions du Seuil under the title of 
Michel Foucault philosophe   (pp.   81   –   2  ).

Jeffrey P. Bishop 348
     Dreyfus  ,   H.   , and    P.     Rabinow      .   1983  .   Michel Foucault: Beyond structuralism and hermeneutics   . 
  Chicago, IL  :   University of Chicago Press  .   
     Elliott  ,   C    .   1999  .   Bioethics, culture, and identity: A philosophical disease   .   New York  : 
  Routledge  .   
    —  —  —   .   2003  .   Better than well: American medicine meets the American dream   .   New York  : 
  Norton and Company  .   
     Engel  ,   G    .   1977  .   The need for a new medical model: A challenge for biomedicine  .   Science    
  196  :  129   –   36  .   
     Florence  ,   M.         1994  .   Michel Foucault  . Trans.     Catherine     Porter    . In   The Cambridge compan-
ion to Foucault    , ed.    G.     Gutting    .   Cambridge  :   Cambridge University Press  .   
     Foucault  ,   M    .   1978  .   The history of sexuality   ,   vol. 1  .   New York  :   Random House, Vintage Books  . 
  Originally published as La volente de Savoir  .   
    —  —  —   .   1980a  .   Questions of geography  . In   Power/knowledge: Selected interviews and other 
writings 1972 – 1977       (pp.   1   –   36  ),   ed.     C.     Gordon    .   New York  :   Pantheon Books  .   
    —  —  —   .   1980b  .   On popular justice: A discussion with Maoists  . In   Power/knowledge    (pp.   1   –   36  ), 
ed.     C.     Gordon    .   New York  :   Pantheon Books  .   
    —  —  —   .   1984a  .   Polemics, politics, problems  . In   The Foucault reader      (pp.   381   –   9  ),   ed.     P.      Rabinow    . 
  New York  :   Pantheon Books     .   
    —  —  —   .   1984b  .   What is an author?   In   The Foucault reader    (pp.   101   –   20  ), ed.     P.     Rabinow    .   New 
York  :   Pantheon Books  .   
    —  —  —   .   1984c  .   What is enlightenment?   In   The Foucault reader    (pp.   32   –   50  ), ed.     P.     Rabinow    . 
  New York  :   Pantheon Books  .   
    —  —  —   .   1988a  .   Madness and civilization: A history of insanity in the age of reason  . Trans. 
    Richard     Howard    .   New York  :   Vintage Books  .   
    —  —  —   .   1988b  .   Technologies of the self  . In   Technologies of the self: A seminar with Michel 
Foucault      (pp.   16   –   49  )  , eds     L. H.     Martin  ,     H.     Gutman  , and     P. H.     Hutton    .   Amherst  :   Univer-
sity of Massachusetts Press.   
    —  —  —   .   1988c  .   The care of the self: The history of sexuality  ,   vol. 3  .  Trans .     Robert     Hurley    .   New 
York  :   Vintage Books  .   Originally published in France by Editions Gallimard in 1984 as Le 
Souci de soi  .   
    —  —  —   .   1990  .   The use of pleasure: The history of sexuality  ,   vol. 2  . Trans.     Robert   Hurley    .   New 
York  :   Vintage Books  .   Originally published in France by Editions Gallimard in 1984 as 
L’Usage des plaisirs  .   
    —  —  —   .   1991  .   The birth of the clinic: An archaeology of medical perception   .   Trans.     A.M.     Sheridan 
Smith    .   New York  :   Vintage Books  .   Originally published by Presses Universitaires de 
France in 1963 as Naissance de la Clinique  .   
    —  —  —   .   1994  .   The order of things: An archaeology of the human sciences   .   New York  :   Random 
House  .   Originally published in France by Editions Gallimard in 1966 as Les Mots et les 
choses  .   
    —  —  —   .   1995  .   Discipline and punish: The birth of the prison   . Trans.     Alan     Sheridan    ,   New York  : 
  Random House, Vintage Books  .   Originally published in French by Editions Gallimard in 
1975 as Surveiller et Punir: Naissance de la prison  .   
    —  —  —   .   2006  .   History of madness   .   London  :   Routledge  .   Originally published in 1961 as Folie 
et déraison. Histoire de la folie à l’âge classique  .   
    —  —  —   .   2008  .   Introduction to Kant’s Anthropology  . In     R.     Nigro  , ed    . Trans.     Roberto     Nigro    and 
   Kate     Briggs    .   Los Angeles, CA  :   Semiotext  .   Originally published as     Introduction à 
l’“Anthropologie” de Kant    by Libraire Philosophique     J  .   Vrin       in 2008     .

Foucauldian Diagnostics 349
     Gutting  ,   G    .   1994  .   Introduction  :   Michel Foucault: a User’s Manual  . In   The Cambridge compan-
ion to Foucault    (pp.   1   –   27  ),    ed.    G.     Gutting    .   Cambridge  :   Cambridge University Press  .   
     Han  ,   B    .   2002  .   Foucault’s critical project: Between the transcendental and the historical   .   Trans. 
    Edward     Pile    .   Stanford, CA  :   Stanford University Press  .   
     Heidegger  ,   M    .   1996  .   Being and time   . Trans.     Joan     Stambaugh    .   New York  :   SUNY Press  .   Origi-
nally published in 1927 as Sein und Zeit  .   
     Hume  ,   D    .   1977  .   An enquiry concerning human understanding    , ed.    E.     Steinberg    ,   2nd ed  . 
  Indianapolis, IN  :   Hackett Publishing  .   
     Kant  ,   I    .   1998  .   Critique of Pure Reason    , eds    P.     Guyer  , and     A. W.     Wood    .   Cambridge  :   Cambridge 
University Press     .   The ﬁ  rst edition was originally published in 1781 as  Kritik der reinen 
Vernuft   ;   second edition published in 1787.   
     Krakauer  ,   E    .   1998  .   Prescriptions: Autonomy, humanism, and the purpose of health technol-
ogy  .   Theoretical Medicine and Bioethics      19  :  522   –   45  .   
     Locke  ,   J    .   1996  .   An essay concerning human understanding   . ed.    K.     Winkler    .   Indianapolis, IN  : 
  Hackett Publishing  .   Originally published under the same title in 1689.   
     Macey  ,   D    .   1993  .   The lives of Michel Foucault   .   New York  :   Random House  .   
     MacIntyre  ,   A    .   1984  .   After virtue   ,   2nd ed  .   Notre Dame, IN  :   University of Notre Dame Press  .   
    —  —  —   .   1990  .   Three rival versions of moral enquiry: Encyclopedia, genealogy, and tradition   . 
  Notre Dame, IN  :   University of Notre Dame Press  .   
    —  —  —   .   1997  .   To relieve the human condition: Bioethics, technology, and the body   .   Albany, 
NY  :   State University of New York Press  .   
     Megill  ,   A    .   1987  .   The reception of Foucault by historians  .   Journal of the History of Ideas    
  48  :  117   –   41  .   
     Milbank  ,   J    .   2003  .   Being reconciled: Ontology and pardon   .   London  :   Routledge Press  .   
    —  —  —   .   2006  .   Theology and social theory: Beyond secular reason   ,   2nd ed  .   London  : 
  Routledge  .   
     Nietzsche  ,   F    .   1999  .   The birth of tragedy  . In   The Birth of Tragedy and other writings     (pp.   3   –   116  ), 
eds    R.     Guess  , and     R.     Speirs    .   Cambridge  :   Cambridge University Press  .   Originally published 
in 1871 and 1886 as Die Geburt der Tragödie aus dem Geiste der Musik  .   
     Pickstock  ,   C    .   1998  .   After writing: The liturgical consummation of philosophy   .   Oxford  : 
  Blackwell  .   
     Porter  ,   T    .   1986  .   The rise of statistical thinking, 1820 – 1900   .   Princeton, NJ  :   Princeton University 
Press  .   
     Porter  ,   T    .   1995  .   Trust in numbers: The pursuit of objectivity in science and public life   .   Princeton, 
NJ  :   Princeton University Press  .   
     Rose  ,   N    .   2007  .   The politics of life itself   .   Princeton, NJ  :   Princeton University Press  .   
     Rousseau  ,   G. S    .   1972 – 3  .   Whose enlightenment? not man’s: The case of Michel Foucault  .   Eigh-
teenth Century Studies      6  :  283   –   6  .   
     Scott  ,   C    .   1987  .   The power of medicine, the power of ethics  .   Journal of Medicine and Philoso-
phy     12  :  335   –   50  .   
     Simons  ,   J    .   1995  .   Foucault and the political   .   London  :   Routledge Press  .   
     Tallis  ,   R    .   1999  .   Enemies of hope: A critique of contemporary pessimism   .   London  :   Palgrave 
MacMillan  .   
     Waters  ,   B    .   2007  .   Disability and the quest for perfection: A moral and theological inquiry  . In 
  Theology, disability and the new genetics: Why science needs the church    , eds    J.     Swinton  , 
and     B.     Brock    .   London  :   T&T Clark  .