## The Oral History Review

ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/uohr20

## Control, Resiﬆance, and the Senses: Neurodivergent Perspectives of the UK School Meals Service; A Case Study

## Isabelle Carter &amp; Heather Ellis

To cite this article: Isabelle Carter &amp; Heather Ellis (07 Mar 2025): Control, Resistance, and the Senses: Neurodivergent Perspectives of the UK School Meals Service; A Case Study, The Oral History Review, DOI: 10.1080/00940798.2025.2468522

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/00940798.2025.2468522

© 2025 The Author(s). Published with license by Taylor &amp; Francis Group, LLC.

Published online: 07 Mar 2025.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 59

View related articles

View Crossmark data

## Control, Resistance, and the Senses: Neurodivergent Perspectives of the UK School Meals Service; A Case Study

Isabelle Carter and Heather Ellis

## ABSTRACT

## KEYWORDS

The UK school meals service has a distinctive history shaped by early welfare policies, austerity measures, and the introduction of universal free school meals, thus making it a useful case study for examining how state interventions and socioeconomic factors  impact disabled  and neurodivergent individuals and their families. Understanding these experiences can provide valuable insights  into  how  national  policies  and  cultural  contexts  influence inclusivity and how neurodivergent students can be better supported  both  in  the  telling  of  their  stories  and  in  school settings. In this article, we strive to bring into focus the perspectives  of  neurodivergent  adults  who experienced  the  UK meals service growing up. By doing so, we also endeavor to bridge the gap between the history of school meals and dining spaces and the history of education, which have often been treated separately. Children's experiences of school meals-particularly neurodivergent children's experiences-are largely absent from the history  of  education;  yet,  as  we  argue  here,  children's  experiences of food in school are integral to an understanding of the workings  of  pedagogy  and  education  policy,  and  growing  up disabled.

discipline; experience; neurodivergent; sensory; UK meals service

This article focuses on oral history interviews with four neurodivergent individuals  who  participated  in  the  research  project,  The  School  Meals  Service: Past,  Present-and  Future?,  which  explores  the  lived  experience  of  the  UK meals service from its inception in 1906 to the present day alongside historical and current developments in policy. 1 The project, which runs from 2023 to 2025, is funded by the UK's Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC) and  comprises  three  teams  across  three  institutions:  the  University  of Sheffield, University of Wolverhampton, and University College London. At the  University  of  Sheffield,  we  primarily  used  oral  history  to  understand historical experiences of the service as told by former pupils, parents, teachers, and caterers. We took a mixed-methods approach to recruiting narrators by building  links  with  communities  local  to  our  institution  in  Sheffield  and connected  to  our  partner  schools  in  London,  Bradford,  Cardiff,  and Glasgow,  as  well  as  with  community-anchor  organizations  across  the  UK. Finally,  we  also  shared  a  nationwide  call  for  participants  from  the  project's account on Twitter (now X).

For this article, we follow two interrelated lines of inquiry that mirror our respective  research  interests  and  experiences  as  an  oral  historian  and a  historian  of  education.  But  as  authors,  we  write  from  neurodivergent  and neurotypical  perspectives,  respectively.  Isabelle  is  an  oral  historian  with  an interest in histories of inequalities in relation to the welfare state in post-1945 Britain,  while  Heather's  research  interests  lie  in  the  fields  of  the  history  of education and the history of childhood and the lived experience of the welfare state. This article stems from our interest in the ways in which neurodivergent perspectives  enriched  our  understanding  of  the  lived  experience  of  school meals  over  the  course  of  a  particular  project  and  encouraged  us  to  reflect more deeply on how to conduct research that endeavors to be inclusive ofeven if not solely focused upon-oral histories and disabilities. We understand the importance of ensuring that our neurodivergent narrators' perspectives are represented  accurately  and  that  the  publication  of  their  words  must  be a  collaborative  process  (we  discuss  this  further  below).  Here,  we  use  oral history interviews as textual and documentary sources that can be examined both for their narrative construction and for their contribution to the historical  record. 2 We  explore  how  we  adapted  our  methodological  approach  in response to information about our narrators' neurodiversity at different stages of the interview process and reflect on the ways the narrators retrospectively composed narratives of their school meals experiences after receiving formal diagnoses  as  adults.  We  then  consider  interactions  between  neurodivergent narrators and the institutional structures of the school meals service, focusing on the sensory and disciplinary regimes of the narrators' schools between the 1960s and the 2000s. While lunchtimes are typically viewed as structures for exercising  control  over  children's  experiences  of  education,  our  narrators' testimonies reveal the ways in which they also became spaces of contestation and resistance.

## Project Background

Since the project's scope was national, we endeavored to support the participation of individuals in places and at times that best suited them by offering narrators the option of either a virtual or in-person interview. Two of the four interviews highlighted in this article took place via video call, while the other two were in person. We used a Zoom H5 audio recording device to record all interviews, which will be made permanently available with participants' consent once the project is complete in July 2025. Of the seventy individuals with whom we  conducted  interviews,  four  identified  as  neurodivergent,  and  we refer  to  the  narrators  here  by  the  qualifiers  they  themselves  use  to  describe their  neurodivergence.  Lauren  describes  themself  as  autistic,  and  Joanne describes  herself  as  autistic  and  neurodivergent.  Ella  and  Lisa  both  refer  to themselves as people who 'have' ADHD, but Ella also referred to herself as

someone 'with neurodiversity.' 3 We understand that this is not the only way of  referring  to  ADHD  narrators,  with  terms  like  'ADHD'er'  and  'ADHD person' often preferred by people in the UK. 4

We also acknowledge that while our narrators referred to medical diagnoses in their discussion of neurodivergence, self-diagnosis is important and valid. Our analysis follows the 'neurodiversity approach' outlined by psychologist Patrick Dwyer, which occupies a 'middle ground' between medical and social models of disability, understanding neurodiversity as something shaped by the interplay  of  individual  characteristics  and  the  environments  in  which  they were experienced. 5 In this  article,  we  therefore  focus  on  the  neurodivergent experiences of our narrators as individuals, also noting how their particular experiences  then  interacted  with  sensory  and  disciplinary  elements  of  the wider UK school meals service. We do not seek to contrast particular elements of  experience  according  to  diagnoses,  nor  to  suggest  that  neurodivergent experiences  of  school  food  are  homogeneous.  Instead,  we  concentrate  on a small number of oral history narrators to explore how individuals recount their experiences of school meals in relation to autism or ADHD.

In  our  examples,  we  draw  on  experiences  that  our  narrators  specifically related to neurodivergence rather than attempting to retrospectively infer the influence  of  neurodivergence  in  narrators'  stories.  While  we  reflect  on  the experience of conducting these interviews from a research perspective, these observations  stem  from  an  attempt  to  consider  our  positionalities  and  the history of the school meals service more broadly rather than an imposition of our  interpretation  upon  the  words  of  our  narrators.  We  are  wary  of  the tendency  of  more  diagnostic  and  cognitively  focused  literature  to  consider the experiences of autistic narrators primarily as 'manifestations of symptoms.' 6 The stories we recount do not fully encompass the experiences shared with us, and our narrators' perspectives will feature in further written work about varied aspects of the school meals service.

## Our Narrators

Three of the project narrators identify as women and one as nonbinary. They all  attended  public  (government-funded)  schools  in  England  from  the  early 1960s  to  the  early  1990s.  Joanne  attended  two  schools-one  in  Dorking  in Surrey  (southeast  England,  near  London)  and  one  in  Cottingham  in  East Yorkshire (northeast England)-from 1967 to 1980, and she later worked as an advisory teacher to support disabled pupils in the 2010s. Joanne reflected on both her personal experiences of consuming school meals as a pupil and her experience of teaching food education (particularly cooking) in classrooms as  an  advisory  teacher.  Lisa  attended  school  in  Leicester,  a  city  in  the  East Midlands,  from  1974  to  1987.  In  the  late  2000s,  she  returned  to  the  city's schools as an elementary school teacher, where she occasionally ate with and

4

supervised children during lunchtimes. Ella and Lauren are close in age. Born in 1992, Ella went to school in Rotherham in South Yorkshire from 1996 to 2010, while Lauren, born two years later in 1994, attended schools in small towns in Northumbria and Merseyside (all in northern England) until they left for college in 2012. Both Ella and Lauren spoke from the perspective of former pupils  who  had  consumed  school  meals,  but  they  also  expressed  a  strong interest in cooking and food culture and used the interview to reflect on the role of school meals in shaping their preferences as adults.

To ensure our process was collaborative, we shared initial transcripts with our narrators (inviting them to offer corrections or comments) and consulted them via email to confirm their consent to include their testimonies in this article. We also took this opportunity to ask a follow-up question regarding the extent to which they felt that their school meal experiences had been shaped by structural  ableism.  We  reflect  on  their  responses  in  a  later  section  in  this article.  Our  narrators  contributed  to  this  article's  development  by  reading and commenting on earlier drafts. For ease of reference, we highlighted the specific sections where each narrator's testimony had been used and provided a brief, accessible summary of our argument.

We focus on the period before, during, and after the interviews to explore how the ongoing dialogue between narrators and interviewers has informed our understanding of working with (these) neurodivergent people. We highlight the importance of making adaptations according to individual needs in order to cocreate oral histories in ways that support narrators, empowering them to share their memories in the ways that best suit them. Our approach also reflects on how these adaptations can sometimes challenge oral historians and their interviewing practices. We then discuss the effects of the narrators' diagnoses  as  adults  on  their  narratives  of  childhood,  the  interviews  having provided them with the opportunity to consider how neurodivergence shaped their earlier experiences. Our focus then shifts to consider the lived experience of our four narrators in relation to the context of school meals, with particular emphasis on the sensory and disciplinary aspects of the service.

## The UK School Meals Service

School meals and the dining spaces used for their consumption have traditionally been treated separately in the historiography from the history of formal schooling and pedagogy, which has tended to focus on the classroom. Yet sociologists and ethnographers have shown dining halls, cafeterias, and canteens to be integral to the pedagogical aims of schools as well as vital opportunities for social learning and  for  building  and  negotiating  relationships. 7 While  the  British  state  has expressed a range of motivations behind the gradual introduction and expansion of  school  meal  provision  (including  humanitarian  and  educational  goals), eugenics and the so-called 'improvement of the [White] race' were significant

factors right from the start. The potential of state-provided school meals to reduce the incidence of illness and disability in the population was particularly stressed. As  Mildred  E.  Bulkley,  who  wrote The  Feeding  of  School  Children in  1914, observed,  'To  the  old  motives  of  sentiment  and  educational  need  was  added a new motive, a motive specially characteristic of the present century . . . This was the  desire  for  'race  regeneration,'  the  conviction  of  the  supreme  importance  of securing  a  physically  efficient  people.'  She  noticed  an  important  shift  in  the rhetorical positioning of children at this time-increasingly, they were removed from  the  traditional  (and  private)  sphere  of  the  family  to  become  'regarded primarily as the raw material for a nation of healthy citizens.' 8

Indeed,  the  school  meals  service  as  introduced  in  the  1906  Education (Provision  of  Meals)  Act  can  only  be  understood  when  viewed  against  the background of the 1904 Interdepartmental Committee on Physical Deterioration.  This  committee  was  established  following  the  discovery  that conscripts  for  the  Second  Boer  War  (1899-1902)  who  had  attended  public (government-funded) elementary schools as children were on average five and a  half  inches  shorter  than  those  attending  private  schools.  There  was  also  'a concern to instruct, through feeding, 'correct' modes of behavior in relation to food and drink consumption'; for example, British historian Catherine Burke has argued that 'the imposition of discipline and control around the school meal was regarded as one important means of challenging working-class habits and replacing them with middle-class norms.' 9

From its  inception,  the  school  meals  service  sought  to  shape  children  in accordance with a population-level vision of public health and racial fitness. There was an assumption that the majority of children entering the education system  could  indeed  be  successfully  shaped  into  'healthy'  citizens  on  the model  of  the  middle  classes.  Poverty,  for  example,  was  not  viewed  as  an inherent  barrier  against  such  socialization.  However,  there  were  always a number of children-in particular, those considered physically and mentally 'handicapped,' in the language of the time-who were viewed as beyond the 'civilizing' reach of the school. While the scope and legal basis of the school meals service changed over time, this population-level public health approach remained  the  underpinning  framework  within  which  the  rationale  for  the service  was  understood  well  into  the  late  twentieth  century  and  beyond.  It remained a collectivist, national, and above all, normative enterprise, designed not  to  accommodate  difference  or  'divergence.'  To  date,  the  majority  of research  on  the  history  of  the  service  has  focused  on  the  state's  intentions, policies, and implementation strategy. This focus has been dictated chiefly by the  much  greater  availability  of  'official'  sources:  central  and  local  government records, as well as legislation and Hansard (the UK Parliament's official report of all parliamentary debates). Research into the impact of the service on the lives of those who experienced it-namely, teachers, caterers, lunchtime supervisors, parents, and students-is much rarer, and what exists is almost

entirely based on printed memoirs and autobiographies. Without making use of other methods such as oral history, historians can do little more than hint at the complex and multifaceted impact the school meals service had on the lives of those it touched and can only hope in vain for responses to it other than grudging conformity. Catherine Burke called this 'one of the curious silences in the history of education' and looks forward to the possibility of a history that is able to show the school dining space as 'a territory of contested desires and intentions, a battleground between the perceived needs of the adult and the child.' 10

## Reflecting on Our Interview Technique

Our  narrators  shared  information  with  us  about  their  neurodivergence  at different points in the interview process. Lauren, who attended public schools in Northumbria and Merseyside from 1998 to 2012, contacted the project via a  form  on  our  website  that  invites  people  to  share  brief  written  memories  of school meals. In their response, they spoke about their autism diagnosis: 'School dinners [lunches in American English] made me a picky eater. This all came out while  being  assessed  for  autism  as  an  adult.' 11 We then contacted Lauren to request  an  interview,  as  we  have  done  with  everyone  who  shares  memories through the project website, which led to an online video interview taking place over Google Meet a few weeks later. In the period between our first email and the  interview,  we  shared  the  project  information  sheet,  which  outlined  the project's rationale, criteria for participation in terms of the narrator's involvement with school meals in a personal or professional capacity, and the anticipated  interview  format.  The  project  information  sheet  stated  that  questions would be semistructured, with some common questions asked of all narrators, and that the remainder of the interview would be directed by the flow of the conversation between interviewer and narrator. While we have provided some narrators with an outline of key interview questions ahead of time, this has not been common practice within the project unless requested specifically by the narrator, as it is generally not considered best practice to do so. As such, while Lauren did not specifically ask for additional information before our conversation, we also did not offer to share any. Instead, a discussion between Isabelle and  Lauren  about  what  the  interview  might  look  like  occurred  in  the  time between the start of our meeting and when the recorded conversation began. It  was  during  this  initial  discussion  that  Lauren  shared  again  that  they  are autistic and stated that sometimes their facial expressions did not match how a person might expect them to react. 12 Our conversation immediately prior to the interview therefore functioned as an important space for setting expectations about what the interview would look like from both of our perspectives and how focusing on what Lauren said as opposed to how they said it could make them feel more comfortable.

In the writing of this article, we have recognized that, for autistic narrators, traditional oral history methods are not always the most appropriate. As The Autistic  Voices  project  team  have  advised  based  on  their  own  participatory research, it is important to provide autistic narrators with interview questions in advance and to establish if they would be comfortable with follow-up questions. Before the interview, it is also useful to discuss their preferences for the interview environment, both in terms of location and expectations for levels of eye contact and stimming. 13 On reflection, this outside guidance made us question the level of support our project provided at the recruitment stage.

This is not to say that we had not anticipated participation from neurodivergent and  disabled  narrators.  Before  conducting  our  own  interviews,  we  listened  to archived oral histories from the 'How Was School?' project, which focused on disabled people's experiences of education in Britain and is archived in the British Library. 14 The issue of  school  meals  recurred  across  many  narrators'  accounts, often highlighting approaches to discipline and the sensory aspects of their experience that we discuss later in this article. During recruitment, we used the discussions  that  occurred  via  email  and  video  call  before  the  interview  took  place  as spaces  where  needs  could  be  outlined  by  narrators  individually  rather  than attempting  to  deploy  a  one-size-fits-all  approach  to  sharing  information  with people  who  identified  themselves  as  disabled  and/or  neurodivergent.  While  it was the first time that Isabelle had knowingly interviewed neurodivergent narrators,  as  a  neurodivergent  oral  historian  herself,  she  had  anticipated  that  some narrators would speak from this perspective.

Lisa, who attended public schools in Leicester from 1974 to 1987, spoke about her  experience  with  ADHD  before  her  recorded  interview.  This  conversation initially did not relate to the interview. Already known to one another, Lisa and Isabelle took the opportunity to catch up before recording began, and it was in this context that Lisa shared confirmation of her formal ADHD diagnosis. Lisa stated that she did not want to share this news with her family, as she anticipated an unsupportive response. Interested in how far Lisa might connect ADHD with her experience of school meals but mindful of her need for confidentiality, Isabelle asked if Lisa would be happy to discuss her ADHD during the interview. While Lisa agreed beforehand, she avoided identifying her ADHD outright during the recording,  instead  referring  more  obliquely  to  issues  with  her  attention  and concentration, as is evident in this discussion of how she spent her break times.

Lisa:  As  a  rule,  I  always  went  into  the  hall  and  practiced  on  the  xylophone  or  the glockenspiel,  depending  on  which  was  free.  [ Isabelle  laughing ]  Occasionally  the  tambourine. But erm, yeah. [The teachers] would not let me play the violin. So, I had to-I was only allowed to bash things! [ Lisa laughing ] I don't know-I see why now-but back then. But I loved it!

Isabelle: What makes you say you 'see why now'? [ Laughing ]

8

Lisa: Erm [ pause ] because I-my attention span was, erm, not brilliant. So, learning to read music and play a violin was not really an option for me.

## Isabelle: Yeah.

Lisa: But bashing pieces of wood really was an option for me! [ Lisa laughing ] And I got into that. I really enjoyed it because I could sort of focus, could hyperfocus on that sort of thing. 15

The recording does not document the pointed look offered by Lisa when asked the  question  'What  makes  you  say  you  'see  why  now'?,'  which  Isabelle interpreted  at  the  time  as  a  request  not  to  push  this  line  of  questioning. While the audio recorder did not capture this exchange beyond Lisa's momentary silence, the decision not to question her further demonstrates the importance of accepting her need for her ADHD diagnosis to go unspoken during the interview. We contacted Lisa after the interview about writing this article, revisiting her reasons for her silence in the recording and asking if this was something we could reflect on in published work. Lisa agreed that we could refer to her ADHD in our analysis provided we took care to anonymize her account.  In  this,  we  sought  to  follow  a  tenet  of  oral  historian  Alexander Freund's  'ethics  of  silence,'  in  which  he  stated  that  '[accepting]  silences may be the most beneficial  way  forward  after  we  have  collaboratively,  with our narrators, probed the deeper meanings of such silences. Only then will we find a balance between protecting the well-being of our narrators and 'truth in publication.'' 16

These negotiations on and off the record, before and after the interview, are vital to understanding the narrative Lisa offered during the recorded conversation.  While  we  as  oral  historians  might  feel  it  is  important  to  empower narrators  to  share  their  experiences  of  neurodivergence  and  enhance  their representation  in  the  historical  record,  this  did  not  align  with  Lisa's  needs. Instead,  her  empowerment came from her silence on this subject. It  is  also worth noting that Lisa did not see neurodivergence as particularly instrumental  in  her  school  meals  experiences.  She  instead  sought  to  emphasize  her creativity  as  a  teacher  and  how  her  passion  for  the  sciences  helped  her  to develop new approaches to teaching children about the food they consumed in the school canteen (or cafeteria). As Kirstie Stage has argued in relation to deaf and disability histories more broadly, oral history can be a valuable tool for highlighting  the  ways  in  which  disabled  people  are  not  solely  defined  by medical  characterizations  but  rather  have  diverse  interests  and  experiences that shape their identities. 17

Receiving  different  levels  of  information  about  the  narrators  at  different points  in  the  interview  process  meant  that  we  had  to  be  responsive  in  our interview  approach  to  meet  the  needs  of  each  individual.  Ella-a  pupil  at public schools in Rotherham, South Yorkshire, from 1996 to 2010-identified herself  as  someone  who  'has  ADHD'  within  the  first  few  minutes  of  the

interview, after recording had started. 18 Joanne, who attended public schools in  Surrey  and  East  Yorkshire  from  the  late  1960s  to  1980,  used  the  time immediately before the recording to outline her needs for the interview. She explained that she was incredibly tired and did not want to talk for very long. She struggles with chronic fatigue and had had a particularly difficult night's sleep.  She  agreed  to  go  ahead  with  the  interview,  so  after  establishing  her name, birth date, and place of birth on the recording, Isabelle asked,

Now, you mentioned you're a bit pushed for time today, so what are the main things that you would like to tell me about in relation to your experience of school meals? And then I can kind of structure some questions around that. 19

This dismantled the typical structure of the interviews we had conducted so far  and meant that the conversation became almost entirely dependent on where Joanne wanted to take it. While typically we had attempted to direct interviews  chronologically,  from  early  educational  experiences  to  leaving school as a teenager, we instead opted for a much more fluid structure in Joanne's  interview.  What  followed  was  a  rich  and  wide-ranging  conversation, but one that challenged our approach to interviewing. The chronological  anchors  we  had  previously  used  to  contextualize  and  trace  the development  of  a  narrator's  narrative  were  largely  lost,  leading  to  some tensions  between  our  anticipated  interview  style  and  structure  and  our ethical responsibilities toward Joanne's needs. Some oral historians, such as Holly  Werner-Thomas  and  Daniel  Kerr,  have  developed  methods  that eschew the chronological approach in order to creatively engage narrators with a range of needs. 20 Werner-Thomas's use of the sensory, in particular, may  have  proven  useful  for  our  project,  as  our  line  of  questioning  did encourage  narrators  to  draw  on  sensory  memories.  However,  due  to  the wider project's attempt to understand the UK school meals service in the past and present, as well as possibilities for its future, a chronological approach to the interviews seemed most appropriate to facilitate comparisons and contrasts across the three cross-institutional strands of our research.

Nevertheless, there remained space for adaptations in our approach. While it  was  generally  semistructured,  with  a  series  of  questions  asked  of  every narrator  but  the  direction  of  the  interview  otherwise  dependent  upon  the narrator's responses, we found it necessary to change our order of questions -particularly those aiming to set the scene chronologically at the start of an interview-and the ways in which we framed them. For Lauren, we established relatively early on that the typically open-ended format of questioning most widely accepted in oral history as best practice for avoiding leading responses could  sometimes  engender  a  sense  of  uncertainty,  even  discomfort.  This extract is taken from the start of Lauren's interview:

Isabelle: What would a typical day be like at primary school? So, starting from the start of the day, what do you remember about how that day would pan out?

Lauren: Oh, gosh, erm. [ Laughs ] This is a while ago, and I don't remember a lot before the age of about 15. Erm [ pause ], so. Yeah, it would mostly just be, you know, primary school, sat in one room, go to your lessons, go to break, go to lunch. I don't know, it's hard to describe the experience of being a small child in school! [ Laughs ] 21

Lauren's uncertainty led us to reassure them about their responses and attempt to rephrase questions in ways that sought more specific examples, as demonstrated in the following excerpt:

Isabelle: That's okay. Does anything spring to mind when you think about a typical day, is there a particular portion of the day that you think about, maybe the lessons or the breaktime, or arriving at school or going home?

Lauren: Erm. I mean mostly breaktime, but that's mostly because I was bullied a lot, like I didn't really have friends until sixth form [the final two years of secondary education in the UK after the age of 16].

Isabelle: Mmhmm. I'm really sorry to hear about that, are you comfortable talking about that at all?

Lauren: Yeah!

Isabelle:  Yeah.  So,  was  that  something  that  happened  at  break  times  and  presumably lunchtimes at school?

Lauren: [ Nods in response ]

Isabelle: Yeah? Yeah. So, to what extent would you say that that influenced your break and lunchtimes in terms of how you were in the space of the playground or perhaps the dining hall?

Lauren: [ Pause ]  I  mean,  because  it  was  primary  school  obviously  it  was  quite  heavily supervised. So, it would be kind of a case of, you know, finish my food. Wait until we were allowed to go outside and then go hang out down the bottom of the field.

Isabelle: Mm, yeah, yeah. So, if you were to describe to me, for example, where you would be at lunchtime say, you'd move from a classroom to a space where you would eat food?

Lauren: Yeah, it was the same space that was used for PE [physical education], which was, they just called it the hall, because it was just the big hall. And there were these really long, you know the kind of plastic tables with like that weird stuff on top that is meant to make it look like stone except it's really horrid and plasticky? With like the metal bits? And then the long benches matching. 22

The flow of Lauren's speech changed throughout the interview. By the final response in the extract above, they spoke much more fluidly and confidently, contrasting with the earlier hesitations, pauses, and qualifiers that halted the pattern of their speech at the beginning of their interview when asked a more open-ended  question  about  their  experience  of  bullying.  Our  last  question

around the dining space in particular was much more direct and concentrated and  led  to  a  more  detailed  response.  Unlike  Joanne,  who  found  that  open questions and a less structured interview approach facilitated her in sharing her experiences, Lauren preferred to respond to more direct questions.

Nevertheless, notes that we wrote immediately after the interview indicate a sense of unpreparedness and dissatisfaction with our approach. It is tempting in hindsight to reflect that the change from more open to direct questions had been spurred only by the nature of Lauren's responses, but Isabelle's notes from  the  time  reveal  that  this  was  motivated  also  in  part  by  our  own  discomfort with the conduct of the interview.

From the start, I struggled to set the pace . . . I got the sense that [they] were trying to figure out what I wanted to know from some of the more open questions, as opposed to thinking  about  what  [they]  might  want  to  tell  me.  Plus,  sticking  to  open  questions became increasingly difficult when [Lauren] began to talk about distressing experiences with primary and secondary school bullies, including violent incidents that went unchallenged by teachers. At these points in the interview, I felt caught between my desire to comfort [Lauren] and empathize with [them] based on my own experiences . . . and the oral historian I feel that I 'should' be, who is a largely silent presence in the recording and  doesn't  lead  the  narrator.  In  the  end,  I  think  I  fell  somewhere  between  the  two, leaving me satisfied with neither. 23

The structure of the interview therefore changed based on the needs of both narrator and interviewer, as we placed clearer parameters around questions to minimize  our  own  and  Lauren's  discomfort.  That  Lauren's  interview  took place early on in our collection phase was also a contributing factor to the level of discomfort. By the time we interviewed Joanne six weeks later, we felt more comfortable  adapting  our  interview  style,  more  readily  deconstructing  the anticipated  structure  of  her  interview.  What  followed  was  an  instructive experience  for  Isabelle  as  the  interviewer,  demonstrating  the  difficultiesand  necessity-of  adapting  our  typical  interview  techniques  based  on  the needs of an individual narrator.

We interviewed  Lisa  and  Ella  in  person,  in  places  chosen  by  them.  Lisa chose to be interviewed at home, while Ella chose to be interviewed in the café connected to her workplace. While Lisa's interview at  home meant that we spoke  to  her  in  a  relatively  quiet  environment,  the  café  interview  with  Ella meant that our conversation was accompanied by the clattering of cutlery and hum of chatter as she recalled her school meals experiences. A quieter environment  may  have  helped  to  minimize  the  number  of  distractions,  but  we followed Ella's preference for the interview setting. In both interviews, we took several breaks at the narrators' requests. This enabled them to do other things during our time together, such as making phone calls, standing up and walking around, or making a drink, thus breaking up the interviews into shorter bursts of  conversation,  which  also  supported  Isabelle  as  the  interviewer.  As  we received information about Lisa's and Ella's ADHD (just before starting the

recording for the former and in the opening minutes of the interview for the latter),  these  adaptations  to  the  interviews'  structures  occurred  organically rather  than  due  to  prior  planning.  These  adaptations  and  collaborative reworkings of the interview structure have helped us to work toward a more flexible,  inclusive  practice  that  better  meets  the  needs  of  each  narrator  and interviewer.

## Composing Narratives of Childhood Following Diagnosis in Adulthood

In  the  interviews  themselves,  the  retrospective  diagnoses  that  the  narrators received as adults had ramifications for the structure of the stories they toldnone of the four narrators were aware of their neurodivergence during their schooling.  Like  all  narrators,  they  accessed  their  childhood  memories  to recount their past experiences, but unlike most, they also mapped onto their childhood  the  senses  and  behaviors  they  now  associate  with  autism  and ADHD as adults. In the interviews, these temporal dynamics sparked mixed reflections  about  their  experiences  of  school  meals.  For  Ella,  it  'all  makes sense'  when  examined  through the lens  of  ADHD. 24 Her understanding of ADHD bears similarities to the process of 'biological illumination' coined by sociologist Catherine D. Tan, whereby autistic participants found themselves better able to identify and explain certain aspects of their childhood experiences  following  their  adult  diagnosis. 25 From  being  late  every  morning  to forgetting  whether  she  needed  to  bring  a  packed  lunch  or  dinner  money each  day,  Ella  remarked  that  the  points  in  her  school  day  that  offered  the clearest  indications  of  the  influence  of  ADHD  were  'all  kind  of  around food.' 26 Ella  continually  expressed  surprise  at  the  centrality  of  food  to  her childhood  experiences,  and  the  interview  was  the  first  time  that  she  had reflected to such an extent on how ADHD-for which she had only received a diagnosis four years prior to the interview in 2019-shaped her experience of food at school and at home as a child in the late 1990s and early 2000s. In this sense, the interview facilitated what Lynn Abrams has described as the 'epiphanic moment,' as Ella reconstructed her sense of self in the past according to her understanding of herself in the present. 27 Yet Ella still hesitated to view certain aspects of her experiences through the lens of neurodivergence, both in the interview and in reflections offered afterward. During her interview, Ella remarked,

Like now I eat absolutely anything, but I think being vegetarian has made that happen, and I think, like, from like early twenties onwards I would, like, eat anything. But at the time, no. I remember being pickier. But I don't know if that is like a neurodiverse thing because it's not so much like I don't like certain things, it's that I like them in the way that I like them. 28

The uncertainty that Ella expresses could come from a variety of factors, such as her relatively recent diagnosis or an internalized sense of 'diagnostic selfdoubt' that leads some individuals to question their own experiences in the face of heterogeneous accounts of neurodivergence. 29 Regardless of the exact reasons  for  Ella's  uncertainty,  her  reflections  hint  at  the  tension  between reconstructing  experience  at  the  level  of  the  individual  and  extrapolating how far those experiences might speak to a wider community. This tension is present not only in Ella's articulation of her own experiences but also in how we interpret this collection of interviews as historians. In analyzing our findings  and  preparing  this  article,  we  were  wary  of  ascribing  meaning  to  the narrators' experiences in ways that they might not have done themselves. We ultimately wanted to understand the relationship between the personal experiences of school meals, which they spoke about with reference to neurodivergence,  and  their  treatment  by  educational  institutions,  which  they  did  not necessarily discuss in similar terms.

In order to dig into this new research question, we invited Ella, Joanne, Lisa, and Lauren to respond by email to a question that explored how far they felt that  structural  ableism  had  shaped  their  experiences  of  school  meals.  Our email read as follows: 'We're exploring how far this is something that underscores the experiences of people with disabilities and neurodivergence, but are wary  of  describing  people's  experiences  in  ways  that  they  might  not  be comfortable with or simply disagree  with. So as  someone who identified as neurodivergent, I just wanted to ask, do you think ableism is an issue that you see  as  having  shaped  your  experience  of  school  feeding?' 30 All  narrators replied except Lisa. Their written responses emphasize the need for caution in interpreting the past through the present, as well as the differing extents to which they reconstruct personal and institutional  experiences in  relation  to neurodivergence. Joanne, though confident in talking about how being neurodivergent shaped her reactions to school meals and the lunchtime environment, wrote an email response indicating that she did not see ableism per se as having structured her experiences.

I was educated in an era of no understanding of difference. Children were told to be quiet unless  spoken  to  and  always  finish  all  the  food  on  your  plate.  This  was  endemic  . . . I don't think it can be called ableism then as such was the era of the 1960s and '70s. I was not comfortable with eating or using public areas for many years anyway as a teenager. In this era [today], I think it might be different as there is so much choice, sandwiches or cooked lunches, menus of what food there would be and no punishment for not eating it all up. I think it is important to help children structure their day eating and drinking. I don't know if this is what you want me to say but it's hard to go back as in those days there  was  not  even  a  word  or  conception  of  being  different  other  than  ill  or  the  old h word ['handicapped']. I hope I am understanding your question? 31

Lauren displayed a similar hesitancy to ascribe what they saw as a modern-day understanding of institutional ableism onto their past experiences.

Looking back, I think it's likely the way I was treated by other children may have been related to ableism, in the way that people who are generally odd or different tend to be ostracized or worse, but as I wasn't diagnosed, the way ableism in staff affected me is harder to quantify. It's possible that the reactions to bullying along the lines of me having it coming due to my reactions (I'm sure you've heard the truism that if you stop reacting to  bullying  they'll  get  bored  and  move  on-somewhat  difficult  when  you  can  barely control your emotions/reactions in the best of circumstances), but I think it would be more the lack of knowledge meaning my autism wasn't noticed rather than what you might call active ableism. I hope that makes sense? It's a difficult thought to express. 32

Ella took longer to respond to the email following an initial reply to state that she needed some time to think about our question. When she did respond, it seemed that this period of reflection had led her to reconsider aspects of her educational experience.

Just taking some time to properly consider this, and it's fascinating. I think it is fair to say ableism definitely plays a part in school meals, and actually is fair to say it shaped my experiences  of  school  more  broadly.  However,  I  was  very  lucky  to  be  at  school  preacademization-particularly in very nurturing and localized infant and primary schools. I  felt  that  despite  not  having  a  diagnosis  or  any  specific  access  requests  at  the  time (because I/my parents didn't know!), the relaxed nature of the school environment and the kindness of the staff helped . . . This most definitely changed at secondary school as things got more strict . . . It was horrible, I'm sure for a lot of young people, but especially those with any mental health concerns or neurodiversity. I don't think I understood why I  found  it  so  hard  at  the  time,  but  looking  back  I  do  think  it's  because  I  had  a  lot  of undiagnosed neurodiverse/mental health stuff going on. In hindsight it's really not an accessible environment. 33

There is an interesting contextualization of experience at play in these responses that  draws  out  the  tensions  between  the  individual,  the  collective,  and  the temporal. While retrospectively understanding their individual experiences as related to autism, Joanne and Lauren are wary of conducting a similar retrospective mapping onto the wider context of their school days. Moreover, despite having no understanding of autism as children, Joanne and Lauren both refer to being  autistic  as  a  way  of  explaining  their  personal  experiences  of  childhood from  their  adult  perspectives  in  their  interviews.  Yet  their  written  responses show that this does not extend to their consideration of the institutional, both showing a reluctance to see their schools and teachers as ableist due to the lack of understanding about autism more broadly in the 1960s, 1970s, and 2000s. While their  understanding  of  themselves  as  neurodivergent  is  developing  over  time and helps Joanne and Lauren to reconstruct their past selves through the lens of the  present,  their  perspectives  of  their  schools  are  fixed  at  a  certain  point  in history. Both write about the challenges they faced in receiving support at school, with Joanne describing the lack of consideration of children's needs as 'endemic' and Lauren identifying how their own behavior in response to bullying made staff dismissive of their experiences. Rather than framing this within the context of disability and ableism, they both ascribe their difficulties to a lack of

knowledge and understanding of 'difference.' 34 Lauren argues that they cannot use the language and logic of ableism to describe the staff given that they did not yet have a diagnosis, although they are more open to viewing their interactions with  peers  through  this  lens.  This  contrasts  with  Ella's  retrospective  understanding of the support she received at school, which she more readily attributed to an ableist environment. Her assertion that 'actually [it] is fair to say [ableism] shaped my experiences of school more broadly' conjures again what Abrams has referred to as the role of the 'epiphanic' in oral histories, as the narrator reaches a new understanding of their experiences and sense of self. 35

## Sensory Responses and Sensory Regimes

In light of our narrators' perspectives, we think an examination of the broader aims  of  the  UK  school  meals  service  is  warranted.  Tracing  the  aims  of  the service  from  its  beginnings  in  the  early  twentieth  century  provides  strong evidence of structural discrimination against disabled people. Many of these aims have remained important drivers of the school meals service to this day and  arguably  still  shape  the  experiences  of  students,  teachers,  parents,  and catering staff. The provision of school meals across the UK should be viewed as an  important  part  of  the  welfare  state  that  developed  over  the  twentieth century, particularly in the postwar years. Foucauldian scholarship is important  here  as  it  has  placed  the  history  of  schools  (including  the  provision  of school meals) alongside other 'institutions that 'contain' persons over time, such as . . . hospitals and prisons.' 36 As such, one of the primary functions of the school meals service has been 'disciplinary' in a Foucauldian sense-it has sought to shape individuals, their bodies, behaviors, habits, and attitudes in particular ways considered desirable by the state. As part of a wider constellation of state institutions, the school meals service played its part in defining what the desired 'norm' should be for children and young people growing up in the UK. The school meals service ascribed norms not just regarding what, when ,  and how much they  should  be  eating  but  also how -in what circumstances, in whose company, and in demonstrating which behaviors are acceptable. Drawing on the work of French historian Alain Corbin, we refer to this effort by school authorities to control the ways in which children responded to the  sensory  environment-in terms of keeping noise levels low,  sitting still, and ensuring all food was eaten-as the 'sensory regime' of the school. 37 We now consider this discipline in relation to neurodivergent narrators' interactions with both sensory regimes and supervisory approaches in school dining spaces.

Neurodivergent people frequently report experiencing heightened sensory responses to everyday stimuli. In accounts of school meals in the past, sensory aspects are often given prominence, even by individuals who do not identify as neurodivergent. From the early days of the service, it was observed that school

meals were often consumed within 'a perfect pandemonium of noise.' 38 In our new interviews with self-identifying neurodivergent narrators, the sensory impact of school meals emerged even more sharply as a focus of their memories. Joanne described her experiences of lunchtime at secondary school in the mid-1970s thus:

Joanne: It was very rushed. It was a huge school in those days, so there'd be a lot of noise. I wouldn't be able to talk. Erm, and, you wouldn't get seconds or anything . . . you just took it on a plate and that was it, and what you eat, it doesn't matter. You're just in a rush to get out, basically. So, it was all very rushed . . .

Isabelle: Yeah. I can see you're kind of hunching in even just at the memory of it. 39

Joanne continued to have similar experiences in adulthood when she worked as  a  special  educational  needs  adviser  and  would  visit  different  schools.  At lunchtime, she would have to eat in the school canteen and recalled 'the noise, the clattering, the wooden . . . chairs on the floor screeching.' 40 She went on to develop  misophonia,  a  chronic  condition  where  someone  experiences a  heightened  response  (sometimes  likened  to  an  involuntary  fight-or-flight response)  to  certain  repetitive  sounds,  and  she  drew  a  direct  connection between this and her neurodivergence.

Joanne:  And  I've  got  misophonia  to  crisp  [chip]  packets  now,  but  the-misophonia, I don't know if you know? But-

Isabelle: The kind of sound of them, is it?

Joanne: Yeah, some people get it when they're chewing food. I don't have that, but when people are crackling crisp packets or sweet packets, it's very intense. And there's-you're meant to be eating and then I can tolerate it, it's when it's on a train or something else . . . But that's a neurodivergent thing. Erm, yes, it was horrendous that noise, erm, and-but I wasn't aware of it then. But I just know I would leave early, so I obviously didn't eat. 41

Ella recalled experiencing a similar 'sensory overload' in her primary school dining hall in the late 1990s and early 2000s that she attributed to ADHD. 42 For Ella, this experience at lunchtime resulted in general feelings of fear and anxiety around school food, in addition to what she described as a 'phobia of other people being sick'-something that she still has today.

I remember one incident in . . . year two [second grade] that really sticks with me, and I remember it happening in the dining hall every now and again, someone would puke and I would freak out. Like absolutely freak out. Like have to leave. I can't be in here! And I remember that being a bit of an anxiety about that might happen, because it's a space where there's food and there's lots of kids and there's choking and there's, yeah. And it being a bit of a like, 'Oh my god this might happen.' 43

When reflecting on these experiences, Ella highlighted the significance of what she called  'the  psychology  of  the  dining  hall.'  In  sociological  literature,  the school dining hall has been viewed positively as a space of 'social learning'

where students learn to build relationships and negotiate conflicts with their peers. 44 These characteristics can present challenges for neurodivergent people,  however,  when  the  social  and  emotional  aspect  of  the  dining  space  is combined with extreme sensory stimulation.

Ella: I had quite a tumultuous time with that friendship group, and I think maybe that's why dinner [lunch] time felt particularly-like as a source of anxiety or as something that had a real place in the day because of that, like the friendship thing. So, it ended up being a space of conflict and resolution and tears. Because if you'd fallen out at playtime then dinnertime was the next time you'd see each other, or the next time you'd actually speak about  what  happened.  And  I  feel  like  I  do  have  some  memories  of  reconciling  over a packed lunch. Like, there being conversations with people, and you end up sat next to someone and you would say sorry to each other, and it was very much that space to do that. So, in some ways like reconciling and in other ways continuing a feud.

Isabelle: Yes, yeah. It sounds like quite an emotive space.

Ella: Yeah! I think it was. And then couple that with the fact that it's loud and there's a lot going  on  and  it's  like  a  sensory  overload  in  the  space,  and  then  you  have  to  make a decision as to what you eat and then you had to carry your tray, you're all quite like 'oh god,' a bit at sixes and sevens [feeling confused]. 45

Often, the distress experienced by neurodivergent narrators went beyond their own sensory responses and feelings of 'overload.' On a number of occasions, narrators  recalled  their  consumption  of  school  meals  (and  the  attendant unpleasant  sensory  experiences) being enforced  by authority figures. Teachers in particular sought to ensure students' conformity with normative behaviors  in  ways  that  exacerbated  feelings  of  discomfort  and  dislocation. Thinking about her early experiences of school meals in 1966 when she was four years old, Joanne recounted,

And I remember erm, a very-it's stayed with me for years-er, in those days school dinners were, you know, cooked to death. And I remember these horrible-I think they were meant to be green beans. Mush. Cold. And you were meant to eat them before you got your dessert, pudding. And I went to get the pudding because I was hungry, because I couldn't eat them. And this, I still remember, this awful woman-I've got a very good memory-sort of almost, you know, marching me back saying I was being naughty and 'you can't have that unless you eat your beans,' which were cold and sitting there on the dish. [ Sense of dread in tone .] I'm also neurodivergent, by the way, so, erm, there was no way I  could  go  there.  Erm,  and,  it  put  me  off  for  life  eating  school  dinners  basically [ laughs ] and particularly green beans! Absolutely. 46

Joanne  reflected  more  broadly  on  the  impact  that  this  kind  of  hierarchical system  of  discipline  in  school  dining  spaces  could  have  on  neurodivergent people. There was such a stark difference in power and authority between the catering  staff  serving  the  food  and  the  children  receiving  it,  as  well  as  the requirement to remain seated and eat different types of food in a particular order. 'A lot of neurodivergent people say it's the awful thing making us sit

down and eat,' she declared. 'You must not force people because the fear is there.' 47

Lauren reported similar experiences of school meals at their primary school in the early 2000s. They described being 'insulted or possibly kicked' if they attempted to interact with other children at dinnertime and remembered that rather  than  receiving  support,  the  teachers  would  punish  them,  not  the students  responsible  for  the  bullying.  Looking  back,  Lauren  connected  this situation with being 'undiagnosed autistic' (as well as a difficult home life) and presented a picture of a disciplinary system that did not support neurodivergent children.

Isabelle: And did you receive any support for any of the bullying that you've described that happened at break times and lunchtimes from any staff members or other students?

Lauren:  Not,  not  really,  because  the  way  that  I  tended  to  react-'cause  again,  we're talking undiagnosed autistic with like, just, to put it kindly, a dad with some anger issues as well. Erm. So, my sort of automatic uncontrollable reaction to this kind of thing was largely to scream and hit. So, I ended up getting in all of the trouble instead. [ Laughs wryly .]

Isabelle: Mm. So, it was quite a one-sided experience of discipline? Or would the other students be disciplined, as well?

Lauren: Not generally, no. 48

As we saw in the case of Ella, this distressing experience of school discipline during  lunchtimes  was  coupled  for  Lauren  with  an  unpleasant  sensory response  to  the  food  itself.  When  asked  what  their  strongest  memories  of food at school were, they replied,

The smell. My primary school really liked just like really lank vegetables. And that, you know that, it's kind of this mashed potato that one hundred percent was instant. Where you can press a fork into it and pick up the fork and the little ice cream scoop of potato would just stick to the fork? [ Laughing ] It's a very vivid memory, that mashed potato. 49

Indeed, Lauren, drawing on conversations with their mother, attributed the fact they are a 'picky eater' to their negative experiences during school meals.

Yeah,  so  basically  before  starting  school-this  is  all  my  mum's  report  now-before starting  school,  I  was  a  really  adventurous  eater.  Like,  you  know,  three-year-olds  just eating whatever is presented at like Chinese restaurants and things.

And then after starting school I very quickly became a picky eater, which-what she says, because again, I don't really remember this much-is that, I really, really hated the school dinners,  and  it  kind  of  flicked  something  in  my  brain  that  was  like  'this  is  what  all mashed potato is like,' 'this is what all cabbage is like,' where it was just like, 'okay, I don't like this food now.' And that's it, forever. According to, you know, small child's logic [ laughs ]. 50

Similar sensory regimes were present in home economics classes in secondary school, centering around food and designed to remove control from students in the name of ensuring conformity. The impact of these regimes for neurodivergent  students-including  the  possibility  of  shaping  their  relationships with food into adulthood-is clear in the account Joanne gave of a 1970s home economics class.

Sorry, this just brings a memory. I remember what we called Home Economics. It put me off  cooking  for  life,  then.  Because  it  took  all  the  joy  away  from  cooking.  You  had  to measure your pastry [ laughs ] which was, mine was dead by then, you know. Like, twelve -in those [days], we had inches-twelve inches by twelve. 'You've got fourteen inches!' [ Mimicking teacher's voice ]  I  mean,  it  was  like,  oh  my  god,  it  was  like  so-it  was  just a nightmare. It took all the joy away from it! 51

Lauren recalled similar experiences more than thirty years later during 'Food Tech'  lessons  in  secondary  school,  where  the  teacher  required  students  to calculate their BMI (body mass index) and listed which foods they should and should not eat to maintain an 'ideal' weight. For Lauren, these experiences provoked a similar sense of judgment, shame, isolation, and loss of control, particularly  because  they  were  unable  to  put  the  various  rules  given  by  the teacher into effect, as they had no real say in the food they ate at home.

And yeah, we did BMI calculations, which is a whole thing, like BMI is bad anyway and then applying it to people who are still growing is just ridiculous. Erm, but I kind of got it in my head that like, if I lost weight people would stop picking on me . . . it's kind of hard being told 'this is how you need to eat,' 'this is what is correct,' while also not really having much control over what you eat. It's like, it's all very well telling me 'oh yeah don't eat too much meat' and things like that, and then going home and being presented with 'here is a large amount of meat' . . . And kind of, I don't know, comparing what I was being told about food to the experience of food I think kind of exacerbated a lot of stuff. 52

There  is  also  evidence  of  these  harmful  sensory  regimes  being  reinforced (often  unwittingly)  by  parents  of  neurodivergent  children-even  parents who were neurodivergent themselves. This is something that generated considerable  feelings  of  guilt  and  responsibility  later  in  life  for  some  narrators, such as Joanne. Joanne received an autism diagnosis as an adult, and her eldest child  has  avoidant  restrictive  food  intake  disorder  (ARFID).  They  attended primary school in the 1990s, and, as Joanne recalled of their experience,

Oh my god. So, my eldest in primary school [ pauses ] obviously couldn't eat. Now you're -I just  feel  still  guilty,  er,  what  I  put  them  through.  And  [ pause ]  yeah.  [ Sighs ]  Erm, [they] just didn't really eat. But of course, they did more chicken nuggets then, in the '90s, erm, it-they didn't allow packed lunches then. I did try. Later on they did. Erm, but at first they didn't. And, yeah, I feel really bad about that [ tone of voice has changed to reflect how Joanne feels ]. So, basically, [they] didn't eat much. 53

These feelings of parental guilt can be considerably exacerbated by intersectional  pressures.  For  example,  neurodivergent  children's  distressing  experiences  of  school  dining  spaces  were  sometimes  compounded  by  the  social stigma  of  free  school  meals-a  service  provided  to  students  from  lowincome  families.  Joanne  provided  the  following  account  of  her  youngest child attending secondary school in the early 2000s and abstaining from eating at lunchtime because of feelings of embarrassment.

And then my youngest, who always ate a lot, very active, in secondary didn't-wouldn't -eat lunch. And I was quite poor, although I was working, I was on the poverty line, so we got free school meals, but they had to give in the token and stand out. And of course they wouldn't do that. So, they went without. [ Pause ] Yeah, I don't feel good about that at all. 54

## Possibilities for Resistance

For Ella, the feeling that she was fully in control of what she was eating only came  in  adulthood,  once  the  disciplinary  regime  of  school  had  been  left behind.

Isabelle: Would you connect that [the feeling that no one understood exactly what she wanted to eat when Ella was at school]-I'm probably leading you here-to your cooking [in later life]?

Ella: One hundred percent. No, one hundred percent. Because if I'm in control and I can produce what I want then it's fine.

Isabelle: Yeah.

Ella: Even my boyfriend now says to me, he's like, if we're going to have a Bolognese-he can make Bolognese and I can make Bolognese, but I make Bolognese in a very specific way, and so if we're having a Bolognese, I want to make it. And he's like 'I'll make Bolognese tonight!' and I'm like 'I'll do it, I'll do it.'

Isabelle: Because you know how you want to do it?

Ella: Yeah, and my sister's the same, and this is not the best phrase probably to use in your research, but she called herself a 'Food Nazi' at one point. She was like 'I know I am, I'm like a fascist, a food fascist, because I'm very'-well, she's worse than me-'I'm very controlling in the kitchen, very easily stressed, very high maintenance, very like high drama,' but enjoys it in a weird way. 55

Joanne and Lauren both made similar comments in their interviews, stressing that it has only been later in life that they have been able to find pleasure in food because this is when they have had control over ingredients and preparation. Moreover, Lauren linked this directly to their experience of being autistic and 'getting into trouble' at school for 'not finishing this thing if I don't like it,' underscoring once again the ways in which neurodivergent people can find the disciplinary regimes around food at school particularly challenging.

Joanne: Oh! For me, I don't like it too prescriptive. So, menus, cooking, I like, I like to be creative. So, if I want to put a splash of this in, a splash of that, and see what comes out. Sometimes not good, sometimesusually quite good, I have to say-and creating something different or if I'm in-when I was working of course it was more difficult-and making the effort to do it and seeing people enjoy it is really nice. 56

Lauren: Versus, yeah, starting to, deciding I need to make food that tastes good rather than just thinking about 'am I getting enough of these various nutrients?' was just a lot more fun . And also, just that control as well, 'cause, I don't know-'cause I think autism plays into this as well. The idea of having full control over what you're eating makes food a lot less stressful [ laughing ]. It's like 'oh I can't get in trouble for not finishing this thing if I don't like it, I can just put it back in the pan and do something else with it.' Or even just chuck it out and start again. 57

Earlier in this article, we asked whether resistance within school itself might be possible  too.  Such  resistance  may  have  proven  especially  challenging  for neurodivergent  students  who  seem  to  have  been  particularly  targeted  by disciplinary regimes relating to the consumption of food. Yet there are indications  from  our  narrators'  interviews  that,  with  the  support  of  sympathetic teachers,  they  were  sometimes  able  to  avoid  the  distress  and  feelings  of isolation  associated  with  the  school  dining  hall.  Ella,  for  example,  recalled a greater degree of flexibility from teachers at primary school in the late 1990s compared  with  those  at  secondary.  Some  teachers  were  prepared  to  adapt meals to accommodate her individual needs, such as when she would accidentally leave her lunchbox at home.

Ella: I've also just remembered there would be weeks when I would say 'sandwiches' [in response to being asked by a teacher if she had brought a packed lunch to school or would be eating a school meal] and then I would forget my lunchbox and I'd have to have dinners, but there was space for them to do that. So it was so fluid that actually even though at the time there was less understanding of neurodiversity and if you didn't have a diagnosis there was no kind of-because I kind of slipped under the radar, and as did my sister, because I was academically able, because I was bright and I did well and they knew  my  family  and  we  had  like  a  nice  family  situation,  and  there  was  never  any consideration of maybe this child is anxious or maybe . . . But as I got older and things got harder and more structured, it definitely showed up more. Primary school was a bit more fluid and a bit easier . . .

Isabelle: Could you just leave as well, like when you're done?

Ella: I think so. Yeah. I think you could. Oh, that's what I was kind of thinking, like even though neurodiversity was less on the radar, the flexibility of school and the kind of the warmth of the school environment and it being very nurturing, I actually found worked with my brain in a way that now I don't think would be the same. Even though teachers are still very nice and kind, the regiment of routines and the-maybe less so in primary actually,  but  definitely  in  secondary  school,  it  was  just  starting  to  get  that  way  in secondary school when I was at school and I think that's why I found it so much harder when I went up to year seven [sixth grade], I found it so much harder than primary. And yeah. It's just like, even though there was no recognition of the fact that I might have

ADHD,  the  certain,  there  were  already  like  access  requirements  in  place,  like  just because. 58

Although Joanne recounted experiencing very harsh responses from teachers in  the  UK  during  her  time  in  reception  (kindergarten)  in  1966-67,  she encountered a more flexible, laid-back approach from teachers after moving to the US at the age of five.

But again, whether it was sensory or food-related, it was a slightly different system in that you  were  meant  to  pay  a  quarter-like  25  cents-for  your  meal  each  day,  but  if  you forgot they gave you an emergency packed lunch, which was a peanut butter and jelly sandwich-jam. I loved peanut butter and jelly sandwiches. I seemed to forget my dinner money a lot [ Isabelle and Joanne laugh ]. I still eat peanut butter. I don't eat the jam so much, but I eat peanut butter every day. 59

As noted previously, Lisa's experience of being given a xylophone to 'bash' at lunchtime  when  attending  primary  school  in  the  1970s  instead  of  being allowed  to  socialize  with  her  peers  can  also  be  understood  in  this  sense. Reflecting back on this experience, Lisa interpreted being given the opportunity to play the xylophone, glockenspiel, or tambourine alone in the hall as an adaptation to her particular sensory needs, and, in hindsight, was something she actually enjoyed.

I  was  only  allowed  to  bash  things!  [ Laughs ]  I  don't  know-I  see  why  now-but  back then. But I loved it! . . . I really enjoyed it because I could sort of focus, could hyperfocus on that sort of thing. 60

In her own professional practice as a teacher of children with additional needs in the 1990s, Joanne developed a range of adaptive techniques to try to make the  experience  of  eating  in  school  more  comfortable  for  neurodivergent students.  Having  appreciated  the  difference  that  a  more  flexible  approach could make, both in her own experience and with her neurodivergent children, Joanne explains,

I've worked with loads of students and sometimes it's just with ARFID, it's playing with the food, and sensing it and smelling it. And even drawing with it or making pizzas and patterns with it. I've done that with my students in school who couldn't eat. They said they were never going to eat cheese, never going to eat that. 'Okay, shall we do a rocket?' And we made a rocket pizza. And they wouldn't eat it then, but they took it home, and the mums said they ate it. You know, it was only, it's-and this was years ago before we had specialists doing it. 61

## Conclusion

Insofar as historians have considered the history of school meals, they have tended to rely on documentary sources that privilege the perspective of the state, school authorities, and teachers. The impact of the school meals service on  individuals  and  groups-particularly  marginalized  communities  such  as

neurodivergent  people-are  rarely  engaged  with  in  such  research.  If  any conclusions  are  drawn  about  the  impact  of  school  meals,  the  service  is shown  as  having  been  broadly  successful  in  imposing  a  system  of  control over the eating and drinking habits of schoolchildren. Responses other than quiet conformity are rarely considered; resistance seems an impossibility.

Oral history offers the potential to provide some insight into the lived experience  of  those  receiving,  preparing,  and  supervising  school  meals in  the  past  and  is  particularly  important  for  understanding  the  experiences  of  marginalized  groups.  As  we  have  seen  from  the  four  interviews with  neurodivergent  narrators  discussed  here,  school  meals  could  elicit feelings  of  fear,  anxiety,  discomfort  and  'sensory  overload.'  In  some cases,  experiences  in  the  school  dining  hall  have  profoundly  influenced narrators'  relationships  with  food  well  into  adulthood  and  have  played a  significant  role  in  their  understandings  of  their  own  neurodivergence. There  were  also  stories  of  resentment  and  resistance-of  teachers  and peers  providing  support  and  understanding,  as  well  as  adaptation  and alternative  spaces  for  the  consumption  of  food  at  school,  away  from  the rigidity,  noise,  and  smells  of  the  formal  dining  hall.

Supporting the telling of these stories required a similar flexibility and preparedness  to  adapt  our  established  oral  history  practices  as  interviewers. We  came  to  the  project  with  the  intention of following a  semistructured,  chronological  approach,  but  soon  realized  that  this did  not  meet  the  needs  of  some  of  our  neurodivergent  narrators.  Just  as the  stories  shared  by  our  narrators  reveal  the  need  for  greater  fluidity and  flexibility  in  the  operation  of  state-run  services  like  school  meals, they  also  demonstrated  the  need  for  greater  care  and  reflection  on  the structure  and  conduct  of  oral  history  interviews  when  researchers  are working  with  neurodivergent  narrators.

## Acknowledgments

We would  like  to  thank  our  narrators  for  their  generous  contributions  to  our  project  and feedback on this article.

## Disclosure Statement

The authors report there are no competing interests to declare.

## Funding

This work was supported by the Economic and Social Research Council.

## ORCID

Isabelle Carter http://orcid.org/0000-0002-7603-4894 Heather Ellis http://orcid.org/0000-0001-8571-0340

## Notes

- 1. This project has been ethically approved by the University of Sheffield's Ethics Review Procedure as administered by the School of Education. The university's Research Ethics Committee  monitors  the  application  and  delivery  of  the  university's  Ethics  Review Procedure across the university. All narrators received an information sheet to provide informed consent. Pseudonyms are used per narrators' requests.
- 2. Linda Shopes,  '  'Insights  and  Oversights':  Reflections  on  the  Documentary  Tradition and the Theoretical Turn in Oral History,' Oral History Review 41, no. 2 (2014): 257-68.
- 3. Lauren,  interviewed  by  Isabelle  Carter,  video  call,  27  September  2023,  School  Meals Service Project SMS2-2023-09-27-a02; Joanne, interviewed by Isabelle Carter, video call, 10  November  2023,  School  Meals  Service  Project  SMS2-2023-11-10-a02;  Ella,  interviewed by Isabelle Carter, Sheffield, UK, 4 October 2023, School Meals Service Project SMS2-2023-10-04-a01; Lisa, interviewed by Isabelle Carter, Leicester, UK, 8 December 2023, School Meals Service Project SMS2-2023-12-08-a01. The format for dates  and  the  file  names  shown  here  (and  in  subsequent  citations  to  interviews,  field notes, or other communication with narrators) are consistent with the style conventions used in other published materials documenting the School Meals Service Project.
- 4. Lorna G. Hamilton and Stephanie Petty, 'Compassionate Pedagogy for Neurodiversity in Higher Education: A Conceptual Analysis,' Frontiers in Psychology 14 (2023): 3.
- 5. Patrick Dwyer, 'The Neurodiversity Approach(es): What Are They and What Do They Mean for Researchers?,' Human Development 66, no. 2 (2022): 77.
- 6. David Henderson and Christine  Bigby,  'Whose  Life  Story  Is  It?  Self-Reflexive  Life  Story Research with People with Intellectual Disabilities,' Oral History Review 44, no. 1 (2017): 41.
- 7. Gurpinder Lalli, 'School Meal Time and Social Learning in England,' Cambridge Journal of Education 50, no. 1 (2020): 57-75.
- 8. Mildred E. Bulkley, The Feeding of School Children (Bell, 1914), 27.
- 9. Catherine  Burke,  'Contested  Desires:  The  Edible  Landscape  of  School,' Paedagogica Historica 41, nos. 4-5 (2005): 574.
- 10.  Burke, 'Contested Desires,' 573, 576.
- 11.  Lauren, written submission to authors via website contact form, 29 Aug 2023, 'Share Your Memories,' The School Meals Project, https://www.theschoolmealsproject.co.uk/ share-your-memories/.
- 12.  Lauren interview, School Meals Service Project SMS2-2023-09-27-a02.
- 13.  'Ethics,'  The  Autistic  Voices  Oral  History  Project,  last  modified  2024,  https://www. autisticvoices.org/ethics. Stimming is a form of self-expression that consists of repetitive movements and mannerisms that help autistic individuals to self-regulate in conducting everyday tasks or in response to particular sensory stimuli.
- 14.  'How Was School? Disabled People's Experiences of Education over the Last Century,' The  Alliance  for  Inclusive  Education,  https://howwasschool.allfie.org.uk. 15 Lisa  interview, School Meals Service Project SMS2-2023-12-08-a01.
- 15.  Lisa interview, School Meals Service Project SMS2-2023-12-08-a01.

- 16.  Alexander Freund, 'Toward an Ethics of Silence: Negotiating Off-the-Record Events and Identity  in  Oral  History,'  in Oral  History  Off  the  Record:  Toward  an  Ethnography  of Practice , ed. Anna Sheftel and Stacey Zembrzycki (Palgrave Macmillan, 2013), 223-38.
- 17.  Kirstie Stage, 'Nothing About Us Without Us,' History Workshop , June 11, 2024, https:// www.historyworkshop.org.uk/disability-history/nothing-about-us-without-us/.
- 18.  Ella interview, School Meals Service Project SMS2-2023-10-04-a01.
- 19.  Joanne interview, School Meals Service Project SMS2-2023-11-10-a02.
- 20.  Holly  Werner-Thomas,  'Sensory  Roadmaps:  How  to  Capture  Sensory  Detail  in  an Interview  and  Why  Doing  So  Has  Exciting  Implications  for  Oral  History,' Oral History Review 49, no. 1 (2022): 97-115; Daniel Kerr, ' 'We Know What the Problem Is': Using Oral History to Develop a Collaborative Analysis of Homelessness from the Bottom Up,' Oral History Review 30, no. 1 (2003): 27-45.
- 21.  Lauren interview, School Meals Service Project SMS2-2023-09-27-a02.
- 22.  Lauren interview, School Meals Service Project SMS2-2023-09-27-a02.
- 23.  Isabelle Carter field notes, 27 September 2023.
- 24.  Ella interview, School Meals Service Project SMS2-2023-10-04-a01.
- 25.  Catherine  D.  Tan,  '  'I'm  a  Normal  Autistic  Person,  Not  an  Abnormal  Neurotypical': Autism Spectrum Disorder Diagnosis as Biographical Illumination,' Social Science and Medicine 197 (2018): 161.
- 26.  Ella interview, School Meals Service Project SMS2-2023-10-04-a01.
- 27.  Lynn Abrams, 'Liberating the Female Self: Epiphanies, Conflict, and Coherence in the Life Stories of Post-War British Women,' Social History 39, no. 1 (2014): 23.
- 28.  Ella interview, School Meals Service Project SMS2-2023-10-04-a01.
- 29.  Rozanna Lilley et al., ' 'Peas in a Pod': Oral History Reflections on Autistic Identity in Family and Community  by  Late Diagnosed -Adults,' Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders 53 (2023): 1156.
- 30.  Isabelle Carter, email message to narrators Lauren, Lisa, Ella, and Joanne, 30 November 2023.
- 31.  Joanne, email response to Isabelle Carter, 3 December 2023.
- 32.  Lauren, email response to Isabelle Carter, 1 December 2023.
- 33.  Ella, email response to Isabelle Carter, 19 December 2023.
- 34.  Joanne, email response to Isabelle Carter, 3 December 2023; Lauren, email response to Isabelle Carter, 1 December 2023.
- 35.  Abrams, 'Liberating the Female Self,' 23.
- 36.  Burke, 'Contested Desires,' 571.
- 37.  Alain Corbin, 'Charting the Cultural History of the Senses,' in Empire of the Senses: The Sensual Culture Reader , ed. David Howes (Routledge, 2005), 128-42.
- 38.  C. G. Stillman and R. Castle Cleary, The Modern School (Architectural Press, 1949), 120.
- 39.  Joanne interview, School Meals Service Project SMS2-2023-11-10-a02.
- 40.  Joanne interview, School Meals Service Project SMS2-2023-11-10-a02.
- 41.  Joanne interview, School Meals Service Project SMS2-2023-11-10-a02.
- 42.  Ella interview, School Meals Service Project SMS2-2023-10-04-a01.
- 43.  Ella interview, School Meals Service Project SMS2-2023-10-04-a01.
- 44.  Lalli, 'School Meal Time and Social Learning in England.'
- 45.  Ella interview, School Meals Service Project SMS2-2023-10-04-a01.
- 46.  Joanne interview, School Meals Service Project SMS2-2023-11-10-a02.
- 47.  Joanne interview, School Meals Service Project SMS2-2023-11-10-a02.
- 48.  Lauren interview, School Meals Service Project SMS2-2023-09-27-a02.
- 49.  Lauren interview, School Meals Service Project SMS2-2023-09-27-a02.
- 50.  Lauren interview, School Meals Service Project SMS2-2023-09-27-a02.

- 51.  Joanne interview, School Meals Service Project SMS2-2023-11-10-a02.
- 52.  Lauren interview, School Meals Service Project SMS2-2023-09-27-a02.
- 53.  Joanne interview, School Meals Service Project SMS2-2023-11-10-a02.
- 54.  Joanne interview, School Meals Service Project SMS2-2023-11-10-a02.
- 55.  Ella interview, School Meals Service Project SMS2-2023-10-04-a01.
- 56.  Joanne interview, School Meals Service Project SMS2-2023-11-10-a02.
- 57.  Lauren interview, School Meals Service Project SMS2-2023-09-27-a02.
- 58.  Ella interview, School Meals Service Project SMS2-2023-10-04-a01.
- 59.  Joanne interview, School Meals Service Project SMS2-2023-11-10-a02.
- 60.  Lisa interview, School Meals Service Project SMS2-2023-12-08-a01.
- 61.  Joanne interview, School Meals Service Project SMS2-2023-11-10-a02.

Isabelle  Carter is an  assistant  professor  in  modern  British  history  in  the  School  of History  and  Cultures  at  the  University  of  Birmingham,  UK.  She  is  an  oral  historian with  research  interests  in  place-based  inequalities.  This  work  stems  from  her  role  as research  associate  on  a  project  funded  by  the  UK's  Economic  and  Social  Research Council  (ESRC)  titled  The  School  Meals  Service:  Past,  Present-and  Future?  (grant number  ES/X000737/1).

Heather Ellis is an associate professor in the School of Education at the University of Sheffield, UK. She is a historian of education with research interests in the history of childhood and the lived experience of the welfare state. She is co-investigator on a project funded by the UK's Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC) titled The School Meals Service: Past, Presentand Future? (grant number ES/X000737/1).