JUNE 2020   VOLUME 22   NUMBER 1   Health and Human Rights Journal1 
Health and Human Rights JournalHHr
HHR_final_logo_alone.indd   1 10/19/15   10:53 AMAudrey Chapman, PhD, is Healey Professor of Medical Ethics, UConn School of Medicine, USA. 
Carmel Williams, PhD, is Executive Editor, Health and Human Rights Journal, Boston, USA.
Julie Hannah is Co-Director of the International Centre on Human Rights and Drug Policy and a member of the Human Rights Centre, 
University of Essex, UK.
Dainius Pūras, MD, Clinic of Psychiatry, Vilnius University, Lithuania, is the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the right of everyone to the 
enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of health.
Please address correspondence to Audrey Chapman. Email: achapman@uchc.edu.
Competing interests: None declared.
Copyright © 2020 Chapman, Williams, Hannah, and Pūras. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons 
Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/), which permits unrestricted non-commercial use, 
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author and source are credited.editorial
Reimagining the Mental Health Paradigm for Our 
Collective Well-Being 
audrey chapman, carmel williams, julie hannah, and dainius pūras
When we planned the special section of this issue and distributed our call for papers, we wanted to present 
a collection that would reflect our view that not only is there is no health without mental health, but there 
is no mental health without human rights. We were hopeful that papers from around the world would 
illustrate human rights-based approaches to easing mental distress, critique the status quo in how we un -
derstand and respond to mental health, and illuminate the scale of suffering that arises from our unequal, 
racist, discriminatory, and violent world. The issue was timed to coincide with guest editor Dainius Pūras’s 
completion of his second and final term as United Nations (UN) Special Rapporteur on the right to health. 
Mental health has been a special focus of his mandate, resulting in several reports on the subject, and he 
also contributed to the two UN resolutions affirming mental health as a human right.1 In his most recent 
report to the UN General Assembly and in his final report to the Human Rights Council, P ūras examines 
the social determinants of mental health and calls for discussions and actions that are “rights-based, ho -
listic and rooted in the lived experience of those left furthest behind by harmful sociopolitical systems, 
institutions and practices.”2 Of great relevance now to our post-pandemic world, he stresses that these 
discussions are needed at global, regional, and national levels to better understand the collective failures of 
the status quo in mental health systems. 
Indeed, one of the critically important lessons the world has learned in 2020 is how important global 
conversations, social justice activism, and community cooperation are. COVID-19 has cruelly demonstrat -
ed our interconnectedness, our shared humanity, and our shared suffering. It has equally illuminated the 
injustice of our economic and political systems and the cruelty of the inequality and systemic discrimina -
tion they have produced. The UN and many others are also acknowledging the long-lasting impact that the 
pandemic will have on our mental well-being.3

a. chapman, c. williams, j. hannah, and d. pūras / editorial, Mental Health and Human Rights, 1-62JUNE 2020   VOLUME 22   NUMBER 1   Health and Human Rights JournalSo the timeliness of this special section could 
not be more appropriate. We urgently need these 
conversations to address the inter-relatedness 
of human rights and to consider the real causes 
of mental distress. The pandemic sadly provides 
ample evidence of human rights failings that lead 
to unequal and unfair health outcomes. Discrim -
ination, disempowerment, and social exclusion are 
producing excessive COVID-19 death rates in racial 
and ethnic minority populations across the world; 
the same patterns will be seen in the mental distress 
caused by the pandemic. Likewise, it is essential to 
develop an evidence base of the disastrous harms 
created by COVID-19 public health policies—po -
litical choices that have caused unimaginable 
suffering among society’s most marginal, includ -
ing (but not limited to) the elderly, those who are 
homeless, people detained in prisons, and people 
living in psychiatric facilities and institutions and 
care homes. Technical solutions being proposed to 
these structural problems and policy harms—such 
as vaccines, telemedicine, and apps for well-be -
ing—are woefully inadequate.
Right now, there is both an urgency and an 
opportunity to change the way mental health 
services are framed, governed, and delivered, 
worldwide. We anticipate that the papers in this is -
sue will be useful for policy makers and health and 
social workers who want to embed human rights 
and adopt right to health approaches to the changes 
that must take place in mental health. One of the 
aims of this special section is to identify alterna -
tive mental health approaches to the reductionist 
biomedical paradigm that has contributed to the 
exclusion, neglect, coercion, and abuse of people 
with intellectual, cognitive, and psychosocial dis -
abilities, and those who deviate from prevailing 
cultural, social, and political norms. In our call for 
papers, we wrote that the status quo, preoccupied 
with excessive biomedical interventions, including 
psychotropic medications and non-consensual 
measures, is no longer defensible. 
The pandemic presents not just the opportu -
nity but the necessity of providing a different form 
of care and support for the millions of people who 
are now suffering its consequences. Given the an -ticipated need for mental health support, there is no 
possible way that dominant models can cope with, 
let alone address, the demand. The pandemic is 
providing a profound illustration of interconnected 
determinants of mental health: the impact of loss of 
freedoms, for example, on people having to stay at 
home when that home may be violent; the impact of 
loss of employment on people who are already poor, 
living on minimum wages without health insur -
ance and perhaps in crowded homes; the impact of 
risk exposure to COVID-19 on health workers and 
other “essential workers” who are from minority 
groups and suffer discrimination in the workplace 
and are given no option but to work; the loss of ac -
cess to nutrition for the school children whose most 
nutritious meal was provided by their school. 
A rights-based approach to mitigating the 
mental health consequences of a global health 
and economic crisis responds to the ways these 
hardships intersect, ensuring that people who lose 
their income and others in financially precarious 
positions are protected by government support 
packages, that people do not lose their homes, 
and that all social rights are protected. These and 
similar measures are often effective at protecting 
mental health, and especially in today’s COVID-19 
environment.
Civil society, particularly movements led by 
users and former users of mental health services 
and organizations of persons with disabilities, 
have brought attention to the failures of tradi -
tional mental health services to meet their needs 
and secure their rights. They have challenged the 
drivers of human rights violations, developed 
alternative treatment approaches, and recrafted a 
new narrative for mental health. This has resulted 
in a paradigm shift, including an evolving human 
rights framework in mental health. The adoption 
of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities (CRPD) in 2006 laid the foundation for 
that paradigm shift, with the aim of leaving behind 
the legacy of human rights violations in mental 
health services.
The right to the highest attainable standard 
of health has much to contribute to advancing this 
shift and provides a framework for the full reali -

a. chapman, c. williams, j. hannah, and d. pūras / editorial, Mental Health and Human Rights, 1-6   JUNE 2020   VOLUME 22   NUMBER 1   Health and Human Rights Journal3zation of the right of everyone to mental health. 
But progress has been slow. Effective, acceptable, 
and scalable treatment alternatives remain on the 
periphery of health care systems, deinstitution -
alization has stalled, and the insufficient mental 
health investment continues to be focused predom -
inantly on a biomedical model, despite increasing 
global recognition that mental health is a human 
development imperative .
We hope that readers find this collection of pa -
pers useful. It demonstrates the role of human rights 
as envisaged by people using mental health services, 
by people providing services, and by a broad move -
ment seeking to shift the entire paradigm of mental 
health away from focusing on biology and brains to 
focusing on relationships and other social determi -
nants of health. Mental health services cannot be 
transformed and cannot satisfy the need for them 
without directing attention and funding toward the 
structural causes of poor mental health and distress. 
Rights-based and population-based approaches to 
mental health promotion are those that have moved 
health systems beyond individualized responses 
toward action on a range of structural barriers and 
inequalities (social determinants) that negatively 
affect mental health.  
Inadequacies of the biomedical paradigm
The first cluster of papers documents some of the 
inadequacies of the current reductionist psychiat -
ric biomedical paradigm. This approach to mental 
health is preoccupied with excessive biomedical 
interventions, including psychotropic medications 
and reliance on non-consensual measures that have 
contributed to the exclusion, neglect, coercion, and 
abuse of people with intellectual, cognitive, and 
psychosocial disabilities. In their paper, Linda Steele 
and colleagues draw on data from focus groups and 
interviews with people living with dementia, care 
partners, aged care workers, and lawyers and advo -
cates to identify the daily facilitators that contribute 
to the confinement of people with dementia in 
Australian care homes. They argue that micro-level 
interrelated factors contribute to human rights 
abuses of people living with dementia by limiting their freedom of movement and community access. 
Petr Winkler and colleagues report on a nation -
wide study in which multidisciplinary teams using 
the World Health Organization’s QualityRights 
toolkit conducted interviews, analyzed internal 
documents, and observed practices to evaluate the 
quality of care in Czech psychiatric hospitals. The 
study concluded that none of the CRPD articles 
was fully adhered to in these hospitals and that sub -
stantial investments are required to reach a more 
adequate adherence to the CRPD. 
Other papers explore the causes of inadequa -
cies in mental health services. Faraaz Mahomed 
focuses on the underprioritization and under -
funding of mental health because it is a neglected 
priority of policy makers and funders at the nation -
al and international levels. He also cautions that as 
policy makers seek to “scale up” mental health and 
reduce “treatment gaps” in the wake of COVID-19, 
there is a need to ensure that increased funding 
does not replicate the current overemphasis on the 
biomedical model. 
Jenifer Wogen and Maria Teresa Restrepo 
discuss the stigmatization, discrimination, and 
negative stereotypes that individuals with men -
tal health problems, including those with drug 
dependence, suffer and how stigma affects their 
treatment and health care. They look at the roles 
played by policy change and the decriminalization 
of drugs in addressing and reducing stigma, and 
improving mental health. Lisa Cosgrove and Allen 
Shaughnessy are critical of industry’s influence on 
psychiatry, for it has contributed to the current 
medical model that overemphasizes biomedical 
treatments and underappreciates the social and 
psychosocial determinants of health and the need 
for population-based health promotion. Their pa -
per argues that a robust rights-based approach to 
mental health is needed to overcome the manipu -
lative effects of commercial interests in the mental 
health field.
Learning from rights-based approaches
Another cluster of papers considers new approach -
es that are more consistent with human rights. A

a. chapman, c. williams, j. hannah, and d. pūras / editorial, Mental Health and Human Rights, 1-64JUNE 2020   VOLUME 22   NUMBER 1   Health and Human Rights Journalperspective contributed by Michelle Funk and 
Natalie Drew Bold introduces the World Health 
Organization’s QualityRights initiative, and it is 
included in our special section as a useful resource 
for practitioners. This approach and framework for 
promoting mental health systems, services, and 
practices prioritizes respect for human rights con -
sistent with the CRPD, and its use is demonstrated 
in the paper by Winkler and colleagues. Lucas 
Trout and Lisa Wexler’s paper on youth suicide in 
indigenous Arctic communities identifies suicide 
as psychogenic on the one hand and as an index of 
social suffering on the other. The paper draws on 
structured interviews and ethnographic work with 
health professionals in the Alaskan Arctic to ex -
amine the inadequacies of the health systems that 
currently shape clinicians’ practices of care. They 
recommend linking caregiving to the health and 
social equity agenda of social medicine in order to 
operationalize commitments to health as a human 
right. Ursula Read and colleagues draw on ethno -
graphic and participatory research in urban and 
rural sites in Ghana to underscore the importance 
of social and economic rights, especially the right 
to work, in protecting the rights of persons with 
mental illness. The paper evaluates the challenges of 
implementing mental health, disability, and labor 
legislation and discusses the potential of practices 
of solidarity and social activism to promote the 
rights of people with mental illness.
Petr Stastny and colleagues, including guest 
editors Julie Hannah and Dainius Pūras, explore 
critical elements of rights-based support for indi -
viduals undergoing serious mental health crises. 
The paper proposes a set of nine critical elements 
underpinned by human rights principles to sup -
port a person experiencing significant emotional 
distress related to mental health problems of psy -
chosocial disabilities. They urge that these nine 
elements be used as building blocks for designing 
services and systems that promote effective rights-
based care and support. Despite the frequency of 
calls for a human rights-based approach to mental 
health, there are few documented attempts to use 
such approaches, nor assessments of their degrees 
of success. We therefore welcome Emma Broberg and her colleagues’ evaluation of a pilot study of 
their human rights-based approach to psychiatry 
in Gothenburg, Sweden. They discuss the human 
rights principles used and are open about difficul -
ties they encountered, such as realizing meaningful 
participation and challenging the hierarchies of dif -
ferent professions within care. Their paper reflects 
on ways to make human rights-based methods 
sustainable in a large organization. 
New paradigms promoting reform
Civil society movements led by persons with 
disabilities have developed alternative treatment 
approaches and, by doing so, have contributed to 
a paradigm shift. The Hearing Voices Movement, 
an international grassroots movement that aims 
to shift public and professional attitudes toward 
experiences such as hearing voices and seeing 
visions—which are generally associated with psy -
chosis—is one such example. Rory Neirin Higgs’s 
paper argues that incorporating this perspective 
into mental health practice and policy has the 
potential to foster greater understanding and re -
spect for consumers and survivors diagnosed with 
psychosis, while opening up valuable avenues for 
future research.
The reform agenda is also promoted by recog -
nizing the importance of traditional health systems 
and cultures for the well-being of local communi -
ties—something often overlooked in contemporary 
health systems and models of mental health care. 
José Carlos Bouso and Constanza Sánchez -Avilés 
discuss the need for the global mental health move -
ment to recognize the role of traditional medicines 
and healers, particularly in Global South countries 
where traditional healers are far more numerous 
than mental health workers and constitute the 
main health resource for local populations. 
Some papers in this section describe the dif -
ficulties inherent in adopting new models more 
consistent with human rights. Jasna Russo and 
Stephanie Wooley examine the implications of 
human rights approaches that lack a theoretical 
framework when trying to counteract the hege -
mony of the biomedical model of mental illness.

a. chapman, c. williams, j. hannah, and d. pūras / editorial, Mental Health and Human Rights, 1-6   JUNE 2020   VOLUME 22   NUMBER 1   Health and Human Rights Journal5They suggest that the task of implementing the 
CRPD requires not just reforming psychiatry but 
rather “an entirely different approach to madness 
and distress” and point to the indispensability of 
first-person knowledge in developing and owning 
a broader agenda for change. Laura Davidson ad -
dresses the difficulties of trying to adopt a complete 
prohibition on the use of coercion, consistent with 
the requirements of the CRPD. She proposes the 
need for interim mental health legislation that will 
facilitate a move toward a complete ban on psychi -
atric coercion. She also urges the UN committee 
overseeing the CRPD to issue a general comment 
providing “reluctant permission” for the progres -
sive realization of respect for articles 12 and 14 of 
the CRPD. Article 12 recognizes the equal rights of 
persons with disabilities before the law and their 
right to exercise this legal capacity. Article 14 sets 
forth the rights of persons with disabilities not to 
be deprived of their liberty and security.  
Finally, Bram Wispelwey and Yasser Abu 
Jamei’s paper on the Great March of Return docu -
ments the ways in which the Gaza mass resistance 
movement protesting the Israeli blockade provides 
an opportunity to develop an understanding of the 
psychosocial consequences of community orga -
nizing and mass resistance. They comment on the 
need for holistic mental and physical health care 
for community members affected by the events of 
the Great March of Return and the ongoing dire 
situation in Gaza.
Conclusion
The 15 papers in this special section give us reason 
for cautious optimism. Optimism in that globally, 
mental health is emerging slowly from a Dickensian 
past, tarnished with human rights violations, to a 
more enlightened era where human dignity, equal -
ity and justice, and empowerment are increasingly 
central to reform efforts and advocacy. Cautious 
and vigilant we must remain as calls for mental 
health reform and expansion become live and 
viable political issues, thanks in part to the global 
mental health movement. This cautious optimism 
is equally critical today, as the demands of social justice movements, including Black Lives Matter, 
to decarcerate and divest from corrupt criminal 
justice systems are finally (and rightfully) receiving 
political attention. While such calls to decarcerate 
and reinvest public spending toward community 
services, including mental health, are an essential 
response to racist and coercive criminal justice 
systems, it is vital to remember that mental health 
systems around the world emerged from and retain 
that same racist and coercive patina. 
While COVID-19 didn’t create inequalities 
or racism, much like natural disasters and disease 
outbreaks before it (such as Ebola and HIV), it has 
exposed the toxic foundations and institutions of 
our society: racist, classist, sexist, and intolerant. 
This legacy, which places our collective well-being 
under strain every day, has produced an infra -
structure of exclusion, coercion, and incarceration 
that breeds systemic and widespread human rights 
violations. This special section aims to illuminate 
the human rights dimensions of this context—and 
though we have fallen short of exposing more ex -
plicitly the racial and gender dimensions, we hope 
that this is merely the beginning of an ongoing 
scholarly conversation. 
In the wake of COVID-19 and the remarkable 
worldwide community activism of Black Lives 
Matter, questions are emerging about how to decol -
onize our broken systems and reimagine something 
different. Mental health is part of that discussion 
and must be part of a reimagined future. The global 
debates around mental health—including the often 
competing visions of activists, governments, Big 
Pharma, psychiatry, and persons with lived expe -
rience—will shape our post-pandemic future in 
many ways. As the editors of this special section, we 
believe that these debates could not come at a more 
important time.  All governments are presently 
having to design and implement policies to support 
people, especially poor and marginalized people, 
who have suffered huge personal and financial loss -
es. Here is their chance to reduce the mental health 
distress arising in an unfair world. We believe that 
the human rights lessons from the papers in this 
special section offer much guidance.

a. chapman, c. williams, j. hannah, and d. pūras / editorial, Mental Health and Human Rights, 1-66JUNE 2020   VOLUME 22   NUMBER 1   Health and Human Rights JournalReferences
1. See, for example, D. Pūras, Report of the UN Special 
Rapporteur on the Right of Everyone to the Enjoyment of 
the Highest Attainable Standard of Physical and Mental 
Health, UN Doc. A/HRC/35/21 (2017); D. Pūras, Interim 
Report of the UN Special Rapporteur on the Right of Ev -
eryone to the Enjoyment of the Highest Attainable Standard 
of Physical and Mental Health, UN Doc. A/73/216 (2018); D. 
Pūras, Report of the UN Special Rapporteur on the Right of 
Everyone to the Enjoyment of the Highest Attainable Stan -
dard of Physical and Mental Health, UN Doc. A/HRC/41/34 
(2019); Human Rights Council, Res. 32/18, UN Doc. A/HRC/
RES/32/18 (2016); Human Rights Council, Res. 36/25, UN 
Doc. A/HRC/36/25 (2017). 
2. See D. Pūras, Report of the UN Special Rapporteur on 
the Right of Everyone to the Enjoyment of the Highest At -
tainable Standard of Physical and Mental Health, UN Doc. 
A/HRC/44/48 (2020). 
3. “UN leads call to protect most vulnerable from 
mental health crisis during and after COVID-19,” UN 
News  (May 14, 2020). Available at https://news.un.org/en/
story/2020/05/1063882; D. Pūras, “COVID-19 and mental 
health: Challenges ahead demand changes,” Health and 
Human Rights Journal (blog) (May 14, 2020). Available at 
https://www.hhrjournal.org/2020/05/covid-19-and-mental-
health-challenges-ahead-demand-changes.