The ethics of knowledge production –
Paciﬁc challenges
Rosemary Du Plessis and Peggy Fairbairn-Dunlop
Introduction
People from all over the
Paciﬁc1came to talk about
ethical principles relating to
the preservation, production,
exchange and use of knowl-edge at the Regional Paciﬁc
Ethics of Knowledge Produc-
tion Workshop in Apia (13–
15 November 2007). This
workshop was the third in a
series of UNESCO meetings
between 2005 and 2007that encouraged Paciﬁc-wide
debate on the Universal
Declaration on Bioethics and
Human Rights (UDBHR)
(UNESCO 2005)
2and discus-
sion of ethics-related issues
more generally. The articlesin this Paciﬁc section of the
ISSJ on global knowledges
are a sample of the positions
debated and the insights gen-
erated at that workshop. They
illustrate the connections and
differences among Paciﬁcpeoples about issues relating
to the ethics of science –
including fundamental ques-
tions about what counts as knowledge,
how knowledge is produced and shared,
and who beneﬁts. They also demonstrate how
Paciﬁc people are taking responsibility for asses-sing the relevance of the UDBHR in the
Paciﬁc, articulating indigenous ethical principles,identifying the research-
related questions they
consider a priority anddetermining strategies for
ethical research practice.
These UNESCO meet-
ings have increased public
discussion on ethics-related
issues in the Paciﬁc, made
relevant research in this ﬁeldavailable and widened the
range of stakeholders who
are now engaging in ethics-
related discussions from
many Paciﬁc countries, inc-luding non-governmental
organisations, policy ana-
lysts and researchers. How-
ever, of most signiﬁcance
has been the framing by
Paciﬁc people of Paciﬁc
ethical issues and the waysin which they might be
addressed. Discussion has
moved from a few small
pockets of debate, largely
in academic circles, to
include conversations about
the ethics of research in thenatural and social sciences
among people from a wide
range of Paciﬁc states, including a number of
community groups. The outcome has been a
more intensive sharing of knowledge as well as a
better understanding of the ethical dilemmas
generated by the increasing pace of technologicaldevelopment.Rosemary Du Plessis is an Associate Professor in
Sociology at the University of Canterbury,Christchurch, New Zealand and a member of
New Zealand National Commission for UNESCO.
She was involved in organising both the Ethics of
Knowledge Production Conference at Otago Uni-
versity in 2006 and the Regional Paciﬁc Ethics ofKnowledge Production Workshop at the Tofama-
mao Centre in Apia in 2007. She has a strong
interest in the politics of knowledge and publicengagement with the social, ethical and cultural
issues associated with new technologies. With
Richard Hindmarsh she has recently edited aspecial edition of New Genetics and Society 27 (3),
which analyses trajectories in life sciences govern-
ance in Australasia. Born in the UK, she grew up in
South Africa and has lived in New Zealand for
most of her life.Email: rosemary.duplessis@canterbury.ac.nz
Peggy Fairbairn-Dunlop is Associate Professor
and Inaugural Director of the Vaaomanu Pasiﬁka(Paciﬁc and Samoa Programme) at Victoria
University, Wellington, New Zealand. Before
taking up this post in 2006 Peggy was Social and
Human Sciences Adviser at the Paciﬁc UNESCO
ofﬁce (Apia) and coordinated Paciﬁc regionalteams to the ﬁrst Asia–Paciﬁc Bioethics Meeting
(Bangkok 2005) and the Ethics of Knowledge
Production Workshop at Otago University (Feb-ruary 2006). In New Zealand she continues
working with the New Zealand National Com-
mission for UNESCO on these issues and Toi te
Taiao, the Bioethics Council, and was conference
chair for the UNESCO Regional Paciﬁc Ethics ofKnowledge Production meeting in Apia (Novem-
ber 2007). She is Samoan.
Email: fairdun2@xtra.co.nz
ISSJ 195rUNESCO 2009. Published by Blackwell Publishing Ltd., 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DK, UK and 350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA.

Four Paciﬁc participants attended the
Asia–Paciﬁc Ethics Forum in Bangkok (11–15
September 2005). They represented the Republic
of the Marshall Islands, Fiji and Samoa and
included tertiary educators, community
researchers and policy-makers. At this forum,
participants shared their own Paciﬁc-groundedviews with participants from Asia and noted
some commonalities, especially in relation to
spirituality. In addition, the Paciﬁc team drew
attention to potential tensions between what
they described as the generic or universal
approach of the UDBHR and Paciﬁc ethics.
They questioned how a universal declarationcould reﬂect Paciﬁc realities, aspirations and
beliefs. They looked critically at the predomi-
nantly individual rights framework of the
UDBHR and noted its incompatibility with
Paciﬁc ideals of collective rights. These and
other questions informed the organisation of the
Paciﬁc section of the Ethics of KnowledgeProduction Conference that was organised by
the New Zealand National Commission for
UNESCO at Otago University, Dunedin (12–
14 February 2006).
The six delegates to this meeting from
Paciﬁc states comprised policy-makers, repre-
sentatives of non-governmental organisations,academics and research practitioners. They
included the UNESCO chair from the Univer-
sity of the South Paciﬁc in Suva, the chair of the
International Council for Paciﬁc Research
located at the National University of Samoa, arepresentative of the regional non-governmental
organisation, the Paciﬁc Islands Association of
NGOs, and community agencies. New Zealand-
based Paciﬁc academics and community
researchers also participated and, along with
M/C22aori researchers, shared their research jour-
neys and ethical challenges. Organisations suchas the New Zealand Health Research Council
andToi Te Taiao , the Bioethics Council, which
until 2009 advised the government on the
cultural, ethical and spiritual aspects of bio-
technologies, participated in this event, along-
side New Zealand representatives of the
International Bioethics Committee and theWorld Commission on the Ethics of Scientiﬁc
Knowledge and Technology.
Justice Michael Kirby, who had chaired the
expert panel on the UDBHR, provided the
keynote address at the Dunedin Conference, andboth M /C22aori and Paciﬁc delegates raised ques-
tions about its focus on individual rights and the
relative neglect of the rights of communities or
collectivities.
3The issues raised were very similar
to the concerns of Paciﬁc delegates to the
Bangkok Conference in 2005. Paciﬁc delegates
agreed that a standard-setting mechanism wasneeded to inform ethical research practice in the
Paciﬁc, but they considered that it needed to
incorporate Paciﬁc values, beliefs and practices.
Conference participants resolved that a follow-
up meeting should be held that would focus
speciﬁcally on Paciﬁc ethics. Funding for Paciﬁc
representation at this event was secured throughthe UNESCO Participation Programme by
the New Zealand National Commission for
UNESCO and the UNESCO ofﬁce for the
Paciﬁc in Apia, and a pan-Paciﬁc organising
committee worked together to organise the
Regional Paciﬁc Ethics of Knowledge Produc-
tion Workshop in November 2007. This meetingwas opened by Dame Silvia Cartwright, former
Governor-General of New Zealand and chair of
the National Commission for UNESCO in New
Zealand, who introduced the keynote speaker,
Tui Atua Tupua Tamasese Ta’isi Eﬁ, the Head
of the Independent State of Samoa (Mila-
Schaaf, 2008).
Paciﬁc ethics: key themes
A number of cross-cutting and inter-relatedthemes emerged in these debates, which set
the context for this collection of articles and the
platform for continuing Paciﬁc debate about theethics of science, social science research proto-
cols and bioethics. Ethics systems and processes
were, and still are, central to every aspect of the
life of Paciﬁc indigenous communities. Although
not documented, and long disregarded in the
privileging of western ideas about ethical prac-
tice in the post-contact period, Paciﬁc ethicsprocesses integrate epistemological, pedagogical
and methodological considerations. For Paciﬁc
people, as these articles illustrate, each daily life
event is seen through a lens of ethical values,
mores and codes of conduct that have developed
over many years, while remaining responsive to
changing times. The indigenous knowledgesystems of the Paciﬁc incorporate technical
insights and detailed observations of natural,110 Rosemary Du Plessis and Peggy Fairbairn-Dunlop
rUNESCO 2009.

social and spiritual phenomena, which in turn
are used to validate what is important in life –
what sustains people and what connects them to
particular places and spaces, and is crucial to
their identity. Spirituality, or the sacred, is
fundamental – people are the carriers of the
lifeblood of future generations and have com-plex responsibilities to their physical environ-
ment and other living things. In Paciﬁc
communities, knowledge is communally made,
sanctioned, shared and used with the aim of
achieving the good life for all members –
however this is deﬁned.
Discussions about Paciﬁc knowledge sys-
tems have highlighted a growing understanding
that erosion of this knowledge is partly, but not
only, due to the demise of community elders.
Agreement about the urgent need to research
and document this knowledge before more is lost
has given rise to further questions about what
knowledge should or could be passed on, towhom and how this should be done. In tradi-
tional times knowledge was passed on from
elders to youth in daily life events, such as
ﬁshing, weaving, communal ventures and meet-
ings of the extended family. The whole commu-
nity was engaged in the act of making knowledge
and deﬁning goals. These were not taught in aformal school curriculum nor were the principles
for correct action incorporated in formal legisla-
tion. Other, more recent, questions (and fears),
such as the possible downstream beneﬁts and the
constraints to documenting and sharing thesetypes of knowledge, were also discussed by the
participants at the Regional Paciﬁc Ethics of
Knowledge Production Workshop.
Documenting the features of indigenous
knowledge systems was not seen to be an easy
task, given that each nation has its own culture
and languages and their histories of contact withnon-Paciﬁc peoples are varied. The inﬂuence of
Christianity received attention, and contributors
analysed how, in some cases, Christian belief
systems appeared to merge seamlessly with the
customary ways, but in other times and places
were diametrically opposed to indigenous prac-
tices. While acknowledging commonalities ofexperience and the beneﬁts of joint enterprises,
the participants emphasised that ethics pro-
grammes must be community-driven and
nation-driven and owned, and allowed to evolve
in the Paciﬁc way, as in the past. Further, astrong case was made that academic research
could provide a framework for community-
based discussion, as would the experiences of
M/C22aori in Aotearoa New Zealand, and the
innovation of groups such as the Vanuatu
Cultural Centre which, in collaboration with
community members, has devised and imple-mented a national research policy aimed at
ensuring that ethical protocols are followed in
the conduct of research, both by ni-Vanuatu and
other external agencies.
Delegates at the Regional Paciﬁc Ethics of
Knowledge Production Workshop recognised
that a negotiated Paciﬁc ethics framework andmechanism for its implementation (at regional,
national and community levels) is vital, given the
compelling evidence that the absence of such a
mechanism has made the Paciﬁc vulnerable to
unethical research practices, including acts of
biopiracy. At the same time, such a framework
must be Paciﬁc in philosophy and locallygrounded in context and take account of the
Paciﬁc experience, including the diversity of
social, economic and physical, spiritual and
cultural contexts in Paciﬁc Small Island Devel-
oping States (SIDS). As Peggy Fairbairn-
Dunlop (2006) has stated: ‘‘The Paciﬁc challenge
is to develop a post colonial ethics discoursewhich is Paciﬁc in philosophy and locally
grounded in context’’. A Paciﬁc set of ethical
principles and standards was seen to be invalu-
able in the context of rapidly developing
biotechnologies. The identiﬁcation of ethicalstandards would serve as a reminder to Paciﬁc
people of their own guiding principles. It would
also foster debate on the ethics of science and
technology, contribute to new learning among
communities and pathways to informed choice,
encourage the review and documentation of
Paciﬁc ethics, paradigms and processes, con-tribute to the global research community and
protect Paciﬁc SIDS against unethical practices
by external as well as national agencies.
The middle ground, a
negotiated space and
syncretic relationships
In the articles that follow the authors argue that
indigenous, people-based systems of knowledgeThe ethics of knowledge production: Paciﬁc challenges 111
rUNESCO 2009.

have a valid place in the global pool of human
knowledge. Often resisting the binary thinking
that opposes tradition and modernity, religion
and science and indigenous and western thinking
and practices, these articles explore what they
describe as the middle ground, a negotiated
space or a syncretic relationship betweenindigenous thinking and western science. In the
process they articulate the challenges that Paciﬁc
people encounter in their relationship with
positivist science and the challenges that Paciﬁc
ethical principles and practices pose for those
outside the Paciﬁc.
Tui Atua Tupua Tamasese Ta’isi Eﬁ out-
lines the importance of the Samoan concepts of
tapu (the sacred) and tofa sa’ili (the search for
wisdom) in identifying what might constitute
ethical practices with respect to bioethical
research and, more generally, ethical research
practice in this context. Drawing on the work of
Hans Kung (2007) he argues that it is possible toﬁnd a middle ground between ideas and
practices grounded in religion, the spiritual, the
sacred and science. Against the background of
an exploration of different facets of the Samoan
concept of tapu, which encompasses the sacred-
ness of the origins of all things as well as the
afﬁnity between people, the cosmos, and ani-mate and inanimate earthly phenomena, Tui
Atua Tupua Tamasese Ta’isi Eﬁ envisages a
Paciﬁc bioethics that involves God-chasing or
reaching out for wisdom. This search for
knowledge would be grounded in a sense ofconnectedness to all things, the awareness of
people’s responsibilities as protectors of the
earth, attention to the sacred essence of all
things and a desire for increased understanding
without ever presuming to know God.
According to Tui Atua Tupua Tamasese
Ta’isi Eﬁ, the ethics underpinning this pursuit ofknowledge would involve collective decision-
making because Samoan thinking is always
relational. It involves recognition of human
vulnerability, humility and a strong sense of
the ‘‘equation and afﬁnity between all things,
animate and inanimate, living and dead’’. He
suggests that knowledge about the beginning ofall things is inaccessible via either religion or
science but both share a commitment to the
passionate pursuit of truth and meaning. A
Samoan approach to both requires attention to
tapu or the sacred aspects of relatedness.The challenges of negotiating the relation-
ship between indigenous and western knowledge
systems are also explored by Maui Hudson in his
consideration of issues for M /C22aori relating to the
exercise of collective rights in the ethical review
of research. He argues that collective consent
does not entail the end of individual consentprocesses but is a way of assessing the implica-
tions of research for a community. Like many
Paciﬁc researchers, Hudson is critical of inter-
national ethical codes that neglect local social
constructs, in particular, the need for commu-
nity input into the assessment of the ethical
features of research projects. His interest is inethicality – ‘‘the situated, speciﬁc and experi-
mental ethics talk of citizens’’. This ethicality, or
practice of ethical principles, is not ﬁxed by
tradition in indigenous communities, but is
context-speciﬁc and time-speciﬁc, changing in
response to new issues and controversies, while
also sustained by key concepts, such as theconcept of tapu. He argues that determining
ethical research practice may involve the devel-
opment of a negotiated space – a space for
deliberation about what will count as knowledge
that is informed by several knowledge systems,
including science and indigenous knowledge.
While recognising that different cultures(including those of the Paciﬁc) often share
ethical principles, he argues for attention to the
speciﬁcs of the local application of those
principles and in this respect resists the uni-
versalism of the UNESCO UDBHR.
Karlo Mila-Schaaf extends discussion of
the concept of negotiated space by focusing
attention on the development of the ‘‘Guidelines
on Paciﬁc health research’’ by the Health
Research Council of New Zealand (2005). At
the core of Mila-Schaaf’s article is the Paciﬁc
concept of vaor the space between people – ‘‘the
space that connects rather than separates’’. It is
only by nurturing vathat relationships among
people and between them and everything else
can be sustained. Mila-Schaaf explores the way
the Paciﬁc expert group that developed the
Guidelines worked to develop a distinctively
Paciﬁc viewpoint, while also resisting andadopting some aspects of western, humanistic
strands of thinking. She argues that in these
respects they were engaged in a post-colonial
project that occupied the negotiated space
between different knowledge systems.112 Rosemary Du Plessis and Peggy Fairbairn-Dunlop
rUNESCO 2009.

The challenges for indigenous people of
identifying when collective processes of consent
and ethical review are relevant, and when people
might engage with science and technology as
individuals, is the focus of Mere Roberts’ article.
She looks at how M /C22aori have had to negotiate
systems of community consultation with respectto the regulation of genetically modiﬁed organ-
isms and argues for the need to consider both
collective and individual rights in making
decisions about using novel health technologies.
She argues that tensions between indigenous
knowledge systems and western science have
intensiﬁed with the development of new bio-technologies, especially genetic modiﬁcation.
There is a need for regulatory agencies, scientists
and scientiﬁc institutions to appreciate the
complexities surrounding indigenous people’s
engagement with these technologies, including
issues relating to who can speak for M /C22aori and in
what context, and when it is appropriate forconsultation and consent to be collective and
when opportunities to exercise individual rights
are important.
Steven Ratuva reminds us that knowledge
systems are constantly changing, evolving and
responding to other forms of knowledge and
different contexts. Colonisation and economicglobalisation have facilitated access to diverse
knowledge systems and the challenges of oper-
ating with multiple ontologies. He suggests that,
rather than being opposed and distinct, Paciﬁc
traditional knowledge systems and westernpositivistic science have been involved in a
constant process of contradiction and accom-
modation. This relationship is problematic when
western science combines Paciﬁc traditional
knowledge and developments in genetic science
to assert patents over the ﬂora and fauna that
Paciﬁc people see as being subject to theirguardianship and control. The assertion of
commercial rights by companies is in tension
with Paciﬁc people’s understanding of knowl-
edge about treasured natural resources as
collective resources that have spiritual aspects
as well as practical value in the treatment of
certain conditions.
This article returns in a very substantive
way to the issues raised in the ﬁrst article by
Tamasese Ta’isi Eﬁ, exploring Samoan under-
standings of tapu, and to Mila-Schaaf’s discus-
sion of vaas a spatial and relational concept.Ratuva argues that the issues posed by patenting
are not just commercial issues relating to own-
ership of certain resources or knowledge about
how they can be used with what effects. They
relate not only to the bio-chemical effects of kava
(a traditional Paciﬁc drink that induces a sense
of well-being), but its place as a tapu item in
ritual occasions. Ratuva explores the ways in
which Paciﬁc states are developing strategies to
protect indigenous knowledge, including the
Paciﬁc Model Law for the Protection of Tradi-
tional Ecological Knowledge, Innovations and
Practices. He also outlines the way in which civil
society institutions are picking up on these issuesand engaging in forms of cultural mapping,
aimed at documenting traditional indigenous
knowledge, protecting it and preventing its
accommodation into western science.
Conclusion
While each of these articles is intensely appre-
ciative of the local and the speciﬁc, they explore
issues that are of regional and international
signiﬁcance. How can knowledge arising out of
different epistemologies be appropriately incor-
porated into western science? How are tradi-tional types of knowledge and customary rights
over certain ﬂora and fauna to be recognised in
national and global systems of knowledge
production, commodiﬁcation and exchange?
Who should decide whether certain forms of
scientiﬁc activity should be undertaken and
under what conditions? How can the culturaleffects of certain disruptions to genetic continu-
ity be assessed and who should be involved in
making decisions about this? What is the
relationship between the passions scientists
bring to the pursuit of greater knowledge and
the Samoan concept of tofa sa’ili, or the pursuit
of wisdom? Are there scientists who pursue whatTamasese Ta’isi Eﬁ refers to in his article as
faautago loloto or the deep view of the here and
now, while other scientists seek tofa mamao, or
the long view? And what are the advantages and
the dangers of attention to collective decision-
making by indigenous people on matters relating
to approvals for ﬁeld trials that involve the use ofgenetic modiﬁcation as well as the analysis and
storage of human genetic information?The ethics of knowledge production: Paciﬁc challenges 113
rUNESCO 2009.

The articles compiled for this Paciﬁc con-
tribution to reﬂection on global knowledge
traverse different positions, assign different
weight to the sacred and the secular and provide
different responses to the challenges posed by
reconciling collective ownership and decision-
making with attention to individual rights inwestern political, economic and ethical systems.
They draw on the life experience of authors who
are at home in the worlds of western culture,
natural and social science and the traditionalknowledge systems of Samoan, Tongan, Fijian
and M /C22aori cultures. These articles are produced
by those who, in their daily lives and everyday
practice, negotiate the spaces in which indigen-
ous Paciﬁc ethical principles and practices can be
articulated, debated, modiﬁed and communi-
cated. Our goal, as the editors of this set ofarticles, is to help these ideas to circulate not
only in Paciﬁc contexts, but more broadly as
contributions to global knowledge about the
ethics of knowledge production.
Notes
1. The term Paciﬁc is used to refer
to both the nation-states of the
Paciﬁc Ocean and the large varietyof cultures, languages, historiesand physical environments thatcompose the Paciﬁc.
2. This UNESCO Declaration
was passed with acclaim by theUNESCO General Conference inParis in October 2005. The fulltext was reproduced and
introduced in issue 186 of the
ISSJ . It is also available online.
3. Many M /C22aori see themselves as
a Paciﬁc people whose ancestorsjourneyed across the Paciﬁc to
Aotearoa and see strong
connections between theirontologies and epistemologies andthose of people who inhabit theislands of the Paciﬁc. For this
reason, those organising the
Regional Paciﬁc Ethics ofKnowledge ProductionWorkshop decided to include apanel presentation by a group ofM/C22aori researchers. Two of these
panel members are contributors tothis collection of articles.
References
FAIRBAIRN -DUNLOP , P. 2006.
Address to the UNESCO Ethics ofKnowledge Production Conference,
Otago University 12–14 February,
2006. Cited in Ethics of Knowledge
Production Conference Report ,N e w
Zealand National Commission for
UNESCO, Wellington. Available
online at http://portal.unesco.org/shs/en/ﬁles/9932/11571219621
Conference_Report.pdf/
Conference_Report.pdf [Accessed 2November 2009].
H
EALTH RESEARCH COUNCIL OF NEW
ZEALAND 2005. ‘‘Guidelines onPaciﬁc health research’’, Auckland:
Health Research Council, availableonline at http://www.hrc.govt.nz/
assets/pdfs/publications/Paciﬁc
%20Fact%20Sheet.small.pdf[Accessed 27 October 2009].
K
UNG, H. 2007. The beginning of all
things: science and religion . [Transl.
by J. Bowden]. Grand Rapids, MI:Wm. B. Eerdmans.
M
ILA-SCHAAF , K. 2008. Report of the
Regional Paciﬁc Ethics of Knowledge
Production Workshop , Apia, 12–14
November. Wellington: NationalCommission for UNESCO/Te
Komihana Matua o Aotearoa mo ˆ
UNESCO. Available online at
www.unescobkk.org/ﬁleadmin/
user_upload/shs/EventInfo/UNESCOApia2007EthicsofKnowledge.pdf [Accessed 12 November 2009]
UNESCO 2005. Universal
declaration on bioethics and human
rights . UNESCO, Paris.114 Rosemary Du Plessis and Peggy Fairbairn-Dunlop
rUNESCO 2009.