SACAD: John Heinrichs Scholarly and Cr eativ e Activity Da ys SACAD: John Heinrichs Scholarly and Cr eativ e Activity Da ys 
Volume 2023 Article 73 
4-17-2023 
Education and Occupation in The Misophonia P odcast Education and Occupation in The Misophonia P odcast 
CJ Gibson 
Fort Hays State Univ ersity , cjgibson3@mail.fhsu.edu 
Follow this and additional works at: https:/ /scholars.fhsu.edu/sacad 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Gibson, CJ (2023) "E ducation and Occupation in The Misophonia P odcast, " SACAD: John Heinrichs 
Scholarly and Cr eativ e Activity Da ys: Vol. 2023, Ar ticle 73. 
DOI: 10.58809/QKNZ3210 
Available at: https:/ /scholars.fhsu.edu/sacad/v ol2023/iss2023/73 
This Submission is br ought t o you for fr ee and open access b y FHSU Scholars Reposit ory. It has been accepted for 
inclusion in SA CAD: John Heinrichs Scholarly and Cr eativ e Activity Da ys by an authoriz ed edit or of FHSU Scholars 
Reposit ory. For mor e information, please contact ScholarsReposit ory@fhsu.edu .

Only one significant correlation was found, between job alone 
time and number of coping mechanisms. This correlation could be 
attributed to how participants disclosed their own coping mechanisms 
instead of identifying their coping mechanisms from a list; participants 
who have jobs that more readily allow for alone time might only 
discuss the types of coping mechanisms they use the most frequently, 
such as avoidance. Participants with jobs that include more alone time 
may not have the need or ability to regularly use a variety of coping 
mechanisms, or participants with a narrower variety of coping 
mechanisms may choose jobs that allow for more alone time.
Applications
One notable takeaway from this study involves the lack of 
significant results found. People with misophonia cannot be 
generalized as fitting a certain group or a certain lifestyle when it 
comes to coping with their disorder —people with misophonia can 
work jobs with different levels of socialization and pursue different 
levels of education yet have similar social support, coping 
mechanisms, and attitudes toward their misophonia . Educational 
level, occupation type, and social support do not doom people with 
misophonia to a life where they cannot manage their disorder —people 
with misophonia are adaptable, and they can develop similar attitudes 
and types of coping skills regardless of the careers they may have. 
Future research could compare people with misophonia based 
on occupation and education level in comparison to a control group to 
examine if participants with misophonia are more likely to hold a 
certain educational level or a certain type of occupation.
Limitations
Some of the variables were categorized based on stereotypes 
rather than the participants’ own responses, such as job alone time. 
Future research could involve isolating this variable and asking 
specific questions regarding time spent alone at a job and how 
homogeneous their work routine is. 
Many of this study’s limitations come from how the data was 
collected, as the study did not involve asking questions that would 
prompt specific responses —some variables were determined through 
indirect descriptions, and data might change if the variables were 
measured in a more straightforward, consistent fashion. Data was at 
the mercy of the flow of conversation.Hypotheses
Education level
➢People with a graduate education are more likely to have more 
social support when compared to those with college and high 
school or lower.
➢People with a graduate education are more likely to have a more 
positive attitude toward their misophonia compared to those with 
college and high school or lower.
➢People with a graduate education are more likely to have a wider 
array of coping mechanisms compared to those with college and 
high school or lower.
Occupation
➢People with people -related occupations are more likely to have 
more social support compared to tech -related, art -related, 
management -related, and other types of occupations.
➢People with people -related occupations are more likely to have a 
more positive attitude toward their misophonia compared to tech -
related, art -related, management -related, and other types of 
occupations.
➢People with occupations that allow more alone time are more likely 
to have a more positive attitude toward their misophonia .
Ahmad, A. (Host). (2019 -2022). The Misophonia Podcast [Audio podcast]. Spotify. 
https://open.spotify.com/show/6BkNkAQh35gXklPng1Obfi?si=50b84f60cfa54
47e
Ferrer -Torres, A., & Giménez -Llort, L. (2022). Misophonia : A systematic review of current and 
future trends in this emerging clinical field. International Journal of 
Environmental Research and Public Health , 19(11). 
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph19116790
Remmert , N., Schmidt, K. M. B., Mussel, P., Hagel, M. L., & Eid, M. (2022). The Berlin 
Misophonia Questionnaire Revised (BMQ -R): Development and validation of 
a symptom -oriented diagnostical instrument for the measurement of 
misophonia .PLoS ONE, 17 (6), 1 –27. https://doi -
org.ezproxy.fhsu.edu/10.1371/journal.pone.0269428Education and Occupation in The Misophonia Podcast
CJ Gibson Janett M. Naylor -Tincknell, PhD
Fort Hays State University
Contact Information
ReferencesIntroduction
Misophonia is a disorder that involves a negative response 
to specific stimuli, commonly repetitive sounds or movements. It is 
not in the DSM -5-TR, and in many cases, people with misophonia
self-diagnose. They unite over their shared symptoms, such as 
the intense “anger, distress, disgust, and anxiety” they feel 
(Remmert et al., 2022, p. 2).
The Misophonia Podcast is one platform where people who 
identify as having misophonia can share their experiences, 
providing over a hundred public testimonies from people with a 
range of backgrounds. 
Through these casual interviews, the guests with 
misophonia reveal details regarding their individual experiences 
with the disorder, including triggers/activators,  coping 
mechanisms, and the emotions they experience. Little research 
exists on misophonia and its treatments (Ferrer -Torres et al., 
2022, p. 18), leaving people with misophonia on their own to 
discover what strategies work best for them.
As lifestyle choices may reflect a complex relationship with 
one’s mental disorder, this study analyzes how education level 
and occupation type may relate to the social support, coping 
mechanisms, and attitudes people have regarding their 
misophonia .
Data Collection
Data from 128 testimonies (Female=69.3%; Male=27.6%) of 
The Misophonia Podcast was coded based on information the guests 
disclosed in the public podcast. As the questions changed depending 
on the flow of conversation, demographic information was not always 
prompted, creating gaps in the data. For the variables examined in 
these tests, 60%  of participants provided a response for education 
level, and 90% of participants provided a response for occupation.Data Coding
➢Occupation was coded into of five categories: (1) tech -oriented 
positions, such as software developer or engineer; (2) art -oriented 
positions, such as graphic designer or musician; (3) people -oriented 
positions, such as social worker or teacher; (4) administrative or 
managing positions; or (5) other positions.
➢Job alone time was grouped into two categories based on whether 
the job would stereotypically allow for introverted, independent work 
(e.g., software engineer or visual artist) or if it involves more regular 
contact with others (e.g., teacher or manager). 
➢Education level is split into three categories: (1) high school or less, 
(2) some college or college degree, and (3) graduate degree.
➢Attitude toward misophonia is a scale from 1 -5 based on how the 
participant described their misophonia with 1 being torture and 5 
being tolerable.
➢Social support is a scale from 1 -5 based on how the participant 
described their overall treatment they received from others 
regarding their misophonia with 1 suggesting  a cruel social 
environment and 5 suggesting an accommodating environment.
➢Identified coping mechanisms were grouped into five categories: 
avoidance, use of tools (e.g., headphones), mental reframing 
strategies (e.g., mimicking), self -care, and the seeking of social 
support.
CJ Gibson: cjgibson3@mail.fhsu.edu
Janett M. Naylor -Tincknell: jmnaylor@fhsu.edu
Discussion
Results
Education level
The hypothesis to examine the impact of educational level on 
social support was tested using a One Way ANOVA. Results were not 
significant, F(2, 73)=1.72, p>.05, indicating not mean differences 
between educational level for reported social support.
The hypothesis to examine impact of educational level on 
attitudes toward their misophonia was tested using a One Way 
ANOVA. Results were not significant, F(2, 73)=.49, p>.05, indicating 
not mean differences between educational levels for reported attitudes 
toward misophonia .
The hypothesis to examine differences on number of coping 
mechanisms used based on educational level was tested using a One 
Way ANOVA. Results were not significant, F(2, 73)=.05, p>.05, 
indicating not mean differences between educational levels for the 
reported number of coping mechanisms used.
Occupation
The hypothesis to examine the impact of occupation type on 
social support was tested using a One Way ANOVA. Results were not 
significant, F(4, 109)=.51, p>.05, indicating no mean differences 
between occupational type on reported social support.
The hypothesis to examine differences in attitudes toward their 
misophonia based on occupation type was tested using a One Way 
ANOVA. Results were not significant, F(4, 109)=.60, p>.05, indicating 
no mean differences reported number of coping mechanisms used 
based on occupation type.
The hypothesis to examine the relationship between reported 
levels of job alone time and number of coping mechanisms used was 
tested using a bivariate correlation. Results were significant, r(91)= -
.27, p<.05, indicating the more time spent alone on the job ( M=1.60, 
SD=.49) the fewer reported number of coping mechanisms used 
(M=3.32, SD=1.06).