Citation: Ferrer-Torres, A.;
Giménez-Llort, L. Misophonia: A
Systematic Review of Current and
Future Trends in This Emerging
Clinical Field. Int. J. Environ. Res.
Public Health 2022 ,19, 6790. https://
doi.org/10.3390/ijerph19116790
Academic Editors: Vicente Javier
Clemente Su árez and Paul B.
Tchounwou
Received: 21 April 2022
Accepted: 28 May 2022
Published: 1 June 2022
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2022 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
International  Journal  of 
Environmental Research
and Public Health
Review
Misophonia: A Systematic Review of Current and Future
Trends in This Emerging Clinical Field
Antonia Ferrer-Torres1,2,*
and Lydia Gim énez-Llort2,3
1L’Alfatier-Centro M édico Psicol ógico, 08025 Barcelona, Spain
2Department of Psychiatry and Forensic Medicine, School of Medicine, Universitat Aut ònoma de Barcelona,
08193 Barcelona, Spain; lidia.gimenez@uab.cat
3Institut de Neuroci ències, Universitat Aut ònoma de Barcelona, 08193 Barcelona, Spain
*Correspondence: cmedicopsicologico@alftier.es; Tel.: +34-934-761-700
Abstract: Misophonia is a scarcely known disorder. This systematic review (1) offers a quantitative
and qualitative analysis of the literature since 2001, (2) identiﬁes the most relevant aspects but also
controversies, (3) identiﬁes the theoretical and methodological approaches, and (4) highlights the
outstanding advances until May 2022 as well as aspects that remain unknown and deserve future
research efforts. Misophonia is characterized by strong physiological, emotional, and behavioral
reactions to auditory, visual, and/or kinesthetic stimuli of different nature regardless of their physical
characteristics. These misophonic responses include anger, general discomfort, disgust, anxiety, and
avoidance and escape behaviors, and decrease the quality of life of the people with the disorder
and their relatives. There is no consensus on the diagnostic criteria yet. High comorbidity between
misophonia and other psychiatric and auditory disorders is reported. Importantly, the confusion
with other disorders contributes to its underdiagnosis. In recent years, assessment systems with
good psychometric properties have increased considerably, as have treatment proposals. Although
misophonia is not yet included in international classiﬁcation systems, it is an emerging ﬁeld of
growing scientiﬁc and clinical interest.
Keywords: misophonia; epidemiology; etiology; comorbidity; treatment; diagnosis
1. Introduction
Misophonia is a complex neurophysiological and behavioral disorder of multifactorial
origin and is characterized by an increased physiological and emotional response produced
by intolerance to speciﬁc auditory stimuli [ 1–5]. It has also been described as a form of
sound intolerance, in which hyper-reactivity and selective aversion to one type of sound
are present [ 6]. Additionally, misophonia has been considered a new mental disorder [ 7,8].
There is currently debate whether misophonia is an auditory or psychiatric disorder per
se. The main reason for the reluctance to include misophonia among mental disorders
is the danger of stigmatizing and “pathologizing” the medical picture [ 9]. On the other
hand, it is considered that misophonia cannot be classiﬁed as an auditory disorder since no
relationship has been found between it and hearing thresholds, as the disorder can occur
in people with normal hearing, with hearing loss, or with some auditory pathology [ 9].
Furthermore, misophonia can develop in the absence of any peripheral or central auditory
pathology [ 10]. Additionally, the speciﬁcity of the triggering stimuli suggests that the
symptoms are unlikely to be caused by an alteration of the auditory system [11].
Although the prevalence of misophonia is not precisely known, the ﬁgure is estimated
to be close to 20% of the population [ 5] or 6% showing signiﬁcant associated functional
impairment as reported in clinical settings [ 12]. Misophonia may coexist with other hearing
and psychiatric disorders, and it can be confused with other hearing conditions, so the
percentage of affected individuals may be higher [ 4,12–14], with it being considered an
underdiagnosed disorder. Misophonia has a signiﬁcant impact on the sufferer’s life, as
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022 ,19, 6790. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph19116790 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/ijerph

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022 ,19, 6790 2 of 26
their maladaptive and avoidant behaviors interfere with the performance of work or
academic tasks and cause signiﬁcant impairment in their interpersonal relationships [ 1,6].
In response to exposure to the triggering stimulus, the individual experiences a series of
physical and emotional reactions of such intensity that they affect their functionality and
well-being (see Figure 1). The intensity of the misophonic responses varies depending on
the emitting source, being more intense when the sound is produced by family members
or acquaintances [ 2,9,15]. Research and health care regarding misophonia are currently
scarce but slowly increasing in recent years, and the ﬁrst consensus deﬁnition has been
published [ 16]. First, there is a lack of sufﬁcient diagnostic criteria to aid in the correct
classiﬁcation of misophonia and its recognition as a distinct disorder. In addition, little
is known about its etiology, and insufﬁcient assessment tools are available to measure
misophonic symptoms accurately. As expected, there are no protocols for its treatment that
are scientiﬁcally supported through randomized clinical trials.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022 , 19, 2 of 27 
 
 so the percentage of affected individuals may be higher [4,12–14], with it being considered 
an underdiagnosed disorder. Misophonia has a si gnificant impact on the sufferer’s life, as 
their maladaptive and avoidant behaviors interfere with the performance of work or aca-demic tasks and cause significant impairment in  their interpersonal relationships [1,6]. In 
response to exposure to the triggering stim ulus, the individual experiences a series of 
physical and emotional reactions of such intens ity that they affect their functionality and 
well-being (see Figure 1). The intensity of th e misophonic responses varies depending on 
the emitting source, being more intense when  the sound is produced by family members 
or acquaintances [2,9,15]. Research and health care regarding misophonia are currently 
scarce but slowly increasing in recent years, and the first consensus definition has been 
published [16]. First, there is a lack of sufficient diagnostic criteria to aid in the correct classification of misophonia and its recognition as a distinct disorder. In addition, little is 
known about its etiology, and insufficient assessment tools are
 available to measure miso-
phonic symptoms accurately. As expected, ther e are no protocols for its treatment that are 
scientifically supported through randomized clinical trials.  
 
Figure 1. Brief explanatory diagram of mi sophonia (own elaboration). 
The aims of the present work were (i) to of fer a quantitative and qualitative analysis 
of the studies on misophonia based on the data obtained in different bibliographic data-
bases; (ii) identify the relevant known, un known, and controversial aspects of misopho-
nia; (iii) identify the theoretical approaches  developed on misophonia; (iv) to know the 
methodology, types of designs used, advantages  and disadvantages of each of the studies; 
and (v) to know the most outstanding advances that misophonia has had until 31 March 
2022, as well as those aspects that remain unknown and deserve future research efforts. 
During the peer-review process (May 2022), so me new scientific reports have been pub-
lished, and because of their relevance they have been included in the discussion.  
Hence, this study presents a state of the art bibliographic review on misophonia, con-
sidering the most recent research on its etiology, epidemiology, diagnosis, comorbidity, 
evaluation instruments, and treatment of this disorder.  
Figure 1. Brief explanatory diagram of misophonia (own elaboration).
The aims of the present work were (i) to offer a quantitative and qualitative analysis of
the studies on misophonia based on the data obtained in different bibliographic databases;
(ii) identify the relevant known, unknown, and controversial aspects of misophonia;
(iii) identify the theoretical approaches developed on misophonia; (iv) to know the method-
ology, types of designs used, advantages and disadvantages of each of the studies; and
(v) to know the most outstanding advances that misophonia has had until 31 March 2022,
as well as those aspects that remain unknown and deserve future research efforts. During
the peer-review process (May 2022), some new scientiﬁc reports have been published, and
because of their relevance they have been included in the discussion.
Hence, this study presents a state of the art bibliographic review on misophonia,
considering the most recent research on its etiology, epidemiology, diagnosis, comorbidity,
evaluation instruments, and treatment of this disorder.
2. Methods
In the present study, a systematic review of misophonia was carried out following the
guidelines of the PRISMA [17] method for its correct elaboration (see Figure 2).

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022 ,19, 6790 3 of 26
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022 , 19, 3 of 27 
 
 2. Methods 
In the present study, a systematic review of misophonia was carried out following 
the guidelines of the PRISMA [17] method for its correct elaboration (see Figure 2). 
 
Figure 2. Flow chart of the systematic review on misophonia. 
The term misophonia was used to search in the following databases: Dialnet, Pub-
Med, SciELO, and WorldWideScience.org, and al so included a direct selection of 20 stud-
ies on isophonia from Google Scholar due to their scientific relevance. The PubMed data-
base was used because it is considered the be st tool for searching biomedical literature; 
WorldWideScience.org was also used because of its extensive database. The chronological 
range of the search was from 2001 to the pr esent date, 31 March 202 2. Although in other 
databases, including Google Scholar, misophonia has been referred to since 2001, in Pub-
Med and WorldWideScience.org, the date of the first publication on misophonia is 2006. 
In SciELO, the first studies are recorded from 2015, and in Dialnet from 2017. As depicted 
in the flowchart, the search yielded 706 results identified as possible analysis sources. Af-
ter removing 297 duplicates, the number of records to be screened was 409, but 326 were found unsuitable after reading the abstract ( n = 140) or were not specific on the topic ( n = 
186). Therefore, the number of full-text articles assessed for eligibility selected to be in-
cluded in the systematic analysis was 83. 
These studies have been approached mainly by neuroscience, psychiatry, psychol-
ogy, and behavioral sciences. The thematic research presented in this paper was divided into seven main areas: symptomatology, the evolution of misophonia, etiology, diagnostic 
criteria, comorbidity, assessment tools, and tr eatment options. Finally, the results section 
highlights those considered more interesting an d points to the areas in which research on 
misophonia should be focused. 
3. Results of the Bibliographic Research 
3.1. Triggering or Misophonic Stimulus and Symptomatology 
The stimuli that trigger the aversive reac tion are called “triggering sounds”, “miso-
phonic stimuli”, or “misophonic sounds” and are characterized by sharing the same pat-tern, regardless of the decibel level [18]. The individual’s responses following the expo-
sure to the misophonic stimulus are referred to as “misophonic responses” [1]. These can 
Figure 2. Flow chart of the systematic review on misophonia.
The term misophonia was used to search in the following databases: Dialnet, PubMed,
SciELO, and WorldWideScience.org, and also included a direct selection of 20 studies on
isophonia from Google Scholar due to their scientiﬁc relevance. The PubMed database
was used because it is considered the best tool for searching biomedical literature; World-
WideScience.org was also used because of its extensive database. The chronological range
of the search was from 2001 to the present date, 31 March 2022. Although in other databases,
including Google Scholar, misophonia has been referred to since 2001, in PubMed and
WorldWideScience.org, the date of the ﬁrst publication on misophonia is 2006. In SciELO,
the ﬁrst studies are recorded from 2015, and in Dialnet from 2017. As depicted in the
ﬂowchart, the search yielded 706 results identiﬁed as possible analysis sources. After
removing 297 duplicates, the number of records to be screened was 409, but 326 were found
unsuitable after reading the abstract ( n= 140) or were not speciﬁc on the topic ( n= 186).
Therefore, the number of full-text articles assessed for eligibility selected to be included in
the systematic analysis was 83.
These studies have been approached mainly by neuroscience, psychiatry, psychology,
and behavioral sciences. The thematic research presented in this paper was divided into
seven main areas: symptomatology, the evolution of misophonia, etiology, diagnostic
criteria, comorbidity, assessment tools, and treatment options. Finally, the results section
highlights those considered more interesting and points to the areas in which research on
misophonia should be focused.
3. Results of the Bibliographic Research
3.1. Triggering or Misophonic Stimulus and Symptomatology
The stimuli that trigger the aversive reaction are called “triggering sounds”, “miso-
phonic stimuli”, or “misophonic sounds” and are characterized by sharing the same pattern,
regardless of the decibel level [ 18]. The individual’s responses following the exposure to the
misophonic stimulus are referred to as “misophonic responses” [ 1]. These can be physical
and/or emotional in nature. The former is often muscle constriction and increased heart
rate [ 6,19]; although one may also experience a feeling of pressure in the chest, arms, head,
or throughout the body, as well as increased body temperature, physical pain, or shortness
of breath [ 2]. On the other hand, the emotional misophonic response may manifest with
reactions such as anger, anxiety, disgust, avoidance behavior, escape, and/or feelings of

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022 ,19, 6790 4 of 26
being overwhelmed. The person suffering from misophonia recognizes that their responses
are unwanted, uncontrolled, sometimes excessive, and unacceptable [ 20,21], but they still
feel offended by those emitting the misophonic stimulus [ 9]. Despite this, too, they may
have violent impulses toward the source of the misophonic sound [ 22]. In fact, anger is the
primary emotional response to misophonia. One study reported that irritation (59.9%) was
the most common misophonic response, and 28.6% of patients reported aggressive verbal
behaviors. Even 16.7% admitted physical aggression towards objects [20].
The set of emotional reactions leads the individual to carry out maladaptive behaviors,
such as asking the person emitting the misophonic stimulus to stop, arguing with them,
or presenting an excessive desire to escape from the stimulus [ 23]. Avoidance behaviors
are frequent, and although they provide the individual with momentary comfort, they
worsen and maintain the symptomatology [ 24]. In addition, misophonia can contribute
to the development of other health problems, such as behavioral disorders, emotional
reactivity [ 1], difﬁculties in regulating emotions [ 15,25], and impaired quality of life [ 6,15].
It also appears to be common for people with misophonia to suffer abuse from others
due to their symptoms and maladaptive behaviors. For example, it has been noted that
misophonic patients routinely share on internet forums that they are accused of being
“crazy” or “troublemakers” by people in their immediate environment [6].
It has been deﬁned that the stimuli that trigger the aversive reaction called “triggering
sounds” or “misophonic sounds”, are characterized by sharing the same pattern, regardless
of their physical properties such as intensity, frequency, harshness, or decibel level [ 3].
Empirical studies have shown that misophonia is not limited to an aversion to loud, sharp,
or harsh sounds; since even soft sounds can trigger the misophonic response (e.g., slurping
sounds) [ 9]. In addition, misophonic sounds vary between people, so they are believed
to be conditioned to individual, learning, and contextual differences. This indicates that
the auditory stimulus does not produce the adverse reaction simply because of its sonic
properties but is also signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced by who or what elicits it [ 2]. Initially, it
was proposed that the patient’s discomfort was elicited by the presence or anticipation of
a speciﬁc sound produced by a person [ 20]. However, years later, it was found that the
triggering sounds did not always come from human activities but were everyday sounds [ 6]
inﬂuenced by the context and individual characteristics of the patient [ 26,27] as well as
sounds emitted by animals or objects [2,5,28,29].
The most frequent triggering stimuli for misophonic symptoms are sounds emitted
while eating [ 30] (e.g., chewing, crunching food, slurping, etc.), nasal sounds (e.g., breath-
ing, snifﬁng, sneezing), and sounds made with the throat (such as throat clearing) [ 5,31].
Machine-related sounds are also common, such as those emitted by the computer keyboard,
the ticking of the clock, the coffee maker, the stapler, or hair dryers, among others [ 21].
These are some examples, but it should be noted that triggering sounds are very varied
and, although they are usually everyday [ 24,32], they are inﬂuenced by the context and the
individual characteristics of the patient [ 27]. Recent research has found that the triggering
stimulus can have different sensory modalities, not limited to sound alone [ 5,28,33]. That
is, visual or kinesthetic stimuli related to the triggering auditory stimulus can also elicit
the aversive response. For example, a person whose misophonic sound is the sound of
chewing may generalize the aversive behavior to visual stimuli associated with the image
of a particular food, e.g., fried food. In addition, another study has found that imagining a
misophonic sound can trigger symptoms very similar to those experienced when hearing
the actual sound [19].
Consequently, probably the best term to use is “triggering stimulus” or “misophonic
stimulus”, since the concept of misophonic sound does not refer only to an auditory sensory
modality. An unresolved unknown is whether the misophonic stimulus also produces
aversive reactions when produced by the same patient. Although in a study with a sample
of 92 misophonic patients, it was indicated that most do not experience symptoms when
they themselves emit the triggering sound (e.g., chewing) [34].

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022 ,19, 6790 5 of 26
3.2. The Evolution of the Study of Misophonia
Figure 3 illustrates the timeline of the outstanding studies related to misophonia. In
the 1990s, Marsha Johnson, an American audiologist, described for the ﬁrst time what she
called ‘Sensitivity to Soft Sound or Selective Sound Sensitivity Syndrome’, abbreviated as
4S syndrome [ 22]. With this label, she described a syndrome characterized by an evident
intolerance to speciﬁc sounds unique to each individual [ 35]. Johnson called the annoying
sound a “trigger sound”, and emphasized that associated visual or olfactory stimuli could
also provoke the misophonic response [22].
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022 , 19, 5 of 27 
 
 Consequently, probably the best term to use is “triggering stimulus” or “misophonic 
stimulus”, since the concept of misophonic so und does not refer only to an auditory sen-
sory modality. An unresolved unknown is whether the misophonic stimulus also pro-
duces aversive reactions when produced by th e same patient. Although in a study with a 
sample of 92 misophonic patients, it was indicated that most do not experience symptoms 
when they themselves emit the trigge ring sound (e.g., chewing) [34].  
3.2. The Evolution of the Study of Misophonia 
Figure 3 illustrates the timeline of the outstanding studies related to misophonia. In 
the 1990s, Marsha Johnson, an American audiol ogist, described for the first time what she 
called ‘Sensitivity to Soft Sound or Selective Sound Sensitivity Syndrome’, abbreviated as 
4S syndrome [22]. With this label, she described a syndrome characterized by an evident intolerance to specific sounds unique to each individual [35]. Johnson called the annoying 
sound a “trigger sound”, and emphasized that associated visual or olfactory stimuli could 
also provoke the misophonic response [22].  
 
Figure 3. Timeline of outstanding studies related to misophonia (Own elaboration). 
In 2001, the authors Margaret and Pawel Jastreboff first used the term misophonia to 
describe a series of negative limbic and au tonomic system reactions resulting from per-
ceiving specific sounds [3]. It was suggested that this response was caused by increased 
functional connections between the auditory system and the limbic system. According to 
these authors, the auditory system functions no rmally, but at the behavioral level negative 
reactions are evoked. In other words, misophon ia does not imply an increased activation 
of the auditory system, but the problem lies in the emotional response of the patients to 
the triggering sound [3]. 
In later years, findings made it possible to differentiate misophonia from other diag-
noses such as hyperacusis or phonophobia. It  was determined that misophonia was a sep-
arate disorder since, unlike hyperacusis (dec reased tolerance to sound), the symptomatol-
ogy was associated exclusively with one type of sound; and it was distinct from phono-
phobia (fear of sounds) because the primary emotional response differed [10]. Although 
misophonia can occur in conjunction with these pathologies, it is also seen in isolation 
[10]. 
With sufficient evidence to consider mi sophonia as an independent disorder, out-
reach efforts began in the medical community to publicize this condition and raise aware-
ness of its impact on the individual’s life [21]. In addition, work was done to understand the prevalence of misophonia [4,5,31] and to  understand the experience of misophonic 
individuals through case studies [2,35–37].  
Figure 3. Timeline of outstanding studies related to misophonia (Own elaboration).
In 2001, the authors Margaret and Pawel Jastreboff ﬁrst used the term misophonia
to describe a series of negative limbic and autonomic system reactions resulting from
perceiving speciﬁc sounds [ 3]. It was suggested that this response was caused by increased
functional connections between the auditory system and the limbic system. According to
these authors, the auditory system functions normally, but at the behavioral level negative
reactions are evoked. In other words, misophonia does not imply an increased activation
of the auditory system, but the problem lies in the emotional response of the patients to the
triggering sound [3].
In later years, ﬁndings made it possible to differentiate misophonia from other di-
agnoses such as hyperacusis or phonophobia. It was determined that misophonia was
a separate disorder since, unlike hyperacusis (decreased tolerance to sound), the symp-
tomatology was associated exclusively with one type of sound; and it was distinct from
phonophobia (fear of sounds) because the primary emotional response differed [ 10]. Al-
though misophonia can occur in conjunction with these pathologies, it is also seen in
isolation [10].
With sufﬁcient evidence to consider misophonia as an independent disorder, outreach
efforts began in the medical community to publicize this condition and raise awareness
of its impact on the individual’s life [ 21]. In addition, work was done to understand
the prevalence of misophonia [ 4,5,31] and to understand the experience of misophonic
individuals through case studies [2,35–37].
3.3. Epidemiology of Misophonia
Because the diagnostic criteria for misophonia are not established, epidemiological
data are unknown, although rough estimates are available. From data collected by a tinnitus
and hyperacusis center in the United States, it is estimated that 3% of the population suffers
from misophonia. In addition, it was found that 92% of patients with low tolerance to
sounds have misophonia, so they warn that this disorder is underdiagnosed because it can
be confused with auditory disturbances [4].

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022 ,19, 6790 6 of 26
Another ﬁgure reported in 2014 was much higher, as the incidence amounted to 19.90%
of misophonia cases in a sample of nearly 500 college students in Florida [ 5]. Subsequently,
in 2017, replicating this methodology, but accounting only for cases of misophonia with
moderate severity, it was reported that 6% of their sample ( n= 415) showed misophonic
symptoms with associated functional impairment [ 31]. This indicates that about a quarter
of the population may have misophonic symptoms, but only 6% of these individuals would
meet the clinical criteria for diagnosis.
Another later study, 2021, using the A-MISO diagnostic tool with a sample of 336 med-
ical students from a UK university, found that clinically signiﬁcant misophonic symptoms
appeared to be common with 49.1% of the sample population affected [ 14]. A new study,
also from 2021, in Ankara, Turkey, showed that misophonia was common in the general
population and could cause signiﬁcant disruption to daily life if not adequately treated. The
results showed a prevalence of misophonia of 12.8% ( n= 69 of 541), although 427 (78.9%)
participants reported at least one sound that was distressing [ 38]. These results, therefore,
indicated that misophonia was a phenomenon that could be experienced by a signiﬁcant
proportion of the population, although only a small subset experienced it severely.
The estimates differ because they are speculative rates, as the degree of misophonic
symptoms has been assessed by self-administered scales, which lack a full psychiatric
assessment [ 39]. The above ﬁgures are not generalizable but suggest that this is a real
health problem that requires attention, as misophonia scores are associated with scales
of functional impairment [ 5,15], speciﬁcally in the school or work, social, and family
context [5].
So far, no difference in the prevalence of misophonia between sexes has been proven.
Some studies have reported that a higher percentage of misophonic individuals were
women [ 23,40], although other studies have not indicated differences [ 31]. It is too early to
afﬁrm or rule out that misophonia affects women differently, so this line of research should
be continued by previously ruling out possible measurement biases.
3.4. Etiology of Misophonia
The exact causes of misophonia and the characteristics related to its evolution are
not currently known. An acute and sudden onset has been observed, often in childhood
or early adolescence, when the person begins to notice the sounds emitted by someone
nearby and becomes hypersensitive to them. According to one paper, the mean age of
onset of misophonic symptoms in a sample of 42 patients was 13 years [ 20]. However,
a case has been reported in which the onset of misophonia was identiﬁed in a 2-year-
old individual [ 23]. On the other hand, regarding the age of diagnosis, some authors
considered that despite being a disorder that can begin in childhood, the mean age at which
the diagnosis of misophonia is received is 37 years [ 20]. The data of another study coincided,
as the mean age of 92 misophonic participants was 39 years, at which time they received
health care due to the disorder [ 34]. It is a chronic disorder that, on average, affects patients
for 30 years of their lives, as they are not usually treated [ 23]. In this study, the natural
evolution of the disorder is a worsening of symptoms in 58% of cases, although sometimes
they remain stable (25%), and rarely remit spontaneously (16.7%) [ 23]. In another study,
45% have worsened over time [2].
Generally, the onset of misophonia appears from an early triggering event that pro-
vokes in the individual unpleasant feelings such as disgust [ 9]. The onset of the disorder
may be associated with unpleasant childhood memories of sounds emitted by family mem-
bers (e.g., during meals) [ 20]. Different explanatory hypotheses for misophonia have been
proposed, including traumatic events or predisposition due to other disorders. However,
several studies rule out trauma as an explanation for the onset of misophonia [20,40].
3.4.1. Genetic Predisposition Hypothesis
The genetic predisposition hypothesis suggests that obsessive-compulsive personality
disorder predisposes the individual to develop misophonia [ 20]. Because of this relationship

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022 ,19, 6790 7 of 26
between obsessive-compulsive disorder and misophonia [ 41], and because it has been said
that this personality disorder could be genetically predisposed, it was hypothesized that
misophonia could also be genetically predisposed. However, although there appears to be
almost 50% comorbidity between the two disorders [ 20], current knowledge is insufﬁcient
to determine a causal relationship between misophonia and another disorder or disease.
Within this theory, one study indicated a higher prevalence of sound intolerance
among individuals with disorders such as Williams syndrome or autism spectrum disorders
(ASD) [ 42]. Speciﬁcally, it was observed that 90% of individuals in a 118-member group
with Williams syndrome showed greater sensitivity to certain sounds; and that 27% of
participants with ASD also showed some degree of sensitivity to sounds greater than the
control group [43].
Another study also proposed the hereditary component of misophonia, as it found
that 15 members of the same family met the criteria for the diagnosis of this disorder [ 23].
Likewise, another study also concluded that one-third of the participants with misophonia
(n= 301) reported a family history with the same symptomatology [ 30]. The fact that
participants manifest misophonic symptoms during childhood or early adolescence could
indicate that they learn to reproduce the behavior of other family members. Although,
according to information from the participants, some of those affected had little contact
with the rest of the family and still developed the disorder [23].
One study suggested that personal characteristics such as age (childhood and early
adolescence), sex, and family traits during the individual’s development (e.g., a family
member having misophonia) mediated the onset of misophonia [ 40]. However, the inﬂu-
ence of these factors is still unclear, as in other studies, age and sex were not signiﬁcantly
associated with the severity of misophonia [ 5,34]. So far, no genetic studies have been
carried out to show that auditory stimulus intolerance has a hereditary component, so this
explanation does not yet have sufﬁcient empirical support.
3.4.2. Neurobiological Alterations Hypothesis
The emotional response experienced by misophonic patients in the presence of sound
raised the question of whether auditory information was processed differently or increased
in these individuals. However, the symptomatology of misophonia associated with only
one type of sound suggested that, if there was an anatomical alteration, it would be found
in cortical areas responsible for information processing [ 10]. In this sense, it was observed
that most people with misophonia had normal auditory sensitivity [ 44]. If the misophonic
response was not due to an alteration of the auditory system as initially thought, it was
proposed that the response of misophonic patients might be due to an alteration of the
limbic system and the autonomic nervous system, which react abnormally to auditory
input of normal intensity [ 10]. Symptoms of increased blood pressure evidence activation
of the autonomic nervous system and heart rate, increased body temperature, sweating
palms, physical pain, and shortness of breath after exposure to trigger stimuli [ 2]. The
increased physiological response has been explained as a result of increased arousal of
the sympathetic nervous system, which in turn produces distress in the individual [ 1].
Edelstein et al. [ 2] pioneered the study of the physiological response of people with miso-
phonia, conﬁrming that their reaction to the triggering sound included an increase in
skin conductance, which did not occur in the presence of nonaversive stimuli of another
modality [ 2]. This physiological reaction showed a positive and signiﬁcant correlation with
the intensity of the aversion indicated by the individual, whether misophonic or control.
Such a ﬁnding suggested that people with misophonia manifested the same reaction as the
general population had to aversive stimuli, with the difference that they experienced the
discomfort much more intensely [2].
Subsequently, a study by Schröder et al. [ 45] used functional magnetic resonance
imaging (fMRI) for the ﬁrst time to localize functional neuroanatomical correlates of miso-
phonia [ 45]. Compared to control patients, participants with misophonia showed increased
neural activity in the visual cortex, temporal cortex, amygdala, and anterior insula. How-

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022 ,19, 6790 8 of 26
ever, these results were taken as preliminary, as it was not evident whether the increased
activation of these regions in patients occurred exclusively in the presence of the triggering
stimuli [ 45]. Continuing this line of research, in 2019, the reactions of 21 patients with miso-
phonia and 23 without were analyzed [ 46]. They presented signals of multimodal nature
(auditory and visual) in three conditions: related to the misophonic stimulus, aversive, and
neutral stimuli. Measurements of the behavioral and emotional responses of the partici-
pants were also performed to have a better understanding of the misophonic reaction. The
results indicated that misophonic audiovisual stimuli caused anger, disgust, and sadness
among patients with misophonia, accompanied by physiological arousal and increased
activity of the right insula, right anterior cingulate cortex, and right superior temporal
cortex [ 46]. This set of reactions occurred only during exposure to aversive stimulus cues, as
the responses of patients with misophonia to neutral stimuli were the same as the rest [ 46].
Answering the previous unknown, these ﬁndings demonstrated that there is no permanent
functional impairment but rather an exaggerated response to a speciﬁc stimulus.
From this study, the authors suggested that the insula and the right anterior cingulate
cortex activity indicated the overactivation of the network responsible for the detection
and selection of emotionally relevant information [ 46]. Since the misophonic signals were
identiﬁed as salient information, there was an increase in cardiovascular arousal and other
autonomic responses. On the other hand, the hyper-reactivity observed in the right superior
temporal cortex would explain the attentional increase of misophonic individuals to the
triggering stimulus due to the relevance of this area for auditory selective attention [46].
Overactivation of the insula had also been reported by Kumar et al. [ 47], who also
detected abnormal connectivity between it and cortical regions such as the medial frontal,
medial parietal, and medial temporal cortex [ 47]. The authors attributed these connectivity
alterations to an abnormality in myelination in the medial frontal cortex, which results
in the neuronal response responsible for misophonic patients’ physiological arousal and
emotional response [ 47,48]. Thus, the most recent studies by Eijsker et al. [ 48,49] are
also rather important as they investigated the neuropathology basis of the disorder and
provided new ﬁndings on structural and functional brain abnormalities.
An interesting paper from 2021 studied misophonia from a motor perspective [ 50],
where the mirror neuron system related to orofacial movements and the visual and auditory
cortex could be the basis of this disorder. According to Kumar et al. [ 50], in people with
misophonia, there was increased functional connectivity between the auditory cortex and
the orofacial motor areas in response to all types of sound; in addition, there was also
increased activation of the orofacial motor area in response to trigger sounds and, ﬁnally, the
activation of the orofacial motor area increased in proportion to the misophonic discomfort.
However, despite the optimism in determining these theories as to the neurobiological
basis of misophonia, some authors mentioned that the lack of consensus about the diagnosis
was its major limitation [ 51]. They also emphasized that the collaboration of psychiatrists
and psychologists was indispensable in the process of participant selection in order to
make a comprehensive evaluation that complements the results of the subjective scales [ 51].
On the other hand, other authors emphasized that anger was not a primary emotional
response in misophonia, as another study with more than 300 patients reported annoyance
as the primary reaction to this disorder [ 40]. Although it is impossible to determine that the
described alterations are the biological bases causing misophonia, they are undoubtedly
associated with the disorder.
3.4.3. Conditioning Hypothesis
It is believed that learning may partly explain the emotional and behavioral symptoms
of misophonia. In this sense, the misophonic response would be a conditioned behavior
through classical conditioning: there is a neutral stimulus (e.g., chewing noise) that, after
being associated with an aversive unconditioned stimulus, triggers the same unconditioned
response (anger, irritation, etc.) [ 3]. The emotional and physiological response results from

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022 ,19, 6790 9 of 26
the activation of the limbic and autonomic nervous system, producing irrational reactions
to the conditioned stimulus (the misophonic sound) [24].
At the behavioral level, patients avoided situations involving the inclusion of the
misophonic sound, and in the long term, the avoidance reinforced the pathological re-
sponse (since it functioned as a negative reinforcer), exacerbating the symptomatology [ 24].
Ultimately, this is a conditioning process in which the individual learns to respond dis-
proportionately to an auditory stimulus. For example, one study presented 10 cases that
supported the development of misophonia as classical conditioning [ 35]. On the other
hand, it is also possible that individuals with misophonia are sensitized to the triggering
sound [ 52]. Although the neural mechanism for sensitization in misophonia is unknown,
it may be related to the long-term potentiation of limbic system neurons [ 2]. Similarly,
Jastreboff and Jastreboff [ 4] considered that the triggering sound was part of a conditioned
stimulus that was inﬂuenced by the context and by psychological factors [ 4]. In fact, these
authors proposed that the treatment of misophonia should aim at desensitizing patients
to the triggering stimulus; and this would be achieved after systematic exposure to the
conditioned stimulus [ 51] despite the disagreement of Dozier, who argued that exposure
could lead to a worsening of symptoms [53].
3.5. Diagnosis of Misophonia
Misophonia is not included in any diagnostic classiﬁcation, so there is no consensus on
the criteria for diagnosis. However, different authors have proposed a series of diagnostic
criteria based on the current body of knowledge [20,29].
3.5.1. Diagnostic Criteria
The need for standardized diagnostic criteria stems from their importance in promot-
ing the recognition of this disorder, the development of empirical work, and the improve-
ment of the evaluation and treatment of misophonia [ 20,29,54]. Some authors suggested
that misophonia should be considered an obsessive-compulsive spectrum disorder [ 20].
They proposed six diagnostic criteria, among which it was stated that the presence or antic-
ipation of the sound causes an aversive physical reaction, that anger is the salient feeling,
and that the sensation experienced by the patient is explained by obsessive-compulsive
disorder or post-traumatic disorder [ 20]. On the other hand, another diagnostic proposal
for misophonia was developed where it was indicated that the diagnostic criteria needed
to be updated based on new scientiﬁc evidence ﬁndings [ 29]. For example, it was found
that misophonic sound could come from any source, not strictly limited to human activi-
ties [ 2,5,28,29]. Thus, a triggering stimulus can be a sound emitted by animals, electronic
devices, or other objects. Based on these and other considerations, an adapted and updated
version of the diagnostic criteria for misophonia was proposed [ 29]. For example, the
stimulus is considered to elicit an immediate physical reaction that is not always easy to
identify [29].
3.5.2. Differential Diagnosis
It should be noted that the symptomatology of misophonia may share characteristics
with other psychiatric and auditory disorders or be confused with them, contributing to its
underdiagnosis [4].
Table 1 shows the disorders that may be most frequently involved in the differential
diagnosis of misophonia and their similarities and differences.

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022 ,19, 6790 10 of 26
Table 1. Disorders most frequently involved in the differential diagnosis of misophonia.
Disorder Similarities with Misophonia Differences with MisophoniaPsychiatric disorderSpeciﬁc phobiaA triggering stimulus may evoke a negative
response, as well as avoidance behaviors.In speciﬁc phobia, one experiences mostly anxiety and
fear, whereas with misophonia a high degree of anger
and aggression is perceived [20].
Phonophobia Fear of a speciﬁc sound.The main symptom is not anxiety or fear as in
phonophobia, but the feeling of irritation, disgust, or
anger [10,20].
Social phobiaHabitual avoidance of social situations, due
to experiencing anxiety and stress.In social phobia, the reason is a hypersensitivity
towards negative social evaluation; whereas in
misophonia, the social situation is avoided to prevent
an encounter with the misophonic sound [20].
Post-traumatic stress disorder
(PTSD)Aversive reaction to a stimulus and
avoidance behaviors are shared.The person with PTSD had to experience a traumatic
event. In the case of misophonia, no such association
has been demonstrated [20,35].
Obsessive-compulsive disorder
(OCD)They share an excessive preoccupation
towards a speciﬁc stimulus, as well as the
feeling of anxiety.People with OCD often perform compulsive behaviors
to reduce anxiety. In their case, there are no behaviors
such as aggression and anger that may occur in
misophonia.
Intermittent explosive disorder Here, the shared factor is anger.In misophonia, the triggering stimulus of anger is
always a sound, for explosive disorder it can be any
stimulus. Loss of control does not usually occur in
misophonia [20].
Eating behavior disordersThe most frequent emotional trigger in
misophonia, as in the TCA, is food.For the person with misophonia, the trigger is the
sound of food, for ED, it is the ingestion of food [23].
Obsessive compulsive personality
disorder (OCPD)The shared factors are anger or aggression.People with misophonia respond to the same auditory
stimulus, people with OCPD do not relate to triggering
sounds [20].
Autism Spectrum Disorders
(ASD)Auditory hyper-reactivity is observed.People with ASD show intolerance to unexpected and
loud noises. People with misophonia can react to any
type of auditory stimulus [20].
Sensory processing disorder
(SPD)Auditory hyper-reactivity is observed.The person with TPS reacts to unexpected and loud
noises, there is also hyper-reactivity to other stimuli.
The person with misophonia reacts to any auditory
stimulus [20].
Personality disorders with
impulsive aggressionDifﬁculty in controlling anger and
impulsivity occurs.The reactions are not necessarily related to a speciﬁc
sound, as is the case with misophonia [55].Auditive disorderTinnitus Can provoke negative emotions; anxiety.It is perceived in one or both ears in the absence of
acoustic source [9].
HyperacusisNegative reaction to any auditory stimulus
with physical characteristics (loudness and
frequency) [55].The stimulus characteristics are neutral or of very low
frequency and intensity and
context-independent [3,56].
3.6. Comorbidity
High rates of comorbidity of misophonia with mental disorders have been reported,
and therefore, it has been suggested to classify misophonia as such [ 5,20,25,34]. In contrast,
there are authors who indicated very low rates of comorbidity, arguing that misophonia
is detached from psychopathological disorders and should be considered as a distinct en-
tity [ 56]. The most frequent mental disorders comorbid with misophonia are depression [ 6],
obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) [ 57,58], and anxiety [ 22]. Comorbidity has also been
observed with neurological disorders such as Tourette’s syndrome and auditory system
disorders [42,59].
3.6.1. Misophonia and Associated Mental Disorders
Preliminary research states that misophonia can coexist with a wide range of psy-
chiatric disorders [ 8,25]. Anxiety disorders have been shown to be often associated with
misophonic symptomatology [ 5,31,34,60]. For example, one paper indicated signiﬁcant
correlations between misophonia scales with other OCD, anxiety, and depression scales [ 5].

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022 ,19, 6790 11 of 26
This one also showed that anxiety was a signiﬁcant mediator between misophonic symp-
tomatology and anger [ 5]. On the other hand, another study reported that 12% of people
with misophonia had a ﬁrst diagnosis of anxiety disorder and that the severity of the anxi-
ety disorder was signiﬁcantly associated with the severity of misophonic symptoms [ 34].
Based on this relationship, the authors suggested that anxious psychopathology might
contribute to the development of misophonia by predisposing the individual to be more
sensitive and aware of their environment. If this hypothesis is proven, misophonia would
be a consequence of the anxiety disorder due to hypervigilance of the nervous system [ 34].
Although this hypothesis seems logical, it should be considered that other studies indicated
that more than 80% of misophonic patients do not suffer from an anxiety disorder.
Apart from this theory, it has been suggested that the association between misophonia
with anxious, obsessive, and depressive symptoms indicated phenomenological similarities
that did not necessarily imply the presence of a common disorder but rather reafﬁrmed
that misophonic symptoms were not fully explained by any of these psychopathologies,
contributing to their identiﬁcation as a distinct diagnostic entity [ 5]. In this regard, one
paper describes two cases of misophonic patients treated with anxiolytic and antidepres-
sant medications, which, despite alleviating anxious and depressive symptoms, failed to
diminish their aversive reaction to triggering stimuli [2].
OCD is one of the mental disorders most frequently associated with misophonia;
approximately half of the people with misophonia also have obsessive-compulsive symp-
tomatology [ 15]. Based on this estimate, the authors believed that misophonia should be
classiﬁed as a type of OCD [ 15]. Misophonia shares clinical features with OCD in that the
preoccupation with the stimulus is experienced as intrusive and unwanted thoughts, and
furthermore, the individual in both cases seeks strategies to avoid distress [ 5,31,58]. It has
also been proposed that misophonic symptoms and sensory overactivity are shared in both
OCD and misophonia [58].
One study focused on the task of analyzing the relationship between OCD symptoms
and misophonia among a large sample of college students and the general population
(n= 828) [ 57]. It was found that elevated OCD or misophonia symptomatology scores
increased the risk of developing the other pathology. Furthermore, misophonia was signiﬁ-
cantly associated with obsessive symptoms of OCD, suggesting that obsessive thoughts
were a particularly shared feature between the two disorders rather than compulsions [ 57].
The clinical similarity between misophonia and OCD leads some to consider that
misophonic reactions are best described as a symptom of OCD, generalized anxiety disorder,
or a personality disorder [ 61]. However, a 2018 study of nearly 400 misophonic patients
showed that only 50% of the participants had comorbidity with another psychiatric disorder,
whereby their condition could not be explained as an effect of another diagnostic entity [ 40].
Although the evidence suggests the existence of misophonia as a distinct pathology, it
is important to keep in mind that comorbidity with OCD increases the severity of the
condition because the symptomatology overlaps: misophonic stimuli produce a negative
emotional reaction, which is reinforced by avoidance behavior, and these in turn increase
the patient’s anxiety and distress [ 58]. This was veriﬁed in another study, which reported
that misophonic patients with other comorbid conditions such as OCD or PTSD report
more severe symptoms compared to those suffering exclusively from misophonia [40].
The comorbidity of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) with misophonia had previ-
ously been reported in the case of one patient [ 2]; although he met diagnostic criteria for
PTSD, the pathology did not explain the patient’s aversive response to one type of sounds.
Another study with a large sample [ 40] noted that the rate of this comorbidity amounts to
12%, the same percentage reported for comorbidity with tinnitus. The symptomatology
shared between PTSD and misophonia is the decreased reactivity threshold since, in both
cases, patients experience muscle tension in response to a triggering stimulus; therefore, it
was suggested that associative learning may inﬂuence the development of the conditioned
response in the two disorders [40].

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022 ,19, 6790 12 of 26
Moreover, several papers observed links between misophonia and other psychiatric
disorders [ 8]. In a sample of 92 misophonic participants from Singapore, this diagnosis was
found to be associated with others such as depression (52% of cases) and schizophrenia
(22%) [ 34]. Depression was not signiﬁcantly associated with the severity of misophonic
symptoms, and the authors suggested that this disorder may not be relevant in the develop-
ment or understanding of misophonia [ 34]. Instead, these results differ from other studies
that reported positive and signiﬁcant correlations between symptoms of depression and
misophonia [ 5,31]. Therefore, the association of depression with this disorder should not
be ruled out, but needs to be studied with greater speciﬁcity. These authors suggested that
low tolerance to a sound may increase depressive symptoms, although the relationship
could also be inverse, i.e., that depression predisposes the person to have greater sensitivity
to certain sounds [5].
It should be noted that misophonia was also found to occur with other pathologies
such as attention deﬁcit disorder with and without hyperactivity (ADD/ADHD) in 12% of
cases, eating disorders (8%), and selective mutism (6%) [ 40]. However, for the authors, none
of these added disorders was sufﬁcient to explain the misophonic symptoms [ 40]. Recent
studies evaluated the relationship between inattention and misophonic symptoms [ 59]. For
example, a study assessing selective attention in patients with misophonia showed that
participants had a lower percentage of correct responses on the chewing sound dichotic
sentence identiﬁcation test [ 62]: suggesting that individuals with misophonia may have
impaired selective attention when exposed to sounds that trigger this condition [ 62,63].
As can be seen, different psychopathologies have been associated with misophonia as
they share clinical features and comorbidity is present in about half of the cases, so it is
important that the study of this line continues [20,40].
A recent study, 2022, found two potential subgroups of individuals with misophonia:
one with “pure form” misophonia with more severe misophonic symptoms but few con-
current conditions, the second subgroup showed greater numbers of concurrent conditions
that may represent misophonia as a secondary phenomenon of other neuropsychiatric
conditions [ 64]. These subgroups create a new demand: to explore the relationship between
misophonia sensory symptoms, misophonia emotional reactivity/behavioral symptoms,
and other related neuropsychiatric conditions, such as ASD and anxiety, with emphasis
on neural mechanisms. Future work should evaluate auditory stimuli and their responses,
as well as the assessment of cognitive control difﬁculties exhibited by individuals with
misophonia to address the possible relationship between misophonia, sensory processing
disorders, executive function, and state/trait anxiety levels [65].
3.6.2. Misophonia and Neurological and Auditory Disorders
Proper functioning of the central and peripheral nervous system is essential for opti-
mal information processing. Although it appears that this system functions adequately in
misophonic patients, there are cases in which a neurological disorder coexists and overlaps
the symptoms [ 2,44,46]. Tourette’s syndrome (TS) is a neurological disorder that presents
in childhood or adolescence and is characterized by the presence of motor and phonolog-
ical tics. It is also considered a psychiatric disorder, because its symptoms resemble the
compulsive behaviors of OCD [ 6]. One paper described the case of a 52-year-old man with
TS who, one year before the onset of the syndrome’s symptomatology, began to develop an
aversion to the sound his father made while chewing [ 59]. The misophonic responses were
in addition to the motor tics, and this contributed to a series of behavioral problems that
affected his quality of life. The authors suggested the possibility of an associated physiolog-
ical disturbance between the two disorders, although this has not been demonstrated at
present [59].
Sensory processing disorder (SPD), also called modulation disorder or sensory integra-
tion disorder, is a condition in which sensory information is inappropriately processed and
organized. As a result, developmental delays, and emotional and behavioral problems such
as those characteristics of autism spectrum disorders occur [ 66]. TPS, more common in chil-

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022 ,19, 6790 13 of 26
dren, is evidenced by an exaggerated or inappropriate response to the presence of various
sensory stimuli [ 66]. For example, aversive responses to certain colors, sounds, or tactile
stimuli are observed. One study showed that individuals with misophonic symptomatol-
ogy also had an intolerance to tactile stimuli, suggesting a relationship between TPS and
misophonia [ 67]. In addition, individuals with sensory intolerance had higher rates of gen-
eral psychopathology, obsessive-compulsive symptoms, and poorer social and occupational
functioning [ 67]. No cases of comorbidity between misophonia and olfactory processing
disorders -such as hyperosmia- have been described, although it is likely that they are
related since their neurobiological substrate is thought to be associated with alterations of
the autonomic nervous system and limbic system, as occurs in misophonia [68–70].
When the failure of sensory processing occurs in the auditory system, it is referred to
as auditory processing disorder (APD), which produces a high intolerance to sounds [ 67].
In the scientiﬁc literature, a case has been reported of a misophonic patient who had a
previous diagnosis of APD, which alone did not explain the clinical reactions [ 2]. Thus,
misophonia can coexist with TPA, where there is a hyper-reactivity towards loud and
unexpected sounds (caused by TPA), and in addition an aversive response towards sounds
of the same pattern irrespective of their physical properties (due to misophonia). The
neurobiological mechanisms of TPA could be related to those of misophonia, although in
the latter case, it is an overactivation of the limbic system, whereas TPA is due to a lack of
maturation of the central auditory system.
In relation to the alterations of the auditory system, tinnitus and hyperacusis have a
close relationship with misophonia, due to the similarity of symptomatology. It is essential
to make a correct differential diagnosis, but sometimes patients present comorbidity with these
hearing disorders. The association between these disorders has been confirmed in other studies,
and it is estimated that 12% of patients with misophonia also have tinnitus [ 2,40].The causes
of these conditions differ, so they should be treated as distinct entities requiring speciﬁc
treatment [27,56].
3.7. Instruments and Procedure for the Assessment of Misophonia
The main difﬁculties faced in research and health care for patients with misophonia
are related to the assessment process. At present, there are very few objective tests that
assess this diagnosis.
3.7.1. Clinical Anamnesis
Clinical anamnesis is an essential tool for recognizing misophonic symptomatology,
which will also provide information on the onset and course of the disorder, the triggering
stimuli, and the patient’s emotional and physiological reactions. Authors have emphasized
the importance of a complete evaluation that involves the interview of the psychiatrist
and/or psychologist, to know the presence of comorbid conditions, as well as the use of
drugs or psychoactive substances [24,39].
The anamnesis is also a tool commonly used in research, especially in case
studies [ 2,35–37,71]. Although the structure and content of the anamnesis is variable,
and depends on the needs of the practitioner, there are a number of data that should be
collected. In addition to patient identiﬁcation data, it is essential to collect as much detail
as possible about the history and characteristics of the symptoms, in order to determine
whether there are sufﬁcient reasons to think of a pathology, and to analyze which best
explains the clinical picture.
When misophonia is suspected, it is crucial to ﬁnd out if there are cases of family
members who have an aversion to a particular type of sound, because as previously
mentioned, it is common for several members of the same family to present misophonic
symptoms [ 20,23,40]. Other essential information is to know since when the aversive
reactions to the triggering stimuli began, and how the symptomatology has evolved.
The precise misophonic response of the patient must also be speciﬁed, as this varies in
each individual, e.g., the speciﬁc emotions and physical sensations experienced must be

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022 ,19, 6790 14 of 26
recognized. In relation to the misophonic stimulus, it should be investigated whether it is
exclusively auditory stimuli, or whether the clinical response has extended to other sensory
modalities such as visual, kinesthetic, or olfactory [ 2,27,67]. Moreover, to understand the
causes of the maintenance of the disorder, it is necessary to describe the patient’s behaviors
and coping strategies, which will also be relevant for treatment planning [29,35].
3.7.2. Audiological Evaluation
A 2021 study, which assessed ( n= 253) misophonia with an online psychoacoustic
test, suggested that such a test can be used to assess misophonia reliably and quickly [ 72].
However, although audiological measurement is historically a suggested component of
the assessment of misophonia, there is no agreement on the protocol that should be per-
formed [ 24]. The lack of consensus is due to the fact that there are no clear audiological
criteria for the diagnosis of misophonia, as misophonic patients have shown both reduced
levels of hearing and normal levels [ 4,73]. Audiological assessment includes measurement
of pitch thresholds and sound discomfort levels, but since no such criteria are known to
characterize misophonia, for now, assessment should focus on the clinical history and
questionnaires described below.
However, even if the audiological evaluation does not in itself conﬁrm misophonia, it
may be important in making the differential diagnosis of other hearing conditions.
If sound intolerance is not speciﬁc to the same sound pattern, it is necessary to rule
out hyperacusis, and hyperacusis can be detected through audiological studies since pa-
tients with hyperacusis generally present discomfort at lower than average volume [ 6]. In
addition, let us remember that hyperacusis and misophonia often coexist, so audiological
evaluation will be substantial in these cases [ 2,4,40]. There are questionnaires that, together
with audiological tests, allow us to know the hypersensitivity to sound, such as the hy-
peracusis test (THS) [ 74]. It is a 15-item questionnaire that evaluates three dimensions:
cognitive behavior in relation to hyperacusis, somatic behavior, and emotional reactions.
It is answered on a four-choice Likert-type scale (0–3), and the overall score indicates the
degree of impairment. It has been adapted and translated into Spanish, showing a high
internal consistency (a = 0.90) [75].
3.7.3. Self-Administered Scales of Misophonia
The second type of tools most commonly used for the assessment of misophonia are
self-report instruments, although most of them are not validated. The most representative
ones to date are shown in Table 2.
Table 2. Self-administered scales for Misophonia.
Self-Administered Scales for Misophonia
Name Description Aim Comment
Misophonia Activation Scale
(MAS-1) [76]Developed by Fitzmaurice
(Misophonia-uk-org)To evaluate the severity of
misophonia on a scale of 1 to 10
where extreme 10 indicates the
most severe level of misophonic
reaction.It has been used in different
studies, but has not been
validated.
[35,53,77]
Amsterdam Misophonia Scale
(A-MISO-S)
[20]It is adapted from a scale for
measuring obsessive-compulsive
disorder
(Yale-Brown Scale).To measure the intensity of
misophonia and its inﬂuence on
social functioning, anger, and
efforts to inhibit aggressive
impulses.Designed from another scale
that measures another
symptomatology.
Misophonia Questionnaire (MQ) [ 1]It is composed of the symptom
scale, the emotions and behaviors
scale, and the severity scale.To assess the sensitivity to sounds,
explores the emotional and
behavioral reaction associated
with the stimulus.Widely used
[31,57,78,79].
Misophonia Physical Response
Scale (MPRS) [80]Developed by The Misophonia
Treatment InstituteTo collect the physical sensations
related to misophonia.It assesses the intensity of the
physiological response.

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022 ,19, 6790 15 of 26
Table 2. Cont.
Self-Administered Scales for Misophonia
Name Description Aim Comment
Online questionnaire
[40]Designed to know the frequency
of misophonic people in the
general population.To inquire about the family
history of misophonia, the
presence of symptoms, and the
characteristic of the response.
Selective Sound Sensitivity
Syndrome Scale ( S-Five) [30]For its development, a sample
was used in the United Kingdom
for people over 18 years of age.To evaluate internalizing and
externalizing appraisals, as well
as threat perception and
avoidance behavior.Under development and in the
process of
validation.
MisoQuest
[81]Validated questionnaire based on
diagnostic criteria proposed in
other studies.Rule out the consideration of
violent behavior in response to
misophonic triggers as a
symptom of misophonia.The reliability of this
questionnaire was shown to be
excellent.
Misophonia
Response Scale
(MRS)
[82]This scale was not conducted as a
speciﬁc tool to diagnose the
presence of misophonia.To know the magnitude of the
misophonic response in the
presence of innocuous stimuli.
Auditory, olfactory, visual, and
tactile stimuli are also assessed.Adequate discriminant and
convergent validity. Good
internal consistency.
Duke Misophonia Questionnaire
(DMQ) [83]Scale of 86 items: subdivided into
(a) general severity of symptoms
and (b) coping.Development and psychometric
validation of a self-report measure
of misophonia.The subscales can be used
individually.
Misophonia Emotion Responses (MER-2) [35]
At the time of the present study, these measures had not yet been
subjected to psychometric evaluation.Misophonia Coping Responses Scale (MCRS) [35]
Misophonia Trigger Severity Scale [35].
Sussex Misophonia Scale for Adolescents
(SMS-Adolescent) [84]The ﬁrst questionnaire of
misophonia validated for children
and adolescents
(10 to 14 years old).It is an adapted version of the
scale for adults [85].
The most recent questionnaire is the Sussex Misophonia Scale for Adolescents (SMS-
Adolescent), the only one that currently assesses misophonia in children/adolescents [ 85].
It is an adaptation of previous version for adults of the same authors [ 86]. The study was
conducted with a sample of 142 children (10–14 years; mean 11.72 SD 1.12; 65 females,
77 males). In addition, the study was able to demonstrate that children with misophonia
showed signiﬁcantly higher levels of anxiety and obsessive-compulsive traits than children
without misophonia. In addition, they also showed that health-related quality of life was
signiﬁcantly poorer.
3.7.4. Emotional Assessment
An important component of the misophonic response is emotional, and it is therefore
crucial to include such measurements in a comprehensive assessment of a patient with
possible misophonia. Previous evidence indicates that misophonia causes psychological
distress and impaired quality of life, so it is important to assess these variables [ 2,6,15,21].
Furthermore, given that the misophonic response is associated with anxious and depressive
symptomatology, it is important to incorporate inventories that allow us to know the
patient’s emotional state [5,31,34].
3.7.5. Physiological Measurements
It has been shown that the patient’s physiological response is part of the misophonic
symptomatology, so that measurements of nervous system activity can be useful in the
diagnosis of the disorder [ 44]. Electroencephalography (EEG) and functional magnetic
resonance imaging have been used in research to record neuronal activity [ 45,46], as well
as measurements of galvanic skin response [2].
From the above, it would be pertinent to propose the use of the electrocardiogram
(ECG), to identify the reactions of the autonomic nervous system, since it allows recording
the heart rate variability (HRV) of patients and identifying the presence of alterations [ 87].

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022 ,19, 6790 16 of 26
In this respect, one of our studies [ 19] has shown that in highly restrictive environmental
situations, such as the one that occurred during the COVID-19 lockdown, the heart rate
variability of patients with misophonia underwent changes with respect to the recordings
of the same triggers previously measured. More importantly, this loss of coherence also
occurred with imagined or evoked sound triggers.
Although there are no speciﬁc physiological indicators of the misophonic response,
it is known that there is an increase in autonomic activity [ 1,6] and the identiﬁcation of
these reactions would favor the understanding of misophonia, as well as guide treatment.
Taylor [ 9] proposed that, for the consolidation of misophonia as a diagnostic entity, it
was important to establish precise biological and physiological indicators, which could be
identiﬁed by laboratory studies for the delineation of the disorder and, subsequently, for
its diagnosis [9].
3.8. Treatment Options
This section presents the possible treatments that have been studied and proposed in
recent years to treat misophonia. According to this literature review, there are currently
no randomized controlled trials examining the efﬁcacy of treatments for misophonia [ 1].
These are strategies developed through clinical practice, which have not been studied
under adequate experimental conditions. Moreover, Brout et al. [1] warned of the need to
recognize that data are still insufﬁcient to classify misophonia as a psychiatric disorder,
which should also be explained to the patient [ 1]. In the absence of a speciﬁc treatment for
misophonia, a multidisciplinary approach becomes especially important for the treatment
of related physical and emotional conditions [88].
3.8.1. Audiological Treatment
Misophonia was recognized at the beginning of its study as an auditory condition, sim-
ilar to tinnitus or hyperacusis. Consequently, the usual therapeutic intervention consisted
of the use of devices for the retraining of the triggering sound, or portable white noise
generators to minimize the concentration on misophonic sounds [ 22]. A clear example
of the therapeutic approach from audiology is tinnitus retraining therapy (TRT), which
offers different treatment protocols in which the patient is systematically exposed to the
triggering sounds, with the aim of achieving habituation to it [ 3,4,27,54,56]. Another case
study included a hybrid approach involving TRT and telecare, with good results [ 89]. In
relation to TRT, it has been reported that more than 80% of misophonic patients in a group
of 184 participants improved after this treatment [ 56]. In addition to the lack of scientiﬁc
evidence, this strategy may help in symptom control, especially in patients who have
comorbidity with tinnitus, but it does not address the complexity of misophonic responses
or the causes of the syndrome.
Similarly, Johnson [ 69] postulated that the most effective treatment for misophonia is
educational counseling in combination with auditory therapies [ 69]. The latter generally
consist of the use of devices, the size of hearing aids, that produce sounds that help mask
aversive stimuli. There is no known support from experimental studies demonstrating the
effectiveness of the therapy proposed by Johnson, yet.
3.8.2. Pharmacological Treatment
Although there is no speciﬁc pharmacological treatment for misophonia or research
protocols in this regard, the use of antidepressant and anxiolytic drugs has been described
to attenuate the clinical symptomatology or comorbid conditions associated with miso-
phonia [ 24]. In this regard, two cases are reported of misophonic individuals who were
treated with anxiolytics and antidepressants to alleviate emotional responses, although this
treatment did not solve the problem, as they continued to experience clinical symptoms [ 2].
However, a recent study has reported drug use directly affecting misophonia. This
particular study showed the case of a 14-year-old adolescent girl with misophonia success-
fully treated with ﬂuoxetine. In the fourth month of treatment, there was a 40% decrease

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022 ,19, 6790 17 of 26
in the Children’s Global Assessment Scale (CGA) score [ 87]. In addition, another study
also demonstrated that the use of methylphenidate helped an adolescent patient decrease
symptoms of distractibility due to misophonia [ 90]. Although these types of drugs were
developed to treat psychopathologies other than misophonia, they are probably useful in
those patients who present association with symptoms of depression or anxiety [5,31,34].
There is also a case study, conducted in 2022, wherein propranolol, a -blocker, was
used to successfully treat a patient experiencing misophonia and misokinesia by completely
eliminating multiple auditory and visual triggering symptoms related to eating with other
people [ 33]. In another case study from 2022, a child with autism responded favorably to a
low dose of risperidone [42].
As a future line of research, it would be interesting to analyze, through randomized
clinical trials with large samples, the efﬁcacy of psychotropic drugs in the treatment of
misophonia.
3.8.3. Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy
The main goal of this approach is to develop coping skills to prevent and respond
appropriately to one’s own misophonia symptoms [ 1,91]. It is important to note that there
are no proven psychological therapy protocols for misophonic patients yet, so this treatment
approach is based for now on the general principles of cognitive-behavioral therapy [92].
Some authors considered cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) to be effective in the
treatment of misophonia given that sympathetic nervous system hypersensitivity may be
a threshold amenable to modiﬁcation through cognition and behavior [ 16]. In addition,
CBT has been observed to support emotional and behavioral control in patients with
misophonia when they hear or anticipate misophonic sounds. For example, based on
CBT principles, a tailored psychoeducation course was implemented for a patient with
misophonia, the aim of which was to provide information about anxiety and its relationship
with the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis [ 22]. The assumption was that the sensitive
threshold could be modiﬁed through cognitive and behavioral self-management. Treatment
included identiﬁcation and restructuring of negative automatic thoughts, modiﬁcation
of maladaptive behaviors such as avoidance, and training to control autonomic nervous
system reactivity. After six treatment sessions, the patient achieved that exposure to
misophonic sounds did not signiﬁcantly impede her social and occupational functioning.
Moreover, at the end of the intervention, a reduction in symptoms and an increase in her life
satisfaction were observed, results that remained stable over four months of follow-up [ 22].
A 2015 case study showed improvement of misophonic responses with two young
people after application of CBT [ 93]. In 2017, a study was conducted with a large sample
of misophonic patients ( n= 90) who received a treatment of eight sessions of CBT, whose
efﬁcacy was assessed using the clinical global impression of improvement scale [ 51]. At
the end of the treatment, 48% of patients had signiﬁcant clinical improvement in relation
to misophonic symptoms. Furthermore, it was found that the severity of misophonia and
the presence of disgust positively predicted the response to CBT. That is, patients with
severe misophonia and those experiencing disgust to the triggering stimulus were more
likely to respond to treatment [ 35]. Finally, another case study, also from 2017, in addition
to CBT, included dialectical behavioral therapy (DBT) with good results arguing that this
therapy might be appropriate for people with misophonia who experience intense anger
responses [94].
In general, different studies have presented cases subjecting misophonic patients to
different cognitive-behavioral therapy plans, using, for example, principles of exposure
and response prevention [ 71,92,95,96]. Moreover, separate analyses have been performed
for patients with tinnitus, hyperacusis, and misophonia [ 96,97]. These studies have been
successful in increasing the level of tolerance to triggering stimuli, signiﬁcantly reducing
psychological distress and self-reported physiology, and signiﬁcantly reducing the feeling
of anger at the triggering stimulus [71,96,97].

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022 ,19, 6790 18 of 26
3.8.4. Third-Generation Therapies
Other approaches to misophonia have been from the third wave of behavioral ther-
apies or third generation therapies (TTG) [ 98,99]. As well as acceptance-based therapies,
compassion training and distress tolerance could effectively address misophonia [ 100,101],
as well as mindfulness therapies, acceptance, and commitment therapy (ACT) [24].
Currently, there is only one study (2021) of treatment for misophonia that has been
conducted with eye movement desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR) therapy [102].
Third-generation therapies aim to address the emotional responses caused by miso-
phonic stimuli [ 24]. However, in order to have a truly effective treatment, larger studies
ruling out comorbidity and deﬁning diagnostic protocols are needed [58].
4. Discussion
This study shows an extensive bibliographic analysis of the advances of the last twenty
years in the area of misophonia, which has allowed to know in depth the main problems and
challenges of a little-known disorder. Aspects such as its evolution, epidemiology, etiology,
diagnosis, comorbidity, evaluation instruments, and treatment have been considered. As a
result, it can be stated that misophonia is a little-known and poorly studied disorder, which
still has many information gaps [1].
4.1. On the Concept of Misophonia and Its Impact
The literal meaning of misophonia is “hatred of sound”, and is attributed to the intense
aversive response that the person with misophonia experiences to a triggering stimulus,
which is usually a sound or the observation of a movement [ 58]. Although many research
articles used this term to describe misophonia, the members of a recent Delphi study [ 16]
“objected to including this translation in the deﬁnition as those with misophonia neither
speciﬁcally feel hate nor do they necessary feel strong emotions only related to sound (i.e.,
some also have similar responses to visual triggers not associated with sounds, such as leg
swinging)”.
Misophonia causes an impact and deterioration in the patient’s quality of life, both in
adults and in children and adolescents, according to [ 84,85]. Thus, in a recent study [ 84],
the quality of life was also impoverished in a group of children with misophonia compared
to those who did not suffer from this disorder, as well as contributing to the development
of other problems such as anxiety and obsessive-compulsive disorder. The most common
symptoms are anger, discomfort, disgust, anxiety, and avoidance and escape behaviors [ 6].
Studies indicated that this is an exaggerated response to a speciﬁc stimulus, a criterion
that is also shared by people suffering from misophonia, despite the fact that they tend to
attribute intentionality to the people who emit the sounds [ 55]. One case study described
a patient’s pressing need to become deaf to stop suffering from sounds [ 103]. Different
authors highlighted the need to unify the criteria for diagnosing misophonia through
validated scales and with the support of the DSM-5 [ 104], where the disorder is currently
not covered [ 47,57,69]. However, despite the scarcity of studies, in recent years, there
has been a signiﬁcant increase in the number of studies. The reasons for their growing
interest were: (1) the need to recognize that there are stimuli that may seem harmless to
the general population, but that, nevertheless, in some people cause severe symptoms that
considerably affect their lifestyle [ 2,6,20,29]; (2) the importance of correctly diagnosing
the disorder without the risk of being confused with other similar conditions; [ 5,20,34,83];
and (3) the existing insufﬁciency of effective treatments that can be validated to treat the
symptoms of misophonia [88].
4.2. The Diagnosis of Misophonia
An important area to highlight has been the interest in clarifying the diagnosis of
this disorder. Due to this, some authors have focused on presenting a series of diagnostic
criteria to make it valid and generalizable. Despite this, there is currently no consensus on
the criteria to establish its diagnosis. Schröder et al. [ 20] and Dozier et al. [ 29], based on the

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022 ,19, 6790 19 of 26
body of knowledge studied to date, proposed a series of criteria for diagnosis. Building on
these studies, other works incorporated variables that would gradually shape the diagnostic
criteria for misophonia [ 2,5,28,29]. It should be considered that the model proposed by
Dozier et al. [ 29], which was an adaptation of the one suggested by Schröder et al. [ 20],
is undoubtedly a promising model, which if proven effective would lay the groundwork
for the development of a future consensus of diagnostic criteria for misophonia among
the medical-healthcare community. The summary of such criteria is summarized in the
following points:
1. The presence or anticipation of a speciﬁc sensory experience such as a sound, vision
or other stimulus of any sensory modality, intensity, and frequency.
2. The triggering stimulus must be a conditioned stimulus.
3. The stimulus of moderate duration (15”) elicits an immediate, reflexive, physical response.
4. Dysregulation of potentially aggressive emotions and thoughts, recognizing these as
illogical and negative.
5. Avoidant and ﬂight behaviors interfering in the person’s life.
In spite of all of them being diagnostic criteria, mostly accepted, it should be noted that
in order to reach a correct diagnostic criterion, it is necessary to carry out methodological
improvements such as increasing the size of the samples in the case studies, including
participants from different countries and different social classes, taking into account the
clinical history of the patients, and above all considering criteria that are speciﬁcally
designed for this disorder [20].
4.3. The Differential Diagnosis and the Comorbidities
As described above, no consensus has been reached to establish diagnostic criteria for
misophonia, but also no uniﬁcation of criteria exists for the comorbidity in misophonia
which is high and therefore a very important issue [ 20,29].Thus, in recent years, it has been ob-
served that misophonia can be confused with other disorders, both psychiatric [ 5,8,20,34,40,105]
and auditory disorders [ 5,20]. For example, the symptoms of misophonia have enough similar-
ity with features of obsessive-compulsive disorder [20,41,58,61,106]. This is noteworthy, since
one of the most frequently associated disorders with misophonia is obsessive-compulsive
disorder (OCD) [ 20,31,40,41,57,58,105,107]. Another of the most frequent comorbid dis-
orders is anxiety [ 5,20,31,34,60,108] and depression [ 5,6,31,108]. It should be noted that
different authors found that misophonia also co-occurred with other pathologies such as
attention deﬁcit disorder with and without hyperactivity (ADD/ADHD) [ 40,105]. Comor-
bidity was also observed with neurological disorders such as Tourette’s syndrome and the
auditory system [ 41,59,66,105] and with the autism spectrum; one study, with a sample
of 779 subjects, conﬁrmed that 74% of people diagnosed with misophonia had autism
spectrum conditions in 14 (3%) [105].
Regarding auditory disorders, misophonia shares qualities with auditory conditions
such as tinnitus [2,40] and hyperacusis [3].
T o have a better understanding of the causes of misophonia, it should be taken into account
that there may be individual differences that determine that only a group of people develop this
aversion to sounds. This specificity of stimuli and symptomatology could be due to neurobio-
logical alterations [ 1,2,10,32,39,45–49], and/or genetic predisposition [ 20,23,40,41,43],which, in
conjunction with learning or conditioning [ 3,4,24,35,52,53,56], result in the development
of misophonia. From this it can certainly be concluded that in order to understand the
etiology of this disorder, it is essential to approach it from a multifactorial perspective.
In summary, the high comorbidity that misophonia has with other disorders has
contributed to its underdiagnosis, as it is often confused with other psychiatric and auditory
conditions [ 9,34]. Therefore, an important ﬁrst step is to make a complete psychiatric
evaluation to understand the type of reactions experienced by the patient, their intensity,
the individual’s level of consciousness, the type of triggering stimuli, and the course of
symptomatology [ 39]. It is essential to make a correct differential diagnosis, but it is also
important that the clinical community and the general population are aware of the existence

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022 ,19, 6790 20 of 26
of this disorder. In addition, knowing the similarities and differences of misophonia with
other psychiatric disorders, as well as understanding the causes of misophonia, will make
it possible to more accurately delineate misophonic symptomatology and develop effective
diagnostic and treatment strategies.
4.4. Instruments and Tools
A major advance for misophonia in recent years has been the assessment instruments
and procedures, even though these remain scarce and with various methodological limita-
tions. Undoubtedly, for most professionals, the anamnesis remains an essential resource for
the assessment of misophonia [ 2,14,24,35–37,39,71]. Although the structure and content of
the anamnesis are variable and depend on the needs of the professional, there are a number
of data that should be collected: (a) family history [ 20,23,40], (b) triggering stimuli [ 2,27,67],
and (c) behaviors or responses and coping strategies [23,35].
The creation of administered self-assessment questionnaires has been one of the great
advances in recent years. While it is true that nonvalidated questionnaires and scales have
been used, these have been an important resource for the study of misophonia, the most
representative in chronological order being:
(1) Misophonia Activation Scale (MAS-1) measures self-reported severity of the
trait [ 76]. (2) Amsterdam Misophonia Scale (A-MISO-S) measures anxiety caused by
misophonia and coping mechanisms [ 20]. (3) Misophonia Questionnaire (MQ) exten-
sively details information about misophonia [ 5]. (4) Misophonia Physical Sensation Scale
(MPRS) focuses on physical sensations and responses [ 80]. (5) Selective Sound Sensitivity
Syndrome Scale (S-Five) examines emotions, behaviors, experiences, and appraisals [ 30].
(6) MisoQuest has been validated and published in peer-reviewed journals. It is based
on the diagnostic criteria proposed by Schröder et al. in 2013. It did not include criteria
such as misokinesia or exposure time, nor intensity to the misophonic trigger, among
others [ 81]. (7) The Misophonia Response Scale (MRS) is a test of simple application. Its
objective was to determine the magnitude of the misophonic response in the presence of
innocuous stimuli. It showed adequate discriminant and convergent validity, with good
internal consistency [ 82]. (8) Duke Misophonia Questionnaire (DMQ) is a broad scale with
subscales. Depending on the needs, it can be applied in its entirety or only to the individual
subscales [ 83]. (9) The ﬁrst child/adolescent scale for misophonia Sussex Myofonia Scale
for Adolescents SMS Adolescent [84].
An historical assessment of misophonia has been the audiological assessment, for
which there is no agreement on the protocol to be applied [ 24]. However, although the
audiological evaluation does not conﬁrm misophonia in itself, it can be important to make
the differential diagnosis of other auditory conditions with which it frequently coexists,
such as hyperacusis and tinnitus, so that in these cases, the evaluation would be highly
indicated [ 2,4,40]. The last study with this type of measurement is from 2021, and its authors
suggested this online psychoacoustic test as a reliable and rapid test for the measurement
of misophonia [72].
In summary, the assessment of misophonia, through self-administered inventories,
needs to reinforce efforts to have valid and reliable instruments. It is also necessary to
increase the sample sizes of studies based on the generalization of results, as well as to
translate and adapt the scales to different populations. This does not necessarily indicate
that the existing instruments are inefﬁcient, but rather that they require greater scientiﬁc
support in order to be able to trust the results they yield. However, since these question-
naires are all that are currently available, we could use them to assess the presence and
severity of misophonia in patients, but with great care and attention to the interpreta-
tion and generalization of the results. Given the increase in research on misophonia, it is
essential to have rigorous psychometric and multimodal tools to measure this disorder.
Moreover, it is important to continue with research and to propose different methods
of diagnosis of misophonia that allow differentiation from other conditions and, therefore,
to establish valid and effective treatments to treat the symptoms of misophonia. The causes

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022 ,19, 6790 21 of 26
of these conditions differ, so they should be treated as distinct entities that require speciﬁc
treatment [27,56].
4.5. Treatments
Regarding the work done on the treatment of misophonia, although there are currently
no validated treatments, it cannot be denied that signiﬁcant progress has been made in this
area as well. Therapeutic interventions have been studied and proposed from audiological,
pharmacological, and cognitive-behavioral techniques.
From the audiological approach, tinnitus retraining therapy (TRT) aims to achieve
habituation to misophonic sound [ 3,4,27,56]. Another alternative is the use of sound
devices, which are the size of a hearing aid, with the aim of helping to mask the misophonic
sound [69].
From pharmacological therapies, antidepressants and anxiolytics have been used
to attenuate the symptomatology [ 24]. Other drugs such as methylphenidate [ 90] and
propranolol, a -blocker [33], have also been used to attenuate misophonic symptoms.
Regarding the third block of treatments, those related to cognitive-behavioral therapies
have been widely used showing that they can help to decrease misophonia symptoms and
improve the patient’s quality of life [ 14,56,87]. The main goal of these therapies has been
the development of coping skills, in general [ 109]. Within these therapies, educational,
self-management, cognitive restructuring, and educational techniques and strategies have
been used [ 22]. Additionally, within cognitive-behavioral therapies, we can ﬁnd therapies
called third generation therapies (TTG) [ 98,99] where work has been developed, among
others, related to eye movement desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR) [101].
5. Conclusions and Future Directions
Both large sample studies and individual case studies have provided valuable infor-
mation that allows for the advancement, development, and maintenance of misophonia. In
the more than 20 years of studying misophonia, we have been able to accurately describe
its symptomatology, approximate epidemiological data, develop explanatory hypotheses,
and propose treatment options. However, it is a subject that is still in its early stages, as it is
still necessary to reach a consensus on the diagnosis of the disorder, to have more assess-
ment instruments, and even to deﬁne the nature of misophonia. Certainly, individual and
collaborative efforts to summarize and integrate the knowledge on misophonia achieved
since the identiﬁcation of the disorder are in good pace. The growing evidence supports
misophonia as an emerging ﬁeld, and experts in the ﬁeld encourage new research efforts to
contribute to advances in understanding the nature and features of misophonia [ 110,111],
which still needs to be recognized as a clinical entity and all efforts come short in achieving
this status.
Recent advances in the treatment of misophonia allow to conclude that researchers
and scientists have done a great job in proposing and studying innovative and creative
treatments to treat a disorder that still does not have its clinical basis well established.
Although these treatment options have not yet been validated, each has presented some
improvements or advantages that should be considered in order to unify a treatment that
successfully treats the symptoms of misophonia.
In the case of sounds, the most frequent trigger stimulus, we proposed our current line
of therapeutic research with the development of active noise-canceling headphones. Such
headphones incorporate a microphone that detects the original sound and a loudspeaker
to create a phase-change sound that cancels the original sound, thus creating a soundless
environment suitable for people with misophonia. This system is in an experimental phase
and presents some difﬁculties in the kHz of certain sounds. This is certainly a palliative
measure and not a treatment, but the development of hearing aids that mute annoying
sounds can be of great help while research into the etiology and treatment of misophonia is
progressing.

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022 ,19, 6790 22 of 26
At the same time, we consider that a multidisciplinary approach to the treatment
of misophonia is desirable to reduce the misophonic symptoms: third generation thera-
pies, virtual reality therapies, as well as the use of drugs, in situations of need, can help
people with misophonia to have a better quality of life for the time being. Within the thera-
peutic actions, it should be considered to complete the intervention in a combined way:
(1) carrying out individual activities contemplated by the specialty in question, (2) at the
same time group activities are carried out where the relatives of the patients are included
with the aim of supporting the person with misophonia and the family itself, and (3) ed-
ucational training programs for misophonia. We consider of special interest this mixed
approach to help both people suffering from misophonia and their relatives, who in parallel,
also suffer from it.
We also consider necessary the construction of a database of sound, visual, kinesthetic,
and/or olfactory stimuli triggering misophonia for a faster and better identiﬁcation of
potential stimuli, and personalized interventions to prevent, alleviate, and relieve them
from the experience. In addition, it may also be of general interest because, as Savard
indicated in a recent study, the speciﬁcity of affective responses in misophonia depends on
the identiﬁcation of the trigger [112].
Despite the gaps that still exist on this topic, one thing that can be done to help people
suffering from this disorder is to keep medical personnel informed of all the advances in
symptomatology, diagnosis, and treatment of misophonia. In addition, patients need to be
informed about the paucity of measurement tools, the lack of clarity about the etiology of
the syndrome, and the lack of proven effective treatment. Ultimately, it is important to be
aware of the methodological limitations of the studies in generalizing results and making
assertions. Moreover, above all, it is necessary for the medical team of neurologists, audiol-
ogists, occupational therapists, neuropsychologists, clinical psychologists, and psychiatrists
to maintain an open and collaborative dialogue, which will expand the knowledge and
treatment of misophonia by focusing on the speciﬁc needs of each patient with misophonia.
Finally, since misophonia is considered by different authors as multisensory (sound,
kinesthetic [ 1,5,50,105], olfactory [ 82], etc.), its meaning should be revised since the etymol-
ogy of the word misophonia only reﬂects the discomfort due to sounds. We are currently
building a data base of trigger sound, visual, kinesthetic, and/or olfactory stimulus that
will also show the weighted incidence of the different types of triggering stimuli for an
individual and allow a faster and better identiﬁcation of potential stimulus, as well as the
design of tailored interventions to prevent, alleviate, and relieve the individual from the
misophonic experience.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, A.F.-T. and L.G.-L.; methodology , A.F.-T.; writing—original
draft preparation, A.F.-T.; writing—review and editing, A.F.-T. and L.G.-L. All authors have read and
agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Brout, J.J.; Edelstein, M.; Erfanian, M.; Mannino, M.; Miller, L.J.; Rouw, R.; Rosenthal, M.Z. Investigating Misophonia: A Review
of the Empirical Literature, Clinical Implications, and a Research Agenda. Front. Neurosci. 2018 ,12, 36. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2. Edelstein, M.; Brang, D.; Rouw, R.; Ramachandran, V .S. Misophonia: Physiological investigations and case descriptions. Front.
Hum. Neurosci. 2013 ,7, 296. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
3. Jastreboff, M.M.; Jastreboff, P .J. Decreased Sound Tolerance and Tinnitus Retraining Therapy (TRT). Aust. N. Z. J. Audiol. 2002 ,24, 74.
[CrossRef]

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022 ,19, 6790 23 of 26
4. Jastreboff, M.M.; Jastreboff, P .J. Treatments for decreased sound tolerance (hyperacusis and misophonia). Semin. Hear. 2014 ,35,
105–120. [CrossRef]
5. Wu, M.S.; Lewin, A.B.; Murphy, T.K.; Storch, E.A. Misophonia: Incidence, Phenomenology, and Clinical Correlates in an
Undergraduate Student Sample: Misophonia. J. Clin. Psychol. 2014 ,70, 994–1007. [CrossRef]
6. Siepsiak, M.; Dragan, W. Misophonia —A Review of Research Results and Theoretical Conceptions. Psychiatr. Polska 2019 ,53,
447–458. [CrossRef]
7. Daniels, E.C.; Rodriguez, A.; Zabelina, D.L. Severity of misophonia symptoms is associated with worse cognitive control when
exposed to misophonia trigger sounds. PLoS ONE 2020 ,15, e0227118. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
8. Cassiello-Robbins, C.; Anand, D.; McMahon, K.; Brout, J.; Kelley, L.; Rosenthal, M.Z. A preliminary investigation of the association
between misophonia and symptoms of psychopathology and personality disorders. Front. Psychol. 2021 ,11, 3842. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
9. Taylor, S. Misophonia: A new mental disorder? Med. Hypotheses 2017 ,103, 109–117. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
10. Møller, A.R. Misophonia, Phonophobia, and Exploding Head Syndrome. In Textbook of Tinnitus ; Springer: New York, NY, USA,
2011; pp. 25–27. [CrossRef]
11. Duddy, D.F.; Oeding, K.A.M. Misophonia: An Overview. Semin. Hear. 2014 ,35, 84–91. [CrossRef]
12. Ferrer-Torres, A.; Gim énez-Llort, L. Conﬁnement and the Hatred of Sound in Times of COVID-19: A Molotov Cocktail for People
with Misophonia. Front. Psychiatry 2021 ,12, 663. [CrossRef]
13. Potgieter, I.; MacDonald, C.; Partridge, L.; Cima, R.; Sheldrake, J.; Hoare, D.J. Misophonia: A scoping review of research. J. Clin.
Psychol. 2019 ,75, 203–1218. [CrossRef]
14. Naylor, J.; Caimino, C.; Scutt, P .; Hoare, D.J.; Baguley, D.M. The Prevalence and Severity of Misophonia in a UK Undergraduate
Medical Student Population and Validation of the Amsterdam Misophonia Scale. Psychiatr. Q. 2020 ,92, 609–619. [CrossRef]
15. Guetta, R.E.; Cassiello-Robbins, C.; Trumbull, J.; Anand, D.; Rosenthal, M.Z. Examining emotional functioning in misophonia:
The role of affective instability and difﬁculties with emotion regulation. PLoS ONE 2022 ,17, e0263230. [CrossRef]
16. Swedo, S.E.; Baguley, D.M.; Denys, D.; Dixon, L.J.; Erfanian, M.; Fioretti, A.; Jastreboff, P .J.; Kumar, S.; Rosenthal, M.Z.; Rouw, R.;
et al. Consensus Deﬁnition of Misophonia: A Delphi Study. Front. Neurosci. 2022 ,224, 841816. [CrossRef]
17. Moher, D.; Shamseer, L.; Clarke, M.; Ghersi, D.; Liberati, A.; Petticrew, M.; Shekelle, P .; Stewart, L.A.; PRISMA-P Group. Preferred
reporting items for systematic review and meta-analysis protocols (PRISMA-P) 2015 statement. Syst. Rev. 2015 ,4, 1. [CrossRef]
18. Jastreboff, M.M.; Jastreboff, P .J. Components of decreased sound tolerance: Hyperacusis, misophonia, phonophobia. ITHS News
Lett. 2001 ,2, 1–5.
19. Ferrer-Torres, A.; Gim énez-Llort, L. Sounds of Silence in Times of COVID-19: Distress and Loss of Cardiac Coherence in People
with Misophonia Caused by Real, Imagined or Evoked Triggering Sounds. Front. Psychiatry 2021 ,12, 638949. [CrossRef]
20. Schröder, A.; Vulink, N.; Denys, D. Misophonia: Diagnostic Criteria for a New Psychiatric Disorder. PLoS ONE 2013 ,8, e54706.
[CrossRef]
21. Schwartz, P .; Leyendecker, J.; Conlon, M. Hyperacusis and misophonia: The lesser-known siblings of tinnitus. Minn. Med. 2011 ,
94, 42–43.
22. Bernstein, R.E.; Angell, K.L.; Dehle, C.M. A brief course of cognitive behavioural therapy for the treatment of misophonia: A case
example. Cogn. Behav. Ther. 2013 ,6, E16. [CrossRef]
23. Sanchez, T.G.; Da Silva, F.E. Familial misophonia or selective sound sensitivity syndrome: Evidence for autosomal dominant
inheritance? Braz. J. Otorhinolaryngol. 2018 ,84, 553–559. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24. Palumbo, D.B.; Alsalman, O.; De Ridder, D.; Song, J.-J.; Vanneste, S. Misophonia and Potential Underlying Mechanisms: A
Perspective. Front. Psychol. 2018 ,9, 953. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
25. Cassiello-Robbins, C.; Anand, D.; McMahon, K.; Guetta, R.; Trumbull, J.; Kelley , L.; Rosenthal, M.Z. The mediating role of emotion
regulation within the relationship between neuroticism and misophonia: A preliminary investigation. Front. Psychiatry 2020 ,11, 847.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
26. Hansen, H.A.; Leber, A.B.; Saygin, Z.M. What sound sources trigger misophonia? Not just chewing and breathing. J. Clin. Psychol.
2021 ,77, 2609–2625. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
27. Jastreboff, P .J.; Jastreboff, M.M. Tinnitus retraining therapy: A different view on tinnitus. ORL J. Oto-Rhino-Laryngol. Its Relat. Spec.
2006 ,68, 23–29. [CrossRef]
28. Cavanna, A.E.; Seri, S. Misophonia: Current perspectives. Neuropsychiatr. Dis. Treat. 2015 ,11, 2117–2123. [CrossRef]
29. Dozier, T.H.; Lopez, M.; Pearson, C. Proposed Diagnostic Criteria for Misophonia: A Multisensory Conditioned Aversive Reﬂex
Disorder. Front. Psychol. 2017 ,8, 1975. [CrossRef]
30. Vitoratou, S.; Uglik-Marucha, N.; Hayes, C.; Erfanian, M.; Pearson, O.; Gregory, J. Item Response Theory Investigation of
Misophonia Auditory Triggers. Audiol. Res. 2021 ,11, 51. [CrossRef]
31. Zhou, X.; Wu, M.S.; Storch, E.A. Misophonia symptoms among Chinese university students: Incidence, associated impairment,
and clinical correlates. J. Obs.-Compuls. Relat. Disord. 2017 ,14, 7–12. [CrossRef]
32. McGeoch, P .D.; Rouw, R. How everyday sounds can trigger strong emotions: ASMR, misophonia and the feeling of wellbeing.
BioEssays 2020 ,42, 2000099. [CrossRef]
33. Webb, J. -Blockers for the Treatment of Misophonia and Misokinesia. Clin. Neuropharmacol. 2022 ,45, 13–14. [CrossRef]

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022 ,19, 6790 24 of 26
34. Quek, T.; Ho, C.; Choo, C.; Nguyen, L.; Tran, B.; Ho, R. Misophonia in Singaporean Psychiatric Patients: A Cross-Sectional Study.
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2018 ,15, 1410. [CrossRef]
35. Dozier, T.H. Etiology, composition, development and maintenance of misophonia: A conditioned aversive reﬂex disorder. Psychol.
Thought 2015 ,8, 114–129. [CrossRef]
36. Tunç, S.; Ba¸ sbu˘ g, H.S. An extreme physical reaction in misophonia: Stop smacking your mouth. Psychiatry Clin. Psychopharmacol.
2017 ,27, 416–418. [CrossRef]
37. Vidal, C.; Vidal, L.M.; Lage, M. Misophonia: Case report. Eur. Psychiatry 2017 ,41, 644. [CrossRef]
38. Kılıç, C.; Öz, G.; Avano˘ glu, K.B.; Aksoy, S. The prevalence and characteristics of misophonia in Ankara, Turkey: Population-based
study. BJPsych Open 2021 ,7, e144. [CrossRef]
39. Schröder, A.; Vulink, N.; Van Loon, A.J.; Denys, D. Cognitive behavioral therapy is effective in misophonia: An open trial. J.
Affect. Disord. 2017 ,217, 289–294. [CrossRef]
40. Rouw, R.; Erfanian, M. A Large-Scale Study of Misophonia. J. Clin. Psychol. 2018 ,74, 453–479. [CrossRef]
41. Webber, T.A.; Johnson, P .L.; Storch, E.A. Pediatric misophonia with comorbid obsessive-compulsive spectrum disorders. Gen.
Hosp. Psychiatry 2014 ,36, 231-e1. [CrossRef]
42. Naguy, A.; Al-Humoud, A.M.; Pridmore, S.; Abuzeid, M.Y.; Singh, A.; Elsori, D. Low-Dose Risperidone for an Autistic Child with
Comorbid ARFID and Misophonia. Psychopharmacol. Bull. 2022 ,52, 91–94. [PubMed]
43. Levitin, D.J.; Cole, K.; Lincoln, A.; Bellugi, U. Aversion, awareness, and attraction: Investigating claims of hyperacusis in the
Williams syndrome phenotype. J. Child. Psychol. Psychiatry 2005 ,46, 514–523. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
44. Schröder, A.; van Diepen, R.; Mazaheri, A.; Petropoulos-Petalas, D.; Soto de Amesti, V .; Vulink, N.; Denys, D. Diminished N1
Auditory Evoked Potentials to Oddball Stimuli in Misophonia Patients. Front. Behav. Neurosci. 2014 ,8, 123.
45. Schröder, A.; Giorgi, R.S.; Van Wingen, G.; Vulink, N.; Denys, D. Impulsive aggression in misophonia: Results from a functional
magnetic resonance imaging study. Eur. Neuropsychopharmacol. 2015 ,25, 307–308. [CrossRef]
46. Schröder, A.; Wingen, G.V .; Eijsker, N.; San Giorgi, R.; Vulink, N.C.; Turbyne, C.; Denys, D. Misophonia is associated with altered
brain activity in the auditory cortex and salience network. Sci. Rep. 2019 ,9, 7542. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
47. Kumar, S.; Tansley-Hancock, O.; Sedley, W.; Winston, J.S.; Callaghan, M.F.; Allen, M.; Grifﬁths, T.D. The brain basis for misophonia.
Curr. Biol. 2017 ,27, 527–533. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
48. Eijsker, N.; Schröder, A.; Liebrand, L.C.; Smit, D.; Van Wingen, G.; Denys, D. White matter abnormalities in misophonia.
NeuroImage Clin. 2021 ,32, 102787. [CrossRef]
49. Eijsker, N.; Schröder, A.; Smit, D.J.; van Wingen, G.; Denys, D. Structural and functional brain abnormalities in misophonia. Eur.
Neuropsychopharmacol. 2021 ,52, 62–71. [CrossRef]
50. Kumar, S.; Dheerendra, P .; Erfanian, M.; Benzaqu én, E.; Sedley, W.; Gander, P .E.; Lad, M.; Bamiou, D.E.; Grifﬁths, T.D. The Motor
Basis for Misophonia. J. Neurosci. Off. J. Soc. Neurosci. 2021 ,41, 5762–5770. [CrossRef]
51. Schröder, A.; van Wingen, G.; Vulink, N.C.; Denys, D. Commentary: The Brain Basis for Misophonia. Front. Behav. Neurosci. 2017 ,
11, 111. [CrossRef]
52. Jiménez, X.F.; Aboussssouan, A.; Mandell, D.; Huffman, K.L. Additional evidence supporting the central sensitization inventory
(CSI) as an outcome measure among chronic pain patients in functional restoration program care. Spine J. Off. J. N. Am. Spine Soc.
2017 ,17, 1765. [CrossRef]
53. Dozier, T.H. Treating the Initial Physical Reﬂex of Misophonia with the Neural Repatterning Technique: A Counterconditioning
Procedure. Psychol. Thought 2015 ,8, 189–210. [CrossRef]
54. Vanaja, C.S.; Abigail, M.S. Misophonia: An Evidence-Based Case Report. Am. J. Audiol. 2020 ,29, 685–690. [CrossRef]
55. Natalini, E.; Dimaggio, G.; Varakliotis, T. Misophonia, Maladaptive Schemas and Personality Disorders: A Report of Three Cases.
Contemp. Psychother. 2020 ,50, 29–35. [CrossRef]
56. Jastreboff, P .J.; Jastreboff, M.M. Decreased sound tolerance: Hyperacusis, misophonia, diplacousis, and polyacousis. Handb. Clin.
Neurol. 2015 ,129, 375–387.
57. Cusack, S.E.; Cash, T.V .; Vrana, S.R. An examination of the relationship between misophonia, anxiety sensitivity, and obsessive-
compulsive symptoms. J. Obs.-Compuls. Relat. Disord. 2018 ,18, 67–72. [CrossRef]
58. Webber, J.; Hinds, J.; Camic, P .M. The well-being of allotment gardeners: A mixed methodological study. Ecopsychology 2015 ,7,
20–28. [CrossRef]
59. Neal, M.; Cavanna, A.E. Selective Sound Sensitivity Syndrome (Misophonia) in a Patient with Tourette Syndrome. J. Neuropsychia-
try Clin. Neurosci. 2013 ,25, E01. [CrossRef]
60. Frank, B.; McKay, D. The suitability of an inhibitory learning approach in exposure when habituation fails: A clinical application
to misophonia. Cogn. Behav. Pract. 2019 ,26, 130–142. [CrossRef]
61. Ferreira, G.M.; Harrison, B.J.; Fontenelle, L.F. Hatred of sounds: Misophonic disorder or just an underreported psychiatric
symptom? Ann. Clin. Psychiatry Off. J. Am. Acad. Clin. Psychiatr. 2013 ,25, 271.
62. Da Silva, F.E.; Sanchez, T.G. Evaluation of selective attention in patients with misophonia. Braz. J. Otorhinolaryngol. 2019 ,85,
303–309. [CrossRef]
63. Simner, J.; Koursarou, S.; Rinaldi, L.J.; Ward, J. Attention, ﬂexibility, and imagery in misophonia: Does attention exacerbate
everyday disliking of sound? J. Clin. Exp. Neuropsychol. 2022 ,43, 1006–1017. [CrossRef]

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022 ,19, 6790 25 of 26
64. Norris, J.E.; Kimball, S.H.; Nemri, D.C.; Ethridge, L.E. Toward a Multidimensional Understanding of Misophonia Using
Cluster-Based Phenotyping. Front. Neurosci. 2022 ,16, 832516. [CrossRef]
65. Jochaut, D.; Lehongre, K.; Saitovitch, A.; Devauchelle, A.D.; Olasagasti, I.; Chabane, N.; Zilbovicius, M.; Giraud, A.L. Atypical
coordination of cortical oscillations in response to speech in autism. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 2015 ,9, 171. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
66. Dar, R.; Kahn, D.T.; Carmeli, R. The relationship between sensory processing, childhood rituals and obsessive-compulsive
symptoms. J. Behav. Ther. Exp. Psychiatry 2012 ,43, 679–684. [CrossRef]
67. Taylor, S.; Conelea, C.A.; McKay, D.; Crowe, K.B.; Abramowitz, J.S. Sensory intolerance: Latent structure and psychopathologic
correlates. Compr. Psychiatry 2014 ,55, 1279–1284. [CrossRef]
68. Marmura, M.J.; Monteith, T.S.; Anjum, W.; Doty, R.L.; Hegarty, S.E.; Keith, S.W. Olfactory function in migraine both during and
between attacks. Cephalalgia 2014 ,34, 977–985. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
69. Johnson, M. Misophonia. Oreg ón Tinnitus y Hyperacusis Treatment Clinic, Inc. 21 September 2019. Available online: https:
//tinnitus-audiology.com/misophonia (accessed on 21 April 2022).
70. Burón, E.; Bulbena, A. Olfaction in affective and anxiety disorders: A review of the literature. Psychopathology 2013 ,46, 63–74.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
71. Muller, D.; Khemlani-Patel, S.; Neziroglu, F. Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy for an Adolescent Female Presenting with Misophonia:
A Case Example. Clin. Case Stud. 2018 ,17, 249–258. [CrossRef]
72. Enzler, F.; Loriot, C.; Fournier, P .; Noreña, A.J. A psychoacoustic test for misophonia assessment. Sci. Rep. 2021 ,11, 11044.
[CrossRef]
73. Siepsiak, M.; Rosenthal, M.Z.; Raj-Koziak, D.; Dragan, W. Psychiatric and audiologic features of misophonia: Use of a clinical
control group with auditory over-responsivity. J. Psychosom. Res. 2022 ,156, 110777. [CrossRef]
74. Nelting, M.; Rienhoff, N.K.; Hesse, G.; Lamparter, U. The assessment of subjective distress related to hyperacusis with a self-rating
questionnaire on hypersensitivity to sound. Laryngo-Rhino-Otol. 2002 ,81, 327–334. [CrossRef]
75. Herráiz, C.; Santos, G.D.L.; Diges, I.; D íez, R.; Aparicio, J.M. Assessment of hyperacusis: The self-rating questionnaire on
hypersensitivity to sound. Acta Otorrinolaringol. Esp. 2006 ,57, 303–306. [CrossRef]
76. Fitzmaurice, G. The Misophonia Activation Scale (MAS-1). Available online: http://www.misophonia-uk.org/the-misophonia-
activation-scale.html (accessed on 21 April 2022).
77. Kluckow, H.; Telfer, J.; Abraham, S. Should we screen for misophonia in patients with eating disorders? A report of three cases.
Int. J. Eat. Dis. 2014 ,47, 558–561. [CrossRef]
78. McKay, D.; Kim, S.K.; Mancusi, L.; Storch, E.A.; Spankovich, C. Proﬁle analysis of psychological symptoms associated with
misophonia: A community simple. Behav. Ther. 2018 ,49, 286–294. [CrossRef]
79. McErlean, A.B.J.; Banissy, M.J. Increased misophonia in self-reported autonomous sensory meridian response. PeerJ 2018 ,6, e535.
[CrossRef]
80. Bauman, N. Misophonia Physical Response Scale (MPRS). 2015. Misophonia Treatment Institute. Available online: https:
//misophoniatreatment.com/forms/ (accessed on 16 September 2021).
81. Siepsiak, M.; ´Sliwerski, A.; Łukasz Dragan, W. Development and Psychometric Properties of MisoQuest-A New Self-Report
Questionnaire for Misophonia. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020 ,17, 1797. [CrossRef]
82. Dibb, B.; Golding, S.E.; Dozier, T.H. The development and validation of the Misophonia response scale. J. Psychosom. Res. 2021 ,
149, 110587. [CrossRef]
83. Rosenthal, M.Z.; Anand, D.; Cassiello-Robbins, C.; Williams, Z.J.; Guetta, R.E.; Trumbull, J.; Kelley, L.D. Development and Initial
Validation of the Duke Misophonia Questionnaire. Front. Psychol. 2021 ,12, 4197. [CrossRef]
84. Rinaldi, L.J.; Smees, R.; Ward, J.; Simner, J. Poorer Well-Being in Children with Misophonia: Evidence from the Sussex Misophonia
Scale for Adolescents. Front. Psychol. 2022 ,13, 808379. [CrossRef]
85. Rinaldi, L.J.; Ward, J.; Simner, J. An Automated Online Assessment for Misophonia: The Sussex Misophonia Scale for Adults.
Available online: https://scholar.google.com/scholar?hl=en&as_sdt=0%2C5&q=An+Automated+Online+Assessment+for+
Misophonia%3A+The+Sussex+Misophonia+Scale+for+Adults.+&btnG= (accessed on 21 April 2022).
86. Karin, J.; Hirsch, M.; Akselrod, S. An estimate of fetal autonomic sate by spectral analysis of fetal heart rate ﬂuctuations. Pediatr.
Res. 1993 ,34, 134–138. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
87. Sarigedik, E.; Yurteri, N. Misophonia Successfully Treated of with Fluoxetine: A Case Report. Clin. Neuropharmacol. 2021 ,44,
191–192. [CrossRef]
88. Meltzer, J.B.; Herzfeld, M. Tinnitus, Hyperacusis, and Misophonia Toolbox. Semin. Hear. 2014 ,35, 121–130. [CrossRef]
89. Zitelli, L. Evaluation and Management of Misophonia Using a Hybrid Telecare Approach: A Case Report. Semin. Hear. 2021 ,42,
123–135. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
90. Osuagwu, C.; Osuagwu, F.C.; Machoka, A.M. Methylphenidate Ameliorates Worsening Distractibility Symptoms of Misophonia
in an Adolescent Male. Prim. Care Companion CNS Disord. 2020 ,22, 27485. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
91. Jager, I.J.; Vulink, N.C.; Bergfeld, I.O.; van Loon, A.J.; Denys, D.A. Cognitive behavioral therapy for misophonia: A randomized
clinical trial. Depress. Anxiety 2021 ,38, 708–718. [CrossRef]
92. Zarotti, N.; Tuthill, A.; Fisher, P . Online Emotion Regulation for an Adolescent with Misophonia: A Case Study. J. Cogn. Psychother.
2022 . [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2022 ,19, 6790 26 of 26
93. McGuire, J.F.; Wu, M.S.; Storch, E.A. Cognitive-behavioral therapy for 2 youths with misophonia. J. Clin. Psychiatry 2015 ,76,
573–574. [CrossRef]
94. Kamody, R.C.; Del Conte, G.S. Using Dialectical Behavior Therapy to Treat Misophonia in Adolescence. Prim. Care Companion
CNS Disord. 2017 ,19, 26256. [CrossRef]
95. Lewin, A.B.; Dickinson, S.; Kudryk, K.; Karlovich, A.R.; Harmon, S.L.; Phillips, D.A.; Tonarely, N.A.; Gruen, R.; Small, B.;
Ehrenreich-May, J. Transdiagnostic cognitive behavioral therapy for misophonia in youth: Methods for a clinical trial and four
pilot cases. J. Affect. Disord. 2021 ,291, 400–408. [CrossRef]
96. Roushani, K.; Mehrabizadeh Honarmand, M. The Effectiveness of Cognitive-behavioral Therapy on Anger in Female Students
with Misophonia: A Single-Case Study. Iran. J. Med. Sci. 2021 ,46, 61–67.
97. Aazh, H.; Landgrebe, M.; Danesh, A.A.; Moore, B.C. Cognitive Behavioral Therapy for Alleviating the Distress Caused by
Tinnitus, Hyperacusis and Misophonia: Current Perspectives. Psychol. Res. Behav. Manag. 2019 ,12, 991–1002. [CrossRef]
98. Hayes, S.C.; Strosahl, K.D. A Practical Guide to Acceptance and Commitment Therapy ; Springer: Boston, MA, USA, 2005.
99. Hayes, S.C. Acceptance and commitment therapy, relational frame theory, and the third wave of behavioral and cognitive
therapies. Behav. Ther. 2004 ,35, 639–665. [CrossRef]
100. Schneider, R.L.; Arch, J.J. Letter to the editor: Potential treatment targets for misophonia. Gen. Hosp. Psychiatry 2015 ,37, 370–371.
[CrossRef]
101. Schneider, R.L.; Arch, J.J.; Wolitzky-Taylor, K.B. The state of personalized treatment for anxiety disorders: A systematic review of
treatment moderators. Clin. Psychol. Rev. 2015 ,38, 39–54. [CrossRef]
102. Jager, I.; Vulink, N.; de Roos, C.; Denys, D. EMDR therapy for misophonia: A pilot study of case series. Eur. J. Psychotraumatol.
2021 ,12, 1968613. [CrossRef]
103. Veale, D. A compelling desire for deafness. J. Deaf. Stud. Deaf. Educ. 2006 ,11, 369–372. [CrossRef]
104. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , 5th ed.; American Psychiatric Publishing:
Washington, DC, USA, 2013.
105. Jager, I.; de Koning, P .; Bost, T.; Denys, D.; Vulink, N. Misophonia: Phenomenology, comorbidity and demographics in a large
sample. PLoS ONE 2020 ,15, e0231390. [CrossRef]
106. Bruxner, G. ‘Mastication rage’: A review of misophonia—An under-recognised symptom of psychiatric relevance? Australas.
Psychiatry Bull. R. Aust. N. Z. Coll. Psychiatr. 2016 ,24, 195–197. [CrossRef]
107. Erfanian, M.; Kartsonaki, C.; Keshavarz, A. Misophonia and comorbid psychiatric symptoms: A preliminary study of clinical
ﬁndings. Nord. J. Psychiatry 2019 ,73, 219–228. [CrossRef]
108. Siepsiak, M.A.; Sobczak, M.; Bohaterewicz, B.; Cichocki., Ł.; Dragan, Ł. Prevalence of Misophonia and Correlates of Its Symptoms
among Inpatients with Depression. Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2020 ,17, 5464. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
109. Haq, S.S.; Alresheed, F.; Tu, J.C. Behavioral Treatment of Problem Behavior for an Adult with Autism Spectrum Disorder and
Misophonia. J. Dev. Phys. Disabil. 2020 ,6, 1005–1015. [CrossRef]
110. Kiese-Himmel, C. Misophonie. Rubrik “Für Sie gelesen, für Sie gehört”. Stimme Sprache Gehör. 2020 ,44, 126–127.
111. Rosenthal, M.Z.; Altimus, C.; Campbell, J. Research Topic ‘Advances in Understanding the Nature and Features of Misophonia’.
Available online: https://www.frontiersin.org/research-topics/25714/advances-in-understanding-the-nature-and-features-
of-misophonia (accessed on 21 April 2022).
112. Savard, M.A.; Sares, A.G.; Coffey, E.B.; Deroche, M.L. Speciﬁcity of Affective Responses in Misophonia Depends on Trigger
Identiﬁcation. Available online: https://scholar.google.com/scholar?hl=en&as_sdt=0%2C5&q=.+Speciﬁcity+of+affective+
responses+in+misophonia+depends+on+trigger+identiﬁcation.+&btnG= (accessed on 21 April 2022).