© Metaphilosophy LLC and Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003. Published by Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK and 350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148, USA METAPHILOSOPHY Vol. 34, Nos. 1/2, January 2003 0026-1068

## EPISTEMIC INJUSTICE AND A ROLE FOR VIRTUE IN THE POLITICS OF KNOWING

## MIRANDA FRICKER

ABSTRACT: The  dual  aim  of  this  article  is  to  reveal  and  explain  a  cer phenomenon of epistemic injustice as manifested in testimonial practice, a arrive at a characterisation of the anti-prejudicial intellectual virtue tha to counteract it. This sort of injustice occurs when prejudice on the par hearer leads to the speaker receiving less credibility than he or she deser suggested that where this phenomenon is systematic it constitutes an impor form of oppression.

Keywords: credibility, epistemic injustice, ethical sensibility, historicism, reasons, oppression, prejudice, social identity, testimonial sensibility, vi

There is a growing sympathy with the idea that epistemology should l to ethics for conceptual tools to use in solving traditional epistem problems. My aim here is to identify a role for virtue in accounti both the rationality and the ethics of what must surely be our most and ubiquitous epistemic practice - the practice of gaining knowledg being told.

I shall try to argue that a central difficulty in the epistemology mony is best handled by reference to a notion that belongs in the instance to ethics, the notion of a  To this end I shall advance the sensibility . idea of a testimonial sensibility : something that governs our responsiveness  to  the  word  of  others  so  that,  given  the  sensibility  is  p educated, we may gain knowledge that  ply by being told that  xt, p sim p . Ne on the assumption that such a sensibility incorporates a variety of i tual skills and virtues that govern how much credibility the respo hearer  will  attribute  to  different  sorts  of  speakers  in  different circumstances, I shall identify a phenomenon of epistemic injustice w view to homing in on the particular virtue whose role it is, or shoul pre-empt  such  injustice.  The  form  of  epistemic  injustice  in  ques happens when a speaker receives the wrong degree of credibility from hearer owing to a certain sort of unintended prejudice on the hearer' The virtue I shall try to home in on, whose role it is to safeguard such operations of prejudice, embodies a special sort of reflexive critical openness to the word of others. The possession of this virtue is pres

as an important regulator in the politics of testimonial practice, t shall suggest ultimately that its powers are limited.

## 1. Avoiding Intellectualism: The Word of Others

There is a certain impasse to be detected in a traditional approach epistemology of testimony.n we try to account for what goes on in 1 Whe an informal discursive context when someone comes to know that p by an interlocutor's telling him that  an seem as if we must plump for one p , it c of two epistemological stories. It can seem as if we must either endor idea that the hearer gains knowledge just by being uncritically recept the speaker's word, so long as there are no explicit signals that sce is in order, or else endorse the idea that the hearer gains knowledg in  virtue  of  rehearsing  an  appropriate  inference  -  an  argument  wh conclusion licenses believing what he has been told. Thus the choic philosophical pictures can seem to be between sheer uncritical recept ness on the one hand and intellectualist argumentation on the other.

The shortcoming of each is the allure of the other. The uncriticaltivity model surely leaves us too open to believing anything people te so that, in the absence of signals of untrustworthiness, we are lice be entirely uncritical. osophical accounts of testimonial knowledge 2 Phil will require the speaker to be both competent and honest with respec her assertion that  ut the experience of everyday life leaves us only t p . B aware that human beings cannot systematically be relied on in respec either. Crudely, people often get things wrong, out of innocent err perhaps because they fancy they know when really they don't. And o course people can also succumb to the temptation to mislead deliberat - for instance, because it is in their interests to do so. When these t of unreliability are compounded with the obvious fact that such munda things  as  haste,  or  misunderstanding  the  inquirer's  purposes,  or  si carelessness can lead a speaker to mispronounce even on something he perfectly competent and ready to be honest about, it becomes clear th blanket policy of accepting the word of others unmediated by any crit filtering  would  be  justificationally  lax.  The  mere  absence  of  exp signals for doubt is not enough to justify a general habit of uncri accepting what other people tell one.

This shortcoming in the uncritical-receptivity model might draw on sympathies  towards  the  inferential  model.  As  C.  A.  J.  Coady  (199 122-23) describes it, this common picture of testimony has it 'tha knowledge by testimony is indirect or inferential. We know that p when

- 1 For an account of how the impasse is merely an artefact of a certain misguided conc tion of the philosophical options, see McDowell 1998.
- 2 See Elizabeth Fricker 1994, and also 1987, in which she presents a powerful ca against  the  idea  that  we  have  a  'presumptive  right'  to  believe  what  we  are  told  i absence of countervailing evidence.

reliably told that  ause we make some inference about the reliability p bec and sincerity of the witness.' In an alternative formulation, John Mc ell presents the inferentialist model as resting on the following assu

If an epistemically satisfactory standing in the space of reasons, with re a proposition, is mediated rather than immediate, that means the standi constituted by the cogency of an argument that is at its occupant's disposal, with the proposition in question as conclusion. (McDowell 1998, 415)

On  either  formulation  the  inferential  model  is  clearly  invulnerab accusations  of  justificational  laxity,  since  it  precisely  requires hearer  go  in  for  a  piece  of  reasoning  that  provides  a  justificat believing what she has been told. Inevitably this will usually be som of inductive argument - for instance, an argument about the indivi speaker's past reliability on these matters, or about the general re of people like that about things like this. But the trouble now is requirement that the hearer avail herself of such an argument seems strong, because too laborious intellectually. It simply does not mat everyday  phenomenology  of  informal  testimonial  exchange,  which presents learning something by being told as distinctly  s and un -laboriou spontaneous. Surely an epistemic practice as basic to human life as b told-things-by-someone-who-knows  cannot  possibly  require  all  tha activity at the level of propositional attitudes. If the hearer were ge supposed to consider (in however rule-of-thumb-ish a way) the likelih that she has been told a truth, that would take at least a moment's nosed assessment of a sort that simply does not tally with the eff spontaneity  characteristic  of  so  much  of  our  everyday  testimon exchange.

The advocate of the inferential model will naturally respond by emp sising that the mature hearer will normally rehearse her argument readily and easily. But the more he is at pains to emphasise that suc ficatory argumentation can be so swift as barely to be noticed, and even be altogether unconscious, the more the model strikes one as a p of intellectualism in a tight corner.

This problem with the inferential model now leads one back again to picture  on  which  the  hearer  is  entitled,  other  things  being  equal, uncritically receptive to what she is told, for this picture of thing be seen to retain something rather strongly in its favour: it more fa represents the phenomenology of our everyday exchanges. In the absen of explicit cues for doubt we do seem simply to accept most of what are told without going in for any active critical assessment. An or case might be that, as I make my way hurriedly to the train station, stranger what the time is, he tells me it is 4:30, and I simply, unref accept what he says. This unreflectiveness is underlined by the fact I do pick up on some cue for doubt - such as his saying it is 4:30 w

already know it cannot be later than four o'clock - then I experience of intellectual shift of gear, out of that unreflective mode and int more active one of critical assessment. It is only with this shift of I might start to bring some argumentation to bear on the matter of my i locutor's trustworthiness.

But now we may feel that the intuitive relevance of the evidence of experience in how we are conditioned to receive the word of others gone missing from the ordinary unreflective case. Surely one's knowled of  a  particular  speaker's  track  record,  or  one's  general  backgr assumptions about how likely it is that someone like this will spea truth about something like that, must be somewhere in the offing? If inductive  considerations  are  wholly  absent  from  our  unreflecti exchanges,  imposing  no  constraint  whatsoever  upon  what  the  hearer  i entitled to accept, then this does seem to leave our ordinary unrefl exchanges in an unacceptable rational vacuum. This thought, then, ca the inferentialist model once again in a more favourable light. And perhaps, the oscillation continues.

The conclusion I suggest we should draw from these brief consider tions is that what is needed to provide a suitable exit from the impas picture  of  informal  testimonial  exchange  that  honours  the  everyd phenomenology of unreflective transparency between speaker and hearer while  none  the  less  avoiding  justificational  laxity.  We  need  a  pos account of how the responsible hearer may spontaneously and non-infe entially give an appropriately critical reception to the speaker's wor critical  reception  must  be  such  that,  reliably,  when  the  hearer  s accepts what he is told by someone who knows, he is justified in sim accepting it. The reception will be one of openness to his interloc assertions, yet critical too - the hearer's normal stance needs to philosophical characterisation such that it constitutes a to critical openness the word of others. Such a characterisation will be able to explain when we are told things, we are indeed able to acquire knowledge, and effortlessly as the phenomenology suggests.

## 2. The Responsible Hearer

McDowell argues for the view that a hearer gains knowledge by testimon in virtue of exercising 'doxastic responsibility'; and what it is to doxastic responsibility is explained in characteristic Sellarsian ter 'sensitivity' to one's place in the 'space of reasons.' As I understa way of putting things, the idea of a 'mediated standing in the spa reasons' is the idea of a state - a state of knowledge, for example has been arrived at by way of an appropriate sensitivity to the reaso and against the proposition. This sensitivity need not manifest itsel making of inferences or arguments - precisely not. As McDowell says:

What I am proposing is a different conception of what it is for a standing space of reasons to be mediated. A standing in the space of reasons ca mediated  by  the  rational  force  of  surrounding  considerations,  in  that concept of that standing cannot be applied to a subject who is not respons that rational force. (McDowell 1998, 430)

So,  if  the  standing  in  the  space  of  reasons  is  'knowing  that p, '  then McDowell's  proposal  is  that  this  knowing  that  s  a  background p has  a precondition  that  the  knower  has  somehow  exercised  a  sensitivity surrounding reasons for and against taking it that p .

If one accepts this eminently acceptable proposal, then it is nat move to the next question and ask, If not by our usual faculties of mentation and inference, then by what rational capacity  er able is the hear to be responsive to the rational force of surrounding reasons? The id the fulfilment of doxastic responsibility need not require argumentat surely crucial to explaining how testimonial knowledge can be mediat yet direct (or, as I am putting it, critical yet non-inferential), bu further needs to be said to explain how the hearer does it. If she is cising her capacity for inference and argumentation, what rational c ity is she exercising?

McDowell is minded to say there is nothing to be explained here:

If we are not to explain the fact that having heard from someone that thin thus and so is an epistemic standing by appealing to the strength of an arg that things are that way . . . do we need some other account of it? I wou tempted to maintain that we do not. The idea of knowledge by testimony is if a knower gives intelligible expression to his knowledge, he puts it i public domain, where it can be picked up by those who can understand t expression, as long as the opportunity is not closed to them because it wo doxastically  irresponsible  to  believe  the  speaker.  That  idea  seems  obv enough  to  stand  on  its  own  epistemological  feet;  the  formulation  makes much sense of the idea that knowledge can be transmitted from one subject another as any purported explanation could hope to confer on it. (McDowe 1998, 437-38).

But I am not sure that nothing more is needed here. One does not h to be an advocate of inferentialism to think that something more is for  in  order  to  explain  how  a  hearer  can  count  as  exercising  dox responsibility if her acceptance of what she has been told is not ba any sort of inference or argumentation.

Let me be clear that the non-satisfaction I am registering is not what doxastically responsible behaviour consists in , as if I were demanding that some rule-like norms or principles be explicated. No doubt are a number of norms general enough to be expressed as guiding prin ples of a hearer's doxastic responsibility, but we don't need them in to have a reasonably firm idea of what that responsibility requires.

those  of  us  sympathetic  to  virtue-theoretical  accounts  of  responsi might be quite happy with the possibility that there were no such pr ples available at all. The question of what constitutes doxastic respo ity for a hearer, then, is not my worry. The worry is rather that th that a hearer exercises such responsibility without making any infere leaves one wondering  - by what capacity of reason - she is supposed how to do it.

If we look to Coady, we find tacit support for the view that somet is needed on this score, since he does make a brief suggestion, albeit too brief to provide more than a pointer. He asserts we have a 'lea mechanism' that operates critically though non-inferentially in the h to determine the balance of trust. He says:

What happens characteristically in the reception of testimony is that the ence operates a sort of learning mechanism which has certain critical capac built into it. The mechanism may be thought of as partly innate, though mo fied by experience, especially in the matter of critical capacities. It is invoke  the  model  of  a  mechanism  here  since  the  reception  of  testimony normally unreflective but is not thereby uncritical. (Coady 1992, 47)

This seems exactly right, but as it stands the metaphor of a learning anism remains philosophically and psychologically mysterious. So much so that we are not much better off with this idea of a mechanism tha were  with  the  non-metaphorical  but  equally  elusive  idea  of  a  heare doxastic responsibility exercised non-inferentially.

It is time to take stock. What we are looking for is some mode of r nal sensitivity that yields spontaneous, non-inferential judgements. we are also looking for a mode of rational sensitivity that is learn learned in an ongoing way so that it is constantly developing and adju itself in the light of experience and critical reflection. I propose t point epistemology should turn to ethics for sustenance. For in ethi find a notion that seems to me to fit the bill: the notion of a sensibility . An ethical sensibility yields genuine judgements - interpretative judgements, such as 'That was cowardly,' or immediately practical judgements, su as 'I ought to confess' - yet these judgements are not conclusions to ments. (They may permit of reconstruction as conclusions to argument but that is quite another thing. A rational reconstruction of a human tice does not automatically constitute a proper characterisation of well-trained ethical sensibility will presumably incorporate a range o vant conceptual and social-perceptual skills, but most importantly i comprise ethical virtues. The central place of virtue explains how a bility issues in non-inferential judgements. The virtuous person doe have to work out that an act was cowardly, or that the culprit should ow up; he just sees that this is the case; he just knows. Continuing broadly Aristotelian vein, we might add that the virtuous person is a

perceive  the  moral  colourations  of  things  spontaneously  in  this  wa virtue  of  his  sensibility  being  formed  by  a  proper  ethical  train upbringing.

This idea of ethical training will be important for present purposes, shall need a more historicist or socially situated conception than we Aristotle. Let me suggest, then, that we think of the training of a s as involving at least two distinct streams of input: social and indivi that order. One develops an ethical sensibility by becoming inculcated a historically and culturally specific way of life - or as Alasdair M puts it, an ethical 'tradition' this is to be construed as a matter o 3 - where ongoing ethical socialisation. There again, it is from an irreducibly ual life experience that one gains a particular sentimental education that  respect  the  ongoing  formation  of  one's  sensibility  is  some distinctly individual. Together these two streams of input - collecti individual - continually generate a person's sensibility.

The deliverances of an individual's sensibility, then, are shaped b of background interpretative and motivational attitudes, which are i first instance passively inherited from the ethical community but the actively reflected upon and lived out in one way or another by the r tive individual. Ethical responsibility demands that there be an appr critical link between the traditional moment in which the individual her ethical socialisation and the experiences life offers her - expe that may sometimes be in tension with her ethical socialisation so prompt critical reflection on the sensibility which she has otherwise inherited. 4

This idea of a sensibility gives us a picture of how judgements c rational yet unreflective, critical yet non-inferential. It presents rational  capacity  that  is  comprised  of  virtues,  that  is  inculcate subject  through  a  process  of  socialisation,  and  that  permits  of  on correction and adjustment in the light of experience and critical ref Thus  we  are  confronted  with  a  rational  capacity  unlike  anythi commonly entertained in epistemology, and a version of it seems to me fit the bill as the explanation of how a hearer might be able to give flective yet critical reception to the word of another. With this in must now ask what the epistemic analogue of an ethical sensibility w be like for testimony. I would like to think that this is not only while philosophical question in its own right but also an important tion at the level of epistemic practice. For if one wants to know improve one's performance as a receiver of the word of others - if wants to become more responsible and successful as a hearer - then had better know what, if not one's skills of inference and argument should be trying better to develop.

- 3 See MacIntyre 1981, especially chapter 15.
- 4 I have tried to develop this theme in my 2000.
- © Metaphilosophy LLC and Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003

## 3. Testimonial Sensibility: Critical Openness to the Word of Others

We are setting our sights on the possibility that responsible hearers flective  testimonial  exchanges  exercise  a testimonial  sensibility .  This possibility introduces the idea that our responses to the testimony of are learned and internalised through a process of  cialisation epistemic so a social training of the interpretative and affective attitudes in p we are told things by other people. We might think of it as part of ou temic 'second nature.' re, again, I suggest there is in the first insta 5 He a  passive  social  inheritance  and  then  a  sometimes-passive-sometime active individual input from the hearer's own experience. Together t two streams of input mean that our normal unreflective reception of w people tell us is conditioned by a great range of collateral experien as  the  experiences  pertinent  to  the  training  of  ethical  virtues  ar nalised in the sensibility of the virtuous person, so the body of co and individual testimonial experience is internalised by the responsi virtuous hearer, rendering it immanent in her testimonial sensibility

It is through the inductive influence of this body of experience th may learn, reliably enough, to assume trust when and only when it i order.  Our  perception  of  speakers  and  their  assertions  comes  to informed by an inductive conditioning relating to what sorts of peopl likely to convey the truth about which sorts of subject matters, jus the ethical case our perception of agents and their actions comes informed by a motivational conditioning relating to what sorts of ac are ethically called for in which sorts of situations.

There is more to be said, however, about what sorts of experiences p erly feed into a testimonial sensibility. They will chiefly be experie testimonial exchanges had by the individual and the wider community. B it must be acknowledged that these experiences can only have a ratio impact on sensibility under a socially rich description. This is beca only way they can have inductive significance is by being such as to su or undermine existing habits of response concerning what sorts of peo are  trustworthy  in  what  sorts  of  situations;  which  sorts  of  incenti deceive are likely to be acted upon by which sorts of people; and so testimonial sensibility, then, needs to be shaped by collective and i ual experiences of testimonial encounters described in rich, socially s terms relating to the trustworthiness of speakers of different social different sorts of contexts. These descriptions cannot but involve co cultural stereotypes of intellectual authority or its lack, perhaps b related characteristics, such as openness or inscrutability, steadiness iness, rationality or emotionality, dependability or deviousness, log

- 5 I echo John McDowell's use of this term, which he finds 'all but explicit in Arist account of how ethical character is formed,' and which he extends to apply not simpl our ethical upbringing (Aristotle's 'practical wisdom') but also, more generally, to ou temic upbringing (McDowell 1994, 84).

or intuitiveness. . . . I use neutrally, but of course stereotypes are stereotype fertile ground for prejudice, so it is easy to see how a testimonial ity may come to embody the prejudices of the day. Where a testimoni sensibility is informed by stereotypes that are unfair - that is, wh are empirically unfounded - the sensibility will be both epistemicall ethically defective.

We shall return to this theme, but for the moment the point is rath such elements of the social imagination as stereotypes of authority a perfectly proper part of a testimonial sensibility, for the necessa richness of the body of testimonial experience which informs sensib means that stereotypes are positively needed to oil the mechanism of day-to-day exchanges. Hearers need spontaneously to perceive their in locutors in a socially fine-grained way so that they can be appropr responsive to all the subtleties of the interaction. Without this ri social  perception,  many  epistemically  relevant  cues  will  be  mis Consider, for instance, what complexity there can be in cues indic how far one should interpret an interlocutor as taking seriously what he is asserting. Perhaps the hearer sees the speaker as entirely competent relevant matters, yet still her perception of him has to be responsi sorts  of  features  of  social  location  and  discursive  style  that  wo figure in any but the richest of social-psychological descriptions encounter.

If these remarks provide a reasonable working idea of  riwhich expe ences feed into sensibility, is there something further we can say abo how an individual takes them on in sensibility? Here again the task is to a parallel with the ethical case. An individual's testimonial sensibi in  the  first  instance  be  passively  inherited.  This  passivity  is firstly, for the a priori reason that the body of judgements and a which comprise a sensibility constitute the basis  a hearer's from which doxastic responsibility emerges. And, secondly, for the empirical r that even a minimally successful epistemic community must be operati with  a  broadly  functional  testimonial  sensibility.  But  once  ligh dawned for a hearer, she will come to find that sometimes her experie of testimonial exchange will be in tension with the deliverances o sensibility she has passively taken on, in which case responsibility r that her sensibility adjust itself to accommodate the new experience.

This might happen spontaneously, without active critical reflectio the part of the hearer, but it is more likely that she will need ac bring critical thought to bear on her internalised habits of hearer in  order  to  shake  them  up  sufficiently  to  effect  the  adjustment. instance, a hearer is a teenager whose testimonial sensibility has con the defect of not taking seriously what old people say, and if this t finds himself one day struck by the veracity of his grandfather's sto the war, he may experience a small epistemic revolution that requires significant deliberative follow-through in terms of how he receive

word of the elderly quite generally. In so far as this teenager is dox responsible,  he  will  effect  an  adjustment  to  his  testimonial  sensi either directly, by way of a shift of social perception, or indirectly of critical reflection. If the adjustment is direct, then he will u Gestalt switch in how he perceives elderly speakers so that the adjus to his testimonial sensibility is more or less instantaneous. If it i then active critical reflection on his habits of hearer response wi produce some sort of corrective policy external to the hearer's sensi (Perhaps this teenager disciplines himself when in conversation with elderly, 'Don't be dismissive. . . .') Given time, and all being well, corrective policy will become internalised as an integral part of his bility, so that it comes to be implicit in his newly conditioned per of elderly speakers.

Whether  direct  or  indirect,  then,  we  can  see  how  the  responsib hearer's sensibility matures and adapts in the light of ongoing testi experience. Its claim to be a capacity of reason crucially depends o adaptiveness,  for  otherwise  it  would  be  little  more  than  a  dead-we social conditioning that looked more like a threat to the justificat hearer's responses than a source of that justification.

This model for how inductive rationality can be embodied in sensibil shows that the making of an explicit inferential step is not the onl that the justificatory force of induction can enter into the hearer's of  a  speaker's  word:  an  appropriately  trained  testimonial  sensib enables the hearer to respond to the word of another with the sort of cal openness that is required for a thoroughly effortless sharing of edge.

To sum up this section, then, the idea of a testimonial sensibility its favour not only that it represents a way out of the impasse with we began (where we were stuck oscillating between the uncritical-rec tion model and the inferentialist model of testimonial knowledge) but that it retains those features of each model that explained its attrac Testimonial sensibility, as I have characterised it, pictures inducti nality as the basic source of justification for hearer response, and the main thing we found attractive in the inferentialist model. Yet pictures hearer response in such a way that where knowledge is gained is usually non-inferential. This means that the idea of a testimonial bility honours our everyday phenomenology of spontaneity and unreflec tiveness, thus incorporating the non-intellectualism we found attract the uncritical-reception model.

Perhaps enough has now been said to show that the idea of a testim nial sensibility is able to explain how everyday testimonial knowledge be non-inferential. But more needs to be said about what constitutes a sensibility. I would like to think that introducing the notion op some  new  terrain  for  work  of  a  virtue-ethical  kind  in  exploring  wh virtues are properly incorporated into such a sensibility - work that

be regarded as either replacing or complementing more technical, pro bilistic approaches to these matters. My next task here, then, wil home in on one virtue in particular, which - although it is in a cert thoroughly familiar - does not have a name. The role that this virtue play in testimonial practice comes into view only if we follow throug implications of our historicist, socially situated conception of the e socialisation that forms testimonial sensibility. More particularly, into view if we return to the role of social stereotypes in how a se determines habits of hearer response. I have said that such stereo where  empirically  founded,  are  a  perfectly  legitimate  heuristic  a necessary determining factor in how a hearer perceives a speaker. Bu must also confront the fact that in any actual human society, human eties being what they are, it is inevitable that such speaker stereot susceptible to distortion by the prejudices of the day. Stereotypes ing testimonial exchange will tend to imitate relations of social po large  in  the  society.  Our  everyday,  face-to-face  testimonial  encou bring to bear a whole social consciousness in an instant, and this cr deep structural liability to prejudicial dysfunction in our testimon tices.

## 4. Epistemic Injustice: The Word of Others

Broadly speaking, prejudicial dysfunction in testimonial practice can two kinds. Either the prejudice results in the speaker's receiving mor ibility than she rationally deserves credibility excess - or it results in her receiving less credibility than she rationally deserves - . 6 credibility deficit Consider the immediate discursive impact of accent, for instance. Not does a speaker's accent carry a great deal of baggage in terms of h hearer perceives the speaker socially; I would suggest that part and of this social perception are implications for how the hearer percei speaker epistemically. Accent can have a significant impact on how mu credibility the hearer affords the speaker, especially in a one-off e

6 Someone might ask how far the idea of a credibility excess or deficit depends on being some exact degree of credibility which the speaker is due. I share Coady's scep about there being any precise science here, any precise credibility ratio to determi degree of belief the hearer is entitled to. As Coady says, people are not like coins ing quite general tendencies to be right and honest about things (see Coady 1992, 210) I see no reason to think this difficulty can be made good by building a sensitivity t matter into one's calculations, for the likelihood of speaker veracity is always depe which of an indeterminate number of discursive contexts the interlocutors happen to (including maximally contingent shifts of context that depend, for instance, on wheth speaker is in the mood for being undetectably sarcastic, and so on). This dependence o finely differentiated contexts seems not merely to indicate that if there is a prec bility available then it can hardly be available to the hearer. Rather, it would see cate that there is no such precise probability available at all, and that the matter significant degree indeterminate.

I do not mean that someone's accent is especially likely to lead a h even  an  intensely  prejudiced  one,  simply  to  some  perfectly disbelieve believable assertion, or simply to  ome otherwise incredible asserbelieve s tion. Given that it is overwhelmingly in the interests of hearers in to believe what is true and not believe what is false, it would have t unusual  prejudice  to  be  strong  enough  to  have  that  sort  of  effect. should  note,  however,  that  social  contexts  structured  by  relation systematically unequal social power do have a habit of generating si tions in which a hearer with the greater social power is in a positio that it costs him nothing to disbelieve a manifestly believable speak one of my examples will demonstrate.)

More usually, however, power will influence hearer-response in a l obvious way. Rather than turning belief into non-belief or vice ver will surreptitiously raise or lower the hearer's  lief, by inflatdegree of be ing or deflating the credibility he affords the speaker. Epistemic tr other kinds of trust, has an affectivehat is influenced - sometimes 7 aspect t rightly, sometimes wrongly - by how the hearer perceives the interlocu Its key affective aspect is a kind of minimal interpretative sympathy the speaker that allows signs of her trustworthiness to be picked up the  hearer's  perception  of  her.  Even  such  a  minimal  sympathy  will signally uneven across differences of social identity and especially those  differences  of  identity  are  characterised  by  dramatically  un relations of power. Both of the examples I shall present illustrate h social 'otherness' of the speaker is fundamental to the prejudiced r tion their word is given - the hearers re-enact their general social tage in the reception they give the speaker's word.

To the examples, then. Both present cases of credibility deficit ( than credibility excess), since that is the phenomenon that most urg calls  for  the  specific  anti-prejudicial  virtue  I  aim  to  identify. example is drawn from a novel, To Kill a Mockingbird , by Harper Lee (1974); the second is drawn from a screenplay, The Talented Mr Ripley , by Anthony Minghella (2000).  offer the first as an example in which the 8 I epistemic failings on the part of the hearer (or rather hearers) is culpable, the second as an example in which it is plausible to sugges the hearer inflicts the injustice non-culpably. Each presents an inst epistemic injustice in testimony - an instance, then, of testimonial injustice .

First  example :  The  year  is  1935,  and  the  scene  a  courtroom  in Maycomb County, Alabama. The defendant is a young black man named Tom Robinson. He is charged with raping a white girl, Mayella Ewell whose family's run-down house he passes every day on his way to and

- 7 See Jones 1996.
- 8 Minghella's  screenplay  is  closely  based  on  Patricia  Highsmith's  novel,  thoug crucially for present purposes, the character of Marge Sherwood and her relationship Dickie Greenleaf is developed differently.
- © Metaphilosophy LLC and Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003

from work. It is obvious to the reader, and would be obvious to any tively unprejudiced person in the courtroom, that Tom Robinson is enti innocent. For Addicus Finch, our politely spoken counsel for the defe has proved beyond doubt that Robinson could not have beaten the Ewe girl  so  as  to  cause  the  sort  of  cuts  and  bruises  she  sustained  t because whoever gave her this beating led with his left fist, wherea Robinson's left arm is disabled, injured in an accident when he was a The trial proceedings present a fairly clear-cut struggle between the of evidence and the power of racial prejudice, with the all-white sympathies  ultimately  succumbing  to  the  latter.  But  there  is  a complexity of social meanings at work in determining the jury's per tion of Tom Robinson as a speaker. In a showdown between the word of black man and a white girl, the courtroom air is thick with the do don'ts  of  racial  politics.  Telling  the  truth  here  is  a  minefield Robinson,  since  if  he  casts  aspersions  on  the  white  girl  he  wi perceived as a presumptuous, lying Negro, yet if he does not publi Mayella Ewell's attempt to kiss him (which is what really happened), a guilty verdict is even more nearly assured. (This discursive predic mirrors  his  practical  predicament  at  the  Ewell's  house  when  Mayel grabbed him. If he pushes her away, he will be found to have assaulted yet if he is passive he will equally be found to have assaulted her does the most neutral thing he can, which is to run away, though know all the while that this action too will be taken as a sure sign of g

At a pivotal moment during the prosecution's interrogation, Tom Robi son makes the mistake of being honest about his motivations for stop off at Mayella Ewell's house as regularly as he did to help her out wi jobs. The scene, like the whole story, is reported from the point of Scout,  Addicus  Finch's  little  daughter,  who  is  secretly  surveying proceedings with her brother Jem from the 'Negro gallery.' Mr Gilme the prosecutor, sets him up:

- 'Why were you so anxious to do that woman's chores?' Tom Robinson hesitated, searching for an answer. 'Looked like she didn't h nobody to help her, like I says -' . . . Mr Gilmer smiled grimly at the jury. 'You're a mighty good fellow, it seem did all this for not one penny?' 'Yes suh. I felt right sorry for her, she seemed to try more'n the rest o ' You felt sorry for   you felt her , sorry for her?' Mr Gilmer seemed ready to rise to the ceiling. The witness realised his mistake and shifted uncomfortably in the chair. B damage was done. Below us, nobody liked Tom Robinson's answer. Mr Gilmer
- paused a long time to let it sink in. (Lee 1974, 201)

Here the 'damage' in question is done to any interpretative sympathy white jury has so far been human enough to feel towards the black de dant. For feeling sorry for someone is a taboo sentiment if you are black

and the object of your sympathy is a white person. And the fact that Robinson has made the sentiment public raises the stakes in a way tha disastrous for justice, disastrous for him. The trial is a contest bet word of a black man against that of a white girl, and there are those jury whose testimonial sensibility is such that the idea that the bla is to be trusted and the white girl distrusted is virtually a psych impossibility - Robinson's expressed sympathy for a white girl only r forces that impossibility.

As  it  turns  out,  the  members  of  the  jury  stick  with  their  preju perception of the defendant, formed principally by the racial stereoty the day. Addicus Finch challenges them to dispense with these stereoty to dispense with the 'assumption - the evil assumption - that all Negroes lie, that  Negroes are basically immoral beings, that   men are all all Negro not to be trusted around our women' (Lee 1974, 208). But when it come to the verdict, the jurors go along with the automatic distrust deliv their  corrupted  testimonial  sensibility.  They  find  him  guilty.  And important that we are to interpret the novel so that the jurors really him guilty. That is to say, they do not privately find him innocent bu cally convict him anyway. They really do fail to do what Finch in summing-up describes as their duty: they fail to believe Tom Robinson . Given the evidence put before them, their immovably prejudiced soci perception of Robinson as a speaker leads at once to a gross epistemic ure and an appalling ethical failure.

Second example: It is the 1950s, and we are in Venice. Herbert Greenleaf, a rich American industrialist, is visiting, accompanied by a detective he has hired to help solve the mystery of the whereabouts o renegade son, Dickie. Dickie Greenleaf recently got engaged to his g friend, Marge Sherwood, but subsequently spent a great deal of time t elling  with  their  'friend'  Tom  Ripley  -  until  Dickie  mysteriou disappeared. Marge is increasingly distrustful of Ripley because he s to be obsessed with Dickie and suspiciously bound up with his stran disappearance. She also knows very well that it is unlike Dickie - un able philanderer though he undoubtedly was - simply to do a bunk, l alone  to  commit  suicide,  which  is  the  hypothesis  Ripley  is  at  pain encourage. Ripley, however, has all along done a successful job of suc up to Greenleaf senior, so Marge is entirely alone in her suspicion correct suspicion - that Tom has in fact killed Dickie.

Herbert Greenleaf has just asked Ripley to be as helpful as he ca 'filling in the blanks' of Dickie's life to Macarron, the private de and Ripley responds:

Ripley : I'll try my best, sir. Obviously I'll do anything to help Dickie. Marge looks at him in contempt. Herbert Greenleaf : This theory, the letter he left for you, the police think a clear indication he was planning on doing something . . . to himself.

© Metaphilosophy LLC and Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003

You don't want to, dear. I'd like to talk to Tom alone perhaps this afternoon? Would you mind? Marge, what a man may say to his

Marge : I just don't believe that! Herbert Greenleaf : sweetheart and what he'll admit to another fellow Marge : Such as? (Minghella 2000, 120-21)

Here Marge is being gently, kindly, sidelined by Greenleaf senior, pathologizes her disbelief that Dickie would kill himself as a sweeth wishful thinking. He also seems to assume that Marge is generally i cent of the more tawdry facts of Dickie's life, so that his primary towards her on the one hand and the-truth-about-Dickie on the other i she needs protection from Greenleaf's everyday theory about what a it . man may say to his sweetheart, et cetera - though in itself quite po true  enough  -  has  the  effect  of  undermining  Marge  as  a  possessor knowledge about the lover she had been living with for some time. Gre leaf is only too aware how little he knows of his son - pathetically siastic as he is at the prospect that the private detective might h good this ignorance - and yet he fails to see Marge as the source of edge about Dickie that she manifestly is.

This attitude has the knock-on effect that Greenleaf fails to trus Marge's key reasons for her correct hypothesis that Dickie has died a hands of Ripley. Even when Marge finds hard evidence back at Ripley place, coming across a ring which she had given Dickie and which he h sworn never to remove, still she receives no credibility. Ripley's del tactic is to dismiss her as 'hysterical' - a line he continues to p front of Greenleaf in order to get him to share this interpretation. T works, not only on Greenleaf but also on her friend Peter Smith-Kings so that the result is a collusion of men against Marge's word being seriously. The theme of knowledge ever to the fore in the dialogue, one point hear her off-screen, soon after she finds the ring, saying ically to the incredulous Greenleaf, 'I don't know, I don't know, know it,' and Greenleaf replies with a familiar put-down: 'Marge, the female intuition, and then there are facts - .'

A number of these sorts of exchanges build up to the scene in whi Marge, being taken back to America, is ushered on to a boat but bre away to lunge at Ripley, saying, 'I know it was you - I know it was Tom. I know it was you. I know you killed Dickie. I know it was yo Macarron, the private detective, comes out of the waiting boat to re her, and the stage direction reads: 'Ripley looks at him as if to sa can you do, she's hysterical. Macarron nods, pulls her onto the boat the viewer is aware, however, Marge was right: she did know; she kn Dickie well; and she knew Ripley had killed him. Her suspicions sho have been listened to;  f all people should have been given some credshe o ibility. But Ripley cynically exploits the gender attitudes of the da the kindly and well-meaning men around her effectively collude with h to make her seem epistemically untrustworthy.

What both these examples present us with, in their different ways, case of a hearer failing to correct for one or another sort of prejudi testimonial  sensibility.  Both  Greenleaf  and  the  members  of  Maycomb County's jury fail to distrust their own distrust aker. They fail 9 of the spe to adjust for the way in which their testimonial sensibility is badly In the formal courtroom context of Tom Robinson's trial, they have amp opportunity to sense the dissonance between the distrust that their tive sensibility spontaneously delivers and the trust that attentio evidence ought to inspire. Even if members of the jury were to be forg for the way their sensibility is saturated with the prejudices of t they remain starkly culpable in failing to respond appropriately to th testimonial experience afforded by the trial. In the case of Herbert leaf, he fails to correct for the way in which his habits of hearer are saturated with the sexist constructions of gender - notably, id women's innocence concerning the truths of men, and their need to protected from such truths; ideas of feminine intuitiveness being an cle  to  rational  judgement;  and  even  ideas  of  a  female  susceptibili hysterics.

But it is not simply a matter of failure properly to accommodate speaker's social identity. In both examples, the hearers fail to adjus way in which their  social identity affects the testimonial exchange own The jury fails to account for the difference it makes to Tom Robins 'performance' as a speaker (in the wide sense of performance, to incl both what he does and how the audience responds) not only that he is b but equally that they are white . What Greenleaf fails to account for in his sceptical responses to Marge is the difference it makes to her perform not only that she is a woman but also that  . The relation - a relahe is a man tion of power - between the social identities of hearer and speaker ence both how the speaker expresses herself and how the hearer respon

Our  two  examples,  then,  demonstrate  that  testimonial  responsibil requires a distinctly reflexive critical awareness. Had Marge shoute accusations in the presence of Mrs Herbert Greenleaf, one speculates she might have received from her some greater degree of credibility. things would have gone differently at Tom Robinson's trial if the memb of the jury had been black goes without saying.

Thus we have arrived at the final feature of the anti-prejudicial t nial virtue we have been looking for: it is essentially reflexive. It sion  means  that  the  hearer  reliably  succeeds  in  correcting  for  the testimonial  performance  can  be  prejudiced  by  the  inter-relation  of hearer's  social  identity  and  the  speaker's  social  identity.  In  test exchanges, for hearers and speakers alike, no party is neutral - ever has a race, everybody has a gender. What is needed on the part of

- 9 I borrow this formulation from Jones 2002, in which she explores the themes of pow and credibility specifically concerning astonishing reports.
- © Metaphilosophy LLC and Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003

hearer, then, in order to avert an epistemic injustice (and in order his own epistemic interest in the truth) is a virtue of Reflexive Critical Openness . This is the virtue we have been aiming to identify by atten to the phenomenon of testimonial injustice.

## 5. The Virtue of Reflexive Critical Openness - Historicism

The virtue of Reflexive Critical Openness is an especially hard vir achieve at the best of times, inasmuch as prejudice is a powerful vi force, functioning less at the level of propositional attitudes and the level of the social-imaginative and emotional commitments that co one's perceptions of speakers. (Even if one were only faced with cor ing for prejudice at the level of belief, this can still be very h those  beliefs  are  propped  up  by  motivational  attitudes  in  this  wa Christopher Hookway [2001, e.g., 182] has argued, there is the usual for akrasia in the practical business of managing one's epistemic habit

Clearly, however, it is in principle achievable, and the virtue wi integral part of any well-trained testimonial sensibility in so far a of prejudice-induced credibility deficit is an inevitable feature of life.  The  human  condition  is  a  social  condition,  and  social  rel inevitably create space for prejudice.

Yet, there are circumstances under which the virtue cannot be achie for  it  is  a  notable  and  ethically  significant  feature  of  this  vir displays  a  special  sort  of  cultural-historical  contingency.  In  o explain this, let me follow Linda Zagzebski's (1996) definition of such that virtues have both a motivational component and a component reliable success in bringing about the end of that motivation. In the intellectual virtues there will always be a motivation to achieve tr usually there will also be a more proximal aim to achieve something is conducive to truth - notably here the aim of ensuring that one's le trust are untainted by prejudice. As a matter of definition, then, t lectually virtuous subject will be reliably successful in fulfilling imal aim of ensuring against prejudice, and she will succeed in th achieving reflexive critical awareness of the prejudicial distortion existing testimonial sensibility and by correcting for those distorti

It must now be acknowledged, however, that the ability to do tha dependent upon the cultural-historical setting. A setting in which t little critical awareness of gender is a setting in which no-one is i tion to possess the virtue of Reflexive Critical Openness  er vis-à-vis g nd prejudice of any subtle kind. While the Herbert Greenleafs of this were always at fault in failing to exhibit the virtue, I would sugg were  not culpably at  fault  until  the  requisite  critical  consciousnes gender became available to them. They were not culpably at fault u they were in a position to know better. Now there will of course b precise answer to the question of at what point a Herbert Greenleaf c

to be in a position where he should know better than to overlook the p bility that Marge was right. But no doubt someone like him will be in position  long  before  he  actually  lives  up  to  it  by  taking  on  boar gender-critical insights newly available to him. Thus there will tend some period of historical transition in which a Herbert Greenleaf, intentioned and paternal as he may remain, moves from innocent fault culpable fault. He lacked the virtue of Reflexive Critical Openness regard to women speakers all along, but the relevant advance in colle consciousness will mean that this shortcoming in his epistemic condu and in the testimonial sensibility behind it, will have become blame thy.

This shows that the power to possess the virtue of Reflexive Crit Openness depends upon the social-historical context. The case of Herb Greenleaf, as I have characterised it, exemplifies the idea that one be blamed for failing to do something one wasn't in a position to reason to do. Essentially this is an instance of the maxim that 'o implies 'can,' since in our example the 'can' part is a matter of wh Greenleaf could reasonably be expected to  the critical perspective achieve on gender that would have given   reason to cast doubt on his lack of him a trust  in  Marge's  word.  More  specifically,  and  more  controversially, might think of ourselves as having arrived at an insight into the st of responsibility that is advanced by Bernard Williams (1995, 35) in t of the internality of practical reasons. It would not be right to blam one for an action or omission unless there existed a 'sound deliber route' from that person's actual motivational set ('the set of his d evaluations, attitudes, projects, and so on'). Whatever one thinks abo disagreements between so-called internal and external reasons theoris is  worth  noting  that  our  intellectual  case  could  not  be  controvers anything like the way the ethical case is. This is because it could controversial to presume that all epistemic subjects possess in their vational set a general motivation to aim at truth, and im at a fortiori to a more proximal ends which are in the service of that general motivat (such as correcting for prejudice in one's habits of trust, for insta

Given this, it is clear that not just Herbert Greenleaf but even t virulent, dyed-in-the-wool sexist version of Herbert Greenleaf possess motivation (the motivation to truth) from which there might be a so deliberative route to distrusting his lack of trust in Marge. It is no of a motivation, then, that explains why Greenleaf 'cannot' do what ought - cannot exhibit the appropriate virtue. It is rather the unava to him of a sound deliberative route from that veridical motivation conclusion that he should doubt his lack of trust in Marge. There is n sound deliberative route available to him, in as much as the critical c in which that deliberation would have to be couched are genuinely not available. On this (perhaps rather charitable) interpretation, then, G is unlucky, epistemically and morally. His non-culpable inability to e

the virtue of Reflexive Critical Openness not only means that he misse on  a  truth  that  he  is  especially  interested  in  acquiring  (Marge  i Ripley is Dickie's murderer) but also means he inflicts a significant tice on Marge. She is treated as a hysterical female who cannot handl truth, someone who deserves protection and sympathy but not epistem trust. If one's rationality is an essential part of one's humanity, t is gently undermined in her very humanity.

Evidently testimonial injustice will tend to imitate the broader tures of power in society, and where it is systematic we should reco it as a face of oppression. In an essay on the nature of oppression Lee Bartky (1990, 30) quotes Frantz Fanon's notion of 'psychic ali ation,' where the alienation in question consists in 'the estrangem separating off a person from some of the essential attributes of p hood.' I take it that basic forms of epistemic agency, such as funct as an informant on everyday matters, is indeed one of the essential utes of personhood - it is part and parcel of being accepted as a com in the community of the rational. If this is so, then an epistemic cl which  some  people  suffer  systematic  testimonial  injustice  must regarded as seriously defective both epistemically and ethically. It site not simply of error and frustration, advantage and disadvantage, a distinctively epistemic kind of oppression. We have seen that the of Reflexive Critical Openness (and doubtless many other virtues besi has an important role in combating this sort of oppression. But as thing possessed of mere individuals whose social-historical situatio deprive them of the very resources they need in order to attain the its anti-oppressive power remains hostage to the broader social stru in which our testimonial practices must take place.

School of Philosophy Birkbeck College University of London Malet Street London WC1E 7HX United Kingdom m.fricker@philosophy.bbk.ac.uk

## References

Bartky, Sandra Lee. 1990. 'On Psychological Oppression.' In Femininity and Domination: Studies in the Phenomenology of Oppression , 22-32. London: Routledge.

Coady, C. A. J. 1992. Testimony: A Philosophical Study . Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Fricker, Elizabeth. 1987. 'The Epistemology of Testimony.' Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society (supplementary volume) 61: 57-83.

© Metaphilosophy LLC and Blackwell Publishing Ltd. 2003

---. 1994. 'Against Gullibility.' In Knowing from Words , edited by B. K. Matilal and A. Chakrabarti. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer. Fricker, Miranda. 2000. 'Confidence and Irony.' In Morality, Reflection, and Ideology , edited by E. Harcourt, 87-112. Oxford: Oxford University Press. Jones, Karen. 1996. 'Trust as an Affective Attitude.'  4-25. Ethics 107: ---.  2002.  'The  Politics  of  Credibility.'  In A Mind  of  One's  Own: Feminist Essays on Reason and Objectivity , edited by L. Antony and C. Witt, 154-76. Boulder, Col.: Westview Press. Lee, Harper. 1974. To Kill A Mockingbird . London: Pan Books. Hookway, Christopher. 2001. 'Epistemic Akrasia and Epistemic Virtue.' In Virtue Epistemology: Essays on Epistemic Virtue and Responsibilit , edited by A. Fairweather and L. Zagzebski, 178-99. Oxford: Oxford University Press. MacIntyre, Alasdair. 1981. After Virtue: A Study in Moral Theory . London: Duckworth. McDowell,  John.  1994. Mind  and  World .  Cambridge,  Mass.:  Harvard University Press. ---.  1998.  'Knowledge  by  Hearsay.'  In Meaning,  Knowledge,  and Reality , essay 19. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. Minghella, Anthony. 2000. The Talented Mr Ripley . London: Methuen. Williams, Bernard. 1995. 'Internal Reasons and the Obscurity of Blame In Making Sense of Humanity and Other Philosophical Papers , chapter 3. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Zagzebski, Linda. 1996. Virtues of the Mind: An Inquiry into the Nature of Virtue  and  the  Ethical  Foundations  of  Knowledge .  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.