A439
SLEEP , V olume 46, Supplement 1, 2023Abstract citation ID: zsad077.0996
0996
A NEW INSOMNIA PHENOTYPE: CORONASOMNIA 
MISOPHONIA SYNDROME
Narayana  Gowda1, Alon  Avidan1
1 UCLA
Introduction: Misophonia is a complex neuropsychiatric phe -
nomenon characterized by an intense selective auditory hyper -
sensitivity to auditory stimuli accompanied by emotional 
intolerance consisting of anger, anxiety, and frustration. We 
report on four subjects who presented with significant sleep 
onset insomnia coinciding with the mandated stay-at-home 
order in March 2020. All patients reported unique and specific 
irritability and aversion to sounds in their proximal environment 
- the misophonic trigger (MT). While a previous study reported 
on the capacity of misophonia to emerge during venerable peri -
ods of confinement, we report a series of four patients in whom 
misophonia was a unique precipitant of insomnia, a “miso -
phonic response” accompanied by hypervigilance and insomnia. 
Our findings support the consideration of a unique insomnia 
phenotype - Coronasomnia Misophonia Syndrome (CMS).
Report of case(s): Subject A is a 29-year-old female with a his -
tory of OCD and mild insomnia (MT: humming refrigerator). 
Subject B is a 31-year-old female with a history of delayed sleep 
phase disorder in her teenage years (MT: husband’s breathing). 
Subject C is a 36-year-old male with well-controlled sleep-on -
set insomnia (MT: electric humming from walls). Subject D is a 
46-year-old male with well-controlled depression (MT: carotid 
pulsation transmitted through his pillow). All but one patient 
had reasonable improvement with mindfulness therapy com -
bined with systematic desensitization. Subject A improved after 
pharmacological modification of OCD therapy.
Conclusion: Our case series supports CMS as a unique insomnia 
phenotype coinciding with social isolation during the COVID-19 
pandemic. The MT might have served as a precipitant through 
classical conditioning. Desensitization with mindfulness ther -
apy was helpful, but the presence of comorbid OCD led to a 
refractory course supporting pervasive sensory processing in this 
patient. Our data highlights the need for more dedicated investi -
gation for MT in patients presenting with insomnia during times 
of confinement and unprecedented anxiety. Additional data is 
needed to support our observation and investigate the potential 
psychophysiological mechanism, particularly the proposed alter -
ation in auditory processing in response to the MT in healthy 
and psychiatric cohorts.
Support (if any): 
Abstract citation ID: zsad077.0997
0997
SEVERE MIXED SLEEP APNEA IN A P ATIENT WITH 
EPILEPSY AND GENE MUTATION EEFIA2
Divya  Gupta1, Anjalee  Galion2
1 University of California, Irvine, 2 Children's Hospital Orange Cou
nty
Introduction: EEFIA2 gene mutation has been linked with epi -
lepsy and intellectual disability. There have been case series and 
case reports in the past that have linked the gene mutation with 
both epilepsy and possible phenotypes of broad nasal bridge and 
tented upper lip. In previous cases, there has been no description of work up of sleep disordered breathing. Here, we present a 
case of sleep apnea in a patient with intractable epilepsy and 
gene mutation.
Report of case(s): Patient is a toddler-aged female with epilepsy. 
She was diagnosed with infantile epileptic encephalopathy with 
a pathogenic mutation in EEF1A2 gene with intractable gener -
alized myoclonic epilepsy, hypotonia, and developmental delay. 
She has been on several seizure medications in an effort to obtain 
seizure control. With medications she has been undergoing side 
effects of swallowing difficulties and increased sedation. During 
her neurology epilepsy follow up, she was noted to have fre -
quent nighttime awakenings. She was scheduled to have a com -
bined polysomnography and 24-hour electroencephalogram. 
Polysomnography performed which showed evidence of severe 
mixed central and obstructive sleep apnea-hypopnea syndrome 
with AHI of 100/h, CAI 42/H, OAHI - 57/h, and REM AHI of 
106/h. Video Electroencephalogram performed at the same time 
and showed multiple atonic and myoclonic seizures with multi -
focal discharges. Patient was evaluated by otolaryngology and 
was not a candidate for surgical interventions. She was titrated 
on bilevel positive airway pressure during a split titration sleep 
study.
Conclusion: Genetic mutations and their phenotypes are becom -
ing more widely addressed and researched. In this case we present 
a rare genetic mutation EEFIA2 which has presented as intellec -
tual disability, hypotonia, and intractable epilepsy in this patient. 
Given some daytime somnolence and nighttime awakenings, a 
polysomnography was pursued and showed severe obstructive 
sleep apnea. In cases where phenotypes are not widely known, it 
is important to screen for sleep disorders.
Support (if any): 
Abstract citation ID: zsad077.0998
0998
DULOXETINE AS A POSSIBLE EFFECTIVE TREATMENT 
OF KLEIN-LEVIN SYNDROME CASE REPORT
Samuel  Hall1, Sally  Ibrahim2
1 Case Western Reserve University, 2 University Hospitals 
Cleveland Medical Center
Introduction: Kleine Levin Syndrome (KLS), or recurrent 
hypersomnia, is a rare sleep disorder characterized by recur -
rent episodes of severe hyper-somnolence lasting several days 
to several weeks. Because the etiology is unknown, treatment 
is mostly supportive. Some pharmacologic agents have been 
attempted to treat symptoms during episodes with limited 
success.
Report of case(s): Patient is a 17 year-old with a history atten -
tion-deficit hyperactivity disorder and generalized anxiety 
disorder who presented to the clinic due to recurrent episodes 
of severe hypersomnolence associated with derealization and 
cognitive dysfunction during all episodes, anxiety of being 
alone, and other symptoms in some episodes such as altered 
taste affecting appetite, and binge eating. The patient was 
diagnosed with KLS and tracked episodes which lasted 11-12 
days (average) with recurrence every 10-17 days. Labs, 72 hour 
EEG, MRI and MRA were largely unremarkable. The family 
declined trial of Lithium. Pharmacogenetic testing showed sig -
nificant gene-drug interaction with duloxetine requiring higher 
drug dosage for effects. After psychiatry started duloxetine, 
the patient experienced a 7 month period without episodes. 
Then episodes recurred for unclear reason while on duloxetine C. Case Reports Case Reports from Clinical TraineesDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/sleep/article/46/Supplement_1/A439/7182200 by guest on 01 June 2023