Processed by Minitex on:

12/14/2022 10:09:59 AM

This material comes to you from the University of Minnesota collection or another participating library of the Minitex Library Information Network.

Patrons: please contact your library for help accessing this document.

Library staff: for issues or assistance with this document, please email: mtx-edel@umn.edu and provide the following information:

-  Article ID : MIH 01MNPALSIHC0009337
-  Patron email address

____________________________________________________________________________________

Title: History of the human sciences ArticleTitle: A History of consciousness: from Kant and Hegel to Derrida and Foucault ArticleAuthor: David Couzens Joy Vol: 4 No: 2 Date: 1991 OCLC - 41551836; ISSN - 09526951; LCN - 2007233857; Publisher: Sage Publications, London : 1991 Source: info:sid/primo.exlibrisgroup.com-alma_local Copyright: CCL

____________________________________________________________________________________

## NOTICE CONCERNING COPYRIGHT RESTRICTIONS:

The copyright law of the United States [Title 17, United StatesCode] governs the making of photocopies or other reproductions of copyrighted materials.

Under certain conditions specified in the law, libraries and archives are authorized to furnish a photocopy or other reproduction. One of these specific conditions is that the photocopy is not to be "used for any purpose other than private study, scholarship, or research." If a user makes a request for, or later uses, a photocopy or reproduction for purposes in excess of "fair use," that user may be liable for copyright infringement.

This institution reserves the right to refuse to accept a copying order if, in its judgment, fulfillment of that order would involve violation of copyright law.

## A  history  of  consciousness : from  Kant  and  Hegel  o Derrida t and  Foucault

## DAVID  COUZENS  HOY

Would  a  history  of  the  human  sciences  seem  trange  if  it featured  a s chapter  on  the history  of  consciousness?  An  rgument  for  including  such  a  chapter  could  point a out  that  consciousness  is often  thought to be  essential to  what  it is to  be  human. Yet the  discipline  that  makes this  argument  is  not a  human  science,  but philosophy,  especially  modern  philosophy,  for which consciousness is  the privileged  subject-matter,  and which asserts  itself  as  the  privileged  way  of theorizing  about consciousness. Yet in this  century,  and  especially  in the last decade,  this  conception  of  philosophy (and  even of the notion of 'the human sciences')  has been called into  question by  other, 'postmodern' philosophers. These  postmodem  thinkers  are  often  interpreted  as  saying  that  we  can  now rite w the  history  of  the  human  sciences  because  we  o n longer  believe  in  the  'sciences  of man',  and,  in particular, we  can  write  the history  of  consciousness  because  we an c now  abandon the  concept  of  consciousness and the  conception  of  philosophy that  featured  it. To  understand  how  this  striking turn  is even possible  requires  us to understand its  historical  and  philosophical background,  which includes a history  of  ttempts  to  rethink  the  concept  of  consciousness.  In  this  article, then,  I a project  as a contribution to the  history  of the human  sciences a  philosophical history  of  consciousness, or,  more  precisely,  a  history  of the  disappearance  of consciousness.

Of course,  some  philosophers -  call  them 'modem' -  might  think that consciousness could not have a  history.  On  this  view,  while the contents of consciousness are  always  different,  the structure of consciousness must be invariant for all individuals at all times. A  istory  of cultural  changes  in how h people  conceived  of  themselves  could  be  interesting,  but  it would  not  be  ossible p

unless  something  remained  unchanged, forming  the lowest common  denominator.

Other  philosophers -  who  erge  on  the  'postmodern' -  think  that this search v for the essence of consciousness is  too unhistorical. Whether consciousness changes  or  remains  the  same  is not  the  issue,  if  only  because  that  question  itself cannot be formulated  clearly enough  to be resolvable on  either  empirical  or a priori grounds. They  could  point  out  that a  history  of  what philosophers  have thought  consciousness  is can certainly  be  written,  but  that  writing  such  a history is unlikely  to show  us what consciousness  really  is.  On  the  contrary,  such a history may  make  us  wonder  instead not  only  what  we  mean by  consciousness, but  whether  we  mean  nything  at  all  by  he  word.  Although  consciousness  thus a t seems to some  to be the  pre-eminent  topic  of  modern  philosophy,  others have suspected  that  the  history  of  modern  philosophy  has  disclosed  not what consciousness  really  is,  but  that  it  really  s not i anything  at  all,  or  at  least  not  much more than  a  matter of  stipulative  definition.  On this  view,  a  history  of consciousness could  only  be  a  postmodern  history  of  'consciousness',  that  is,  a history  not of some real  thing  but of a technical term. The best  way  to do philosophy  in the  future, then,  would  be  to  avoid  the  term.

Of  course,  what  I have  been  describing  is the  classic dilemma  that  philosophy faces in  trying  to reconcile its own history  with its  aspiration  to  finding  truths that  transcend  history.  I will  call  this  dilemma  the problem  of  truth  and  time.  The attempt  of  philosophy  to  comprehend  its  own  arguments  as  sound,  while showing  the unsoundness of its  predecessors,  can be  regarded (from  outside philosophy)  as a literary self-fashioning  that  is  typical  of  the  genre  'philosophy'.

'Modern'  philosophers  may  e  upset  by  this  operation  because  it threatens to b turn  philosophy  into  literature,  and to  deny  the truth of their  philosophical claims. The  analysis  of the  literary  strategies  in  philosophical  texts  looks at philosophy  from the outside and seems to  deny  that there is a  genuine  inside. That  is,  the  external  erspective p on  philosophy  seems  sceptical  about  the  internal perspective  of  philosophers themselves,  who  believe that  they  are  making  true claims about some  level of  reality. Philosophers  must  be  internal realists about their own  discourse,  but the external  perspective  seems to  be  viewing  this discourse  as rhetorical  and  erhaps  even  as fictional.

p

What  these  contrasting perspectives  on  the status of  philosophical  discourse are  reviving  is the ancient conflict between  logic  and rhetoric. To  distinguish logic  and  rhetoric,  as Plato  attempted,  is  already to  privilege logic  over  rhetoric. As  the  history  of philosophy  shows,  once  the  distinction  is  made,  rhetoric  will  be reduced  to a  minor  matter,  a  side-show  that  is taken  less and  less  seriously  until philosophers  no  longer  understand  why anyone  would  study  or  practise  it. Therefore,  for  postmodern  historians of  consciousness  to treat  philosophy  once again  as rhetoric seems  to  deny  that there  is a genuine  distinction between  logic and  rhetoric. But  such  a  denial  seems  to  claim  victory  for rhetoric  by  suggesting that  logic  is never pure.  Philosophy  is never  really  logical  if it is  always  rhetorical.

There  are  thus  at  least  two  traditional  philosophical  problems  that  will  feature in  any  study  of  the  history  of  consciousness. One  is the  problem  of  truth and time,  which I  suggested  comes to a head in the  way  two different attitudes towards  philosophy generate conflicting approaches  to the  question  whether consciousness  can  be  described  philosophically.  The  other  is the  problem  f  ogic o l versus  rhetoric,  which  arises when  any  serious  attempt  to do  philosophy  finds itself confronted  with  the  possibility  of  not being  taken  seriously by  those  who would  treat it as  simply  another  literary  discourse,  one  that  may now  be  already dated  historically.

These  problems  are  not  new,  however.  They  feature  in  the  history  of philosophy  from  Kant  to  the  present.  In  what  follows  I will  pick out  several  such moments, including  Kant's  critique  of  Descartes,  Hegel's critique  of  Kant, Heidegger's  critique  of  Husserl,  Derrida's  critique  of  Heidegger,  and  Foucault's critique  of  Derrida.  There  are other  such  moments  that I could  have  chosen  (for instance,  Roland  Barthes's  critique  of  his earlier structuralist  self).  I focus  on  he t ones  that I  do, however,  because  my oal  is to show  that  writing  the  history  of g consciousness can  itself be  a  philosophical activity,  and  that there will still be  a place  for  philosophical  reflection in a postmodern  era.

## KANT'S  CRITIQUE  OF  DESCARTES

My  history  of consciousness can start with Kant  instead of  Descartes,  because only  with Kant has consciousness become  problematic enough  to  make it necessary  to search for other terms to take its  place. Only  with  the  problematization of  the term  'consciousness' itself do  we  see the  possibility emerge  of  a history  of  'consciousness'. Even  Kant,  however,  is not  self-consciously  worried about whether there is  such a  thing  as  consciousness. So if  the  history  of consciousness  starts with  Kant,  it could  be  written  only  fter  Hegel.  Consciousa ness can be  perceived  as a historical  phenomenon only  when the  concept  of consciousness becomes  problematic enough  to cast doubt  on  the  reality  of the phenomenon  of consciousness itself.  Hegel's historicizing  of consciousness follows from his  critique  of  the Kantian  conception  of  consciousness,  and  the Kantian  conception  follows from a  critique  of the Cartesian  conception.  So although  I choose  to  begin  with  Kant  via  Hegel's  critique,  I think  that  wherever one's  study begins,  there is  not  likely  to be a first moment  of the  history  of consciousness,  for  it will have  always  already  begun.

If  the  beginning  of the  history  of consciousness is  the  beginning  of the disappearance  of  consciousness  from  the  philosophical  scene,  this  disappearance will nevertheless take a  long  time  (and  is not  yet complete). During  this  long interval  consciousness will  even  become the  central  theme for  continental philosophy, especially during  the first half  of  the  twentieth  century,  the  heyday of  phenomenology.  But  if we  see  phenomenology  from  the  perspective  of  the

history  of  consciousness,  then  we will  not  see  it as the  moment when consciousness  is most completely  described  by  philosophy.  Instead,  phenomenology  will be  the  moment  when  'consciousness'  finally  becomes  so obviously  a technical  term that the  possibility emerges  of  abandoning  it  altogether.  Of course,  this possibility  is a  difficult  one  to begin  to  act  on,  and perhaps  no  one  will ever  do  so successfully.  But  the  history  of  consciousness  can  be  written  as if that disappearing point  is,  paradoxically,  in  sight.  The  story  it  tells  will thus be different in tone from the  story  that sees  philosophy progressing  towards the alternative  limiting point  where  consciousness is  finally  made  transparent  in a single, comprehensive,  phenomenological  description.

I  emphasize  this  point to  make  sure  that  we  ead  Kant  not  as a  precursor r of  the phenomenological emergence  of  consciousness,  but as the  beginning  of the disappearance  of consciousness. This  reading may  lead to a difference  only  in colouring  or  tone,  not in the detailed  interpretation  either of Kant's  negative critique  of  Cartesian rational  psychology  in the  'Paralogisms'  of  the  Critique  of Pure  Reason,  or  his  positive  construction  of  the  transcendental  unity  of apperception  in the second  edition 'Deduction'. The  outcome  of  the  critique  of Cartesian  rational  psychology  is roughly  that  there  is no such  thing  as consciousness.  Of course,  unlike  Nietzsche,  Kant  still believes  there  is consciousness. Kant's more limited claim is  that there is an invalid inference (which  is  what a  'paralogism' is)  from the existence of consciousness to the existence  of  the  thing  that  is conscious. Cartesians  who  know  that  they  hink  do t not  thereby  know  mmediately  that  they  are  thinking  things. i

The  most  one  can  claim  to  know  is  that,  given  any  experience that  one  has,  one must  be  able  to recognize  that  one  is  having  that  experience  oneself.  The 'I  think' must  be  able  to  accompany  any  experience  that one  has as a logical  condition  of having  any  experience  at all. But  we  cannot  know  nything  further about the I a that  thinks,  such  as that  it is a simple, single  substance  (e.g.  a  Cartesian  soul).  As some  interpreters  like to  stress,  the  mistake  is to  confuse  the  unity  of experience with  the  experience  of  nity.  The  'I think'  as  a u logical  condition  of  xperience  (i.e. e the transcendental  unity  of  apperception)  is not  the  same  as the  I that  is  actually experienced,  since  the  latter  (the  empirical  ego that  we  ntrospect)  has  constantly i changing  contents. So  the Cartesian  makes  the mistake  of  onfusing  the I that  is c experienced empirically  with the transcendental  unity  that is the condition of having  any  experience  at  all,  including  the  experience  of  the  empirical  self.

Pursuing  the  details of  Kant's  text  would  lead  to seeing  that  although  he  text  is t apparently making  clearer what consciousness  really  is  (as  a transcendental condition instead of as an  empirical experience),  at the same time the text is showing  that  we  cannot  really  know  what  consciousness is  ultimately.  At  least, we cannot know that there is  a  simple  substance that is  conscious,  as  the Cartesians believed.' Kant's claim  depends  on  his distinction between  knowing and  thinking.  We an  know  nly  about  things  of  which  we ould  have  empirical c o c intuitions or  sensory experience. God,  freedom and  immortality (the  standard

topics  of rationalist  metaphysics)  are  beyond  our  knowledge. However,  Kant maintains that humans will  inevitably  need to think about these  topics,  and 'thinking'  here  is more  than  just  imagining or  fantasizing.  To  think  means  to  be able to  give  rational  arguments  about  what  we  can  or  must  believe.

The  critique  of  Cartesian  psychology  suggests  that  we  ave  no  direct  sensory h experience  of  the  transcendental  I.  Therefore,  we  cannot  claim  to  know  nything a about what the I  really  is  like,  but  only  that it  must obtain  (as  a  logical requirement,  or condition of the  possibility  of  experience).  We  believe that it obtains  because without this  condition we could not be  having  the  very experience  that  we  o  have.  One annot d c deny  that  one  is  having some  experience, and  to  have  an experience  is to  have  a  unified  experience.  But  the  unity does  not come  from  the  object  of  experience,  since  experience  is a  manifold  of  data. So  the unity  must  be  contributed  by  s. u

This indirect transcendental  argument  that there is no  it without  an I moves from the admission that there is  some  experience  to  the  discovery  of the necessary  conditions for  any  such  experience  at all.  So  do  we  know  that there really  is transcendental  ego,  or  do  we only  think that there is? Kant's  language suggests  that  we  now  that  the  transcendental  unity  of k apperception  obtains,  but the  proof  r  deduction  depends o not  on  a  direct experience  of  the  transcendental  I (which  he denies that we  have),  but on this  indirect,  transcendental  argumentation. There  are limits on  what  we  can  know  about  ourselves  through  our self-consciousness. We  cannot  know  ourselves  through introspection,  and  we cannot know  how  the active  synthesis  that  produces  our  consciousness  really takes  place.  All we  can infer are the conditions that must obtain in  any  such synthesis (where  such conditions would  include,  for  instance,  that  experience consist  of  ausally  connected  interactions between  real  objects). c

These  limits on  our  knowledge  of  our  own  mind,  that is to  say,  of  our  own apparatus  for  knowing,  entail that there  will also be  limits on  our knowledge  of things.  We cannot have  any knowledge  of  things-in-themselves,  but  this limitation on  our  knowledge  is not a  result of  the  things themselves,  since the right  sort  of  knower  (God,  for  instance)  could  have  complete  knowledge  about them.  We cannot know  directly,  however,  how our  cognitive  apparatus functions and  how  it is limited. So  the  unknowability  of  the  things  results not from the  things  themselves but  from  the  unknowability  of  our own cognitive apparatus.

## HEGEL'S  CRITIQUE  OF  KANT

Hegel  is  not the  first  to  attack  Kant's  conclusions,  but he  goes  beyond contemporary  criticisms of  Kant  by  recasting  the whole  idea of  consciousness. We  can  think  of  the  move  rom  Descartes  to  Kant  to f Hegel  as  a  rocess  of  aking p m consciousness less and less of a  metaphysical  notion. Whereas Kant  rejects  the

Cartesian inference that the self we  introspect  must be an eternal  soul,  Kant himself  leaves  open  the  metaphysical  possibility  that the  self is a  noumenal  and not  simply  a  phenomenal entity. Although  we  have not  knowledge  but  only necessary  belief  (on  moral  rounds), g we  still must  believe  that  the  self  is somehow both  free  and  eternal.  Hegel continues  to  discuss  the  problem  of  free  will  and  the eternal  soul,  but  commentators  have  noted  that he  has little to  say  that  is novel. His  critics  suggest  that  he  eally r does  not  understand  the problems  as  well  as  Kant did,  but I  would draw a different conclusion. The traditional  problems  of rationalist  metaphysics begin  to lose their  grip  on  thinkers after  Kant,  perhaps partly  because of Kant's  critique  of  metaphysics.  Hegel's philosophy may therefore be in the  early stages  of  being  cured of the obsessions of rationalist metaphysics.

Hegel  thus  treats Kant's  distinction between  the  phenomenal  world  of  human experience  and  an  other-worldly,  noumenal  realm as  unnecessarily mystifying. He  classifies Kant  with  the  mpiricists  because  he  sees  Kant's  talk  about  the  limits e of  knowledge  as a further form  of Humean  and  Berkeleyan scepticism,  which Kant  intended to overcome.  Hegel  probed  the  metaphors  used  by  Kantians to describe how  knowledge  can be had,  exposing  in these  metaphors  senses in which  they  made  knowledge  seem  impossible.  He  was  not  the first to  suggest that  the  Kantian  image  of  the  limits  of  our knowledge  as a  curtain  or boundary  is self-defeating.  For  if we  cannot  know  what  lies  beyond  the  boundary,  then  we cannot  say  there is a  boundary. Any  thought  that the  thing-in-itself  is ineffable leads  to  a problem  explaining  how  e  know  that  our  sensory  apparatus  could  be w registering  the  thing as it  really is at  all. Hegel  caricatured  the  Kantian  conception of  the constituting  consciousness  by  suggesting  hat  Kantians  think  of  conscioust ness as an instrument that  grasps  or  captures  the  thing.  He  points  out that although  a forked  twig  could be  used  to  capture  a  bird,  little could be inferred about  the  bird  from  observations about  the  twig.

I prefer to  illustrate the  point  in more up-to-date  terms  by  suggesting  that  we imagine  a  being  capable  of  perception  in  only  two  dimensions  (for  instance,  in  a computer  model).  Where  such  a being  could  see only  a point  growing  o  a  certain t length  and  then  shrinking  to a  point  again,  we  three-dimensional  beings  would perceive  a sphere passing through  the other  being's perceptual plane.  This thought experiment suggests  further that if there were other  mathematically possible  dimensions than those  we  erceive spatially  and  temporally,  for us the p world  would  inevitably  remain  unknowable.

I will turn  shortly  to how  later Kantians  (from  Husserl  to  Hintikka)  respond to this  objection,  but first I want  to  suggest  how  it leads  Hegel  to rethink the Kantian  conception  of consciousness.  Although  Kant  rejects  the  Cartesian appeal  to the data of  introspection  for  knowledge  of the  self,  the Kantian philosophy  is in  many  respects  still committed  to  what  I shall call the primacy  of the first  person singular.  Kant  continues to describe individual  consciousness, with the  goal  of  discovering  in one consciousness the universal features of all

human  consciousness.  The  self's relation  to  itself  is thus  the paradigmatic  locus  of philosophical investigation.  The  theoretical  philosopher  can  investigate  the relation of  the  empirical  to the transcendental  ego,  and  the  practical philosopher can  go  on to consider the moral and  metaphysical  connections between the phenomenal  and  the noumenal  self.

Since  for  Hegel  he  phenomenal  perspective  is all we  have,  and  all we  need,  he t can  give up  the  noumenal-phenomenal  contrast and  replace  it with the self as seen not  from  the noumenal  or  eternal  perspective,  but  from  the  social and  historical  perspective.  Although  Hegel  imself  does  not  say  so,  I would  uggest  that h s he  has  extended  Kant's  'Refutation  of  Idealism'  (in  the  Critique  of Pure  Reason), which is  a  critique  of  sceptics  who doubt or  deny  the existence of external objects.  Whereas  Kant  is  making a point  mainly  about  our knowledge  of  objects, Hegel  spells  out  the  implications  for consciousness. Kant's refutation  works  by showing  sceptics  who  think  that  they  can  be  certain of  their inner  experience  of consciousness  but  not  of  their  outer experience  of  objects  that thinking  of  xperie ence as 'inside'  presupposes  that there is  experience  of  the outer  world. In the Phenomenology  of Spirit Hegel  accepts  the Kantian  argument  that there is no  I without an  It,  but  tries to show  that the  experience  of an It  (or  of  an external world)  would  not by  itself  suffice  to generate  the  idea  that  there  is an  inner  I to  be experienced  in addition to external  objects.  So  if consciousness of  objects  alone would  not produce  consciousness  of  self,  what  dimension  is  missing  from  Kant's analysis? Hegel's  dialectic of  self-consciousness  is constructed  to  show  that  consciousness  of  self  presupposes  recognition  of  other  selves,  so  that  there  could  not be  an  I unless  there  were  a  We  or  at least another  I than  one's  own). (

The  dialectic  of  self-consciousness  is not  intended  to  solve  the  Cartesian  problem  of  other  minds,  which  starts  from  the  inner  and  then  doubts  the  existence  of external  other  minds.  What  egel's H account  is intended  to  solve  is what  I would call the  problem  f  one's  own  ind,  i.e. of  how t is  possible  that  one o m i experiences oneself  as having  a  mind  or  a  self  at  all. Hegel's  account  is not  a psychological  one, and not  genetic,  but  logical  (or transcendental).  It  shows not whether selfconsciousness  or  the  consciousness  of  others  comes  first in  time (they  could  both emerge gradually  in  conjunction  with each  other),  but  that the former  presupposes  the  latter, contrary  to the Cartesian  supposition. Hegel  is not  correcting Kant  so  much  as  adding to Kant  a  further  dimension  that  he  thinks  is  implied  by Kant's  critique  of  the  Cartesian  rational  psychologist.  Kant's  philosophy can  be construed  as  replacing  the  metaphysical  solipsism  of  Cartesian  rationalism  with methodological solipsism. Hegel's  addition turns Kant's attack on  solipsism against  vestiges  remaining  in Kant  of  the  Cartesian  conception of  the  task  of philosophy.  These  vestiges  are  apparent  in Kant's  need  to start from  sensory  experience  and  deduce  the  objectivity  of  the  external  world.  Hegel's  critique  may  ell w be  justified  if these  vestiges  are what  cause Kant to think of the  phenomenal world  as in  some  sense only  an  apparent one  in  contrast  to  an  ultimate,  noumenal reality beyond  space  and  time.

Instead of  starting  with  sensory experience  and  deducing objectivity,  in the Phenomenology Hegel  starts  by  showing  the incoherence  of  any  conception  of experience presupposing  the  veracity  of  recognizably distinct,  purely sensory components  (which  Kant  might  have  called 'intuitions' as opposed  to  concepts). Hegel  then  goes  on  not  to ground  experience  in  perception  but  to  show  that  there is  no  such  thing  as  pure  perception,  or at least that the  conception  of  passive perception  used  by  the tradition to  ground  knowledge  serves instead to make knowledge  seem  impossible. Perception  would  not  be  possible  without  an  I,  but consciousness  of the  I  is  not  possible  without the  experience  of another consciousness.

An  early  title,  later  dropped,  for the  Phenomenology  was Science  of  the Experience of  Consciousness.  This title  suggests  that  the  phenomenological description  of  the ways  consciousness  experiences  itself  can  be  given  a 'scientific' or  systematic explanation  such as  Hegel develops  later in the Science  of  Logic. Hegel thereby  offers  the first  statement of the  problems  of the  history  of consciousness I  described at  the  outset,  and the first solution to them. The historical,  changing  character of consciousness is  admitted,  and described at length.  Yet  the  systematic philosopher steps  back  from  this  phenomenological description  and  explains  why  he  changes  take  place  (using  arguments  that  are  in t many  respects  much  like Kant's  transcendental  arguments).

So  Hegel  goes  beyond  ant  in  recognizing  that  consciousness  is  historical,  that K it changes,  and that  in  the  act  of  appearing  to  itself  it disappears.  The Phenomenology  is the  story  of  the  disappearance  (orAufhebung)  of  what  Hegel calls 'natural' consciousness. A ransformation  of  consciousness  from  one t shape into another takes  place  when  consciousness becomes  self-aware,  for what it becomes aware of when it  becomes self-aware is  not a  fully  constituted, indubitable  self. On he  contrary,  what  it  experiences  is its  inadequacy,  its failure t to have  knowledge  or  experience  of  the  sort it thinks it is  having.  Instead  of  the object  of  knowledge  being  fully  present  to  the  conscious  subject,  what consciousness  experiences  when  it reflects on  itself is the  gap  that still  persists between  subject  and  object.  The  solution is to  do  away  ith  the  subject-object w distinction  (as  is  supposed to  happen  when  we  leave  the Phenomenology  behind and  move  to the  Logic).  But  to do away  with  the  subject-object  distinction is to do  away  with  natural  consciousness,  since  this consciousness  is defined  in terms of  the  subject-object  relation.

Another  title for  the Phenomenology  of Spirit,  or  at least  a  subtitle  for  it,  could thus have been T'he  History of  Consciousness.  Hegel  himself  says  that  'the sequence  of  Shapes through  which consciousness  passes  on this road is  the detailed  history  of  consciousness'  own  ducation  to  the  level of  science.  To  do e the  history  of  consciousness is thus  to describe  various  shapes  of  consciousness both  from  the  inside  and  in  the  past  ense. For  to  be  able  to  talk  about t a 'shape'  of consciousness  is to  be  beyond  it,  and  no longer  sharing  in its  way  f  envisioning o either  the  world  or  itself. Historians  of  consciousness  will  therefore  not  to  be  able

to describe their own  'shape  of  consciousness',  and  in  general  will act as if  they did  not  have  a shape  that  could  be  included  in future  histories of  consciousness. They  can do this either as  Hegel did, by assuming  that their own  standpoint represents  superior  knowledge  that  cannot be further  transcended,  or  by 'disappearing'  into a  supposedly  neutral,  timeless observational stance  (perhaps by  such  simple  devices  as using  the  passive voice  or avoiding  the  first  person).

Obviously,  however,  exempting  one's  own stance  from the  history  of consciousness would be rhetorical  self-deception.  In the  twentieth  century philosophers  therefore  wrestle  with  the  problem  of  their  own  istoricity,  that  is, h of  how  to  make  their  own esire  to  do  hilosophy,  and  thus  to  utter  truths  about d p what  it is to  be  a  human  eing,  consistent  with  their  recognition  of  the  ossibility b p of  radical  change  in consciousness and  in what  human  eings  are. In  the  light  of b Hegel's  rhetorical  failure,  one line of solution would be  dissolution,  that  is, changing  the  meaning  of the  problematic  terms 'consciousness' and  'philosophy',  even  to the  point  of trying  to  abandon  them  ltogether. a

## HEIDEGGER'S  CRITIQUE  OF  HUSSERL

Hegel's conception  of  phenomenology  could thus have led to  giving up  the notion of  the  transcendental  ego,  and  of  the  ineffability  of  things-in-themselves in  some  hidden  noumenal  realm.  Nietzsche  states most  adically  the  conclusions r that seem to follow from the  paradoxes  of Kant's  position.  Not  only  does Nietzsche debunk  the two-world  view he sees as the essence of  the  history  of metaphysics,  he  also attacks the  notion  of  mind  as the  inner  consciousness  of  an outer  world  of  things.  To  block  the Cartesian  inference from  the  supposed  fact that  I am  hinking t to  the assumption  that  I am  most  ssentially  a e thing  that  thinks, Nietzsche  argues  more  radically  than  Kant  not only  that  the  inference  is  invalid, but that the initial  premiss  is unsound. There is  no  thinking  in the Cartesian sense,  says  Nietzsche  in  unpublished  notes  from  1887-8:

'Thinking,'  as  epistemologists  conceive  it,  simply  does not occur: it is  a quite  arbitrary  fiction,  arrived  at by  selecting one  element  from  the  process and  eliminating  all the rest,  an artificial  arrangement  for the  purpose  of intelligibility -

The  'spirit,' something  that thinks: where  possible even  'absolute, pure spirit' -  this  conception  is  a second derivative of that false  introspection which  believes  in 'thinking' :  first  an  act  is  imagined which  simply  does  not occur,  'thinking,'  and  secondly a  subject-substratum  in  which  every  act  of thinking,  and  nothing  else,  has  its  origin:  that  is to  say, both  the deed  and the  doer  are  fictions.  (Nietzsche, 1967)

The idea of consciousness as that which I  most  essentially  am, and which I control,  is  suspicious,  on  Nietzsche's account,  both  because  it misdescribes the

way  ideas  spring up  independently  of one's  volition,  and because it  privileges inner  contemplation  over  external  action. Nietzsche  has  little use  not only  for  the idea of  the  transcendental  ego,  but  for  that of  the  introspected empirical ego  as well.  For  at  least one  philosopher,  then,  'consciousness'  has  completely disappeared  as the  subject-matter  of  philosophy by  the end of the nineteenth century.

The  twentieth  century, however,  starts with  the return of  the transcendental ego  in Husserl's  phenomenology.  Unlike  Hegel's conception  of  phenomenology,  which  describes  the  history of  the appearance  and  disappearance  of  otally t different  shapes  of  consciousness,  Husserl's  programme  is unhistorical. Husserl proposes  to describe the invariant and universal structures of consciousness persisting throughout  the constant  change  in the contents of consciousness. Consciousness is construed as an infinite series of  profiles (Abschattungen)  of things.  A  articular  thing  is never p perceived  in  itself,  but only  in  a series of  these profiles,  no  two  of  which  are exactly  alike. The  series  is infinite  because  no  ubset s of  the profiles  of  a thing  completely  exhausts all the  possible perceptions  of  that thing.

This  model  of  consciousness  yields  a  different  result  from  Kant's.  For  Kant  at ( least,  as Hegel interprets him) things  are, in  themselves,  ineffable. For  Husserl things  are not  ineffable,  but instead are inexhaustible. There is no  feature of a thing  which  could  not  in  principle be  revealed  in  a profile,  even  if  there  are always further  profiles  that  are  possible  in  the  series.  So there  is nothing  that  is impenetrable  to consciousness. In  taking up  the  Enlightenment  notion of the infinite task that  continuously progresses  towards an  asymptote,  Husserl sees himself  as  the  defender  of  reason against  the  dangers  of  relativism,  psychologism and  particularly,  historicism. He  can face these  dangers  because  although  the profiles  are constantly changing,  the mental  schema  or  noema  contains  a  central core  of  invariables. Since these are  articulatable,  there is no  reason  to think that the  unarticulated  aspects  of  hings  are  inarticulatable  in  principle.  The  invariables t of  consciousness  guarantee  the  commensurability  of our  mental and  linguistic representations  of  the world.

Heidegger's  response  is to challenge  the  very  idea  of  mental  representation,  on which  the  foundationalist  ambitions  of  Husserlian phenomenology  rest. Husserl inherits from  both  Descartes and  Kant  the  thought  that  philosophy  should  put knowledge  on secure foundations.  Although Heidegger  uses the term 'hermeneutic  phenomenology'  to describe his own  project  in such a  way  as not  to offend  Husserl,  the  term  is misleading  in  that  Heidegger  criticizes  the foundationalist  goals  of  phenomenology  and  replaces phenomenology  with hermeneutics,  which  is a non-foundationalist  approach  to  philosophy.  According  to  hermeneutics,  philosophy  is itself  always interpretative,  and  there is no presuppositionless starting-point  that  undergirds  the rest of our  knowledge. Phenomenology  is  mistaken in  believing  that  by accurately representing  the representational process,  it  will  ensure the  certainty  of the  representational

process  and  get  back the world it  bracketed.  At some  point,  furthermore, phenomenology  runs  up against  the  problem  that there  must be more to consciousness than the structures and contents of  consciousness. If consciousness is itself  being  represented,  there  must  be  something  doing  the  representing. Yet  consciousness  can  only  be  consciousness of  what  is  represented,  not  of  the representing  as such.

To  deal  with  this  problem  usserl  is thrown  back  to  a  solution  like  Kant's,  and H he  posits  a  transcendental  ego.  Sartre then  comes along  and  denies that there is something  doing  the  representing,  or that consciousness is  anything  at all.  He prefers  to think of consciousness as  'nothingness'.  But Sartre's  approach  still thinks of  consciousness as a phenomenon  that can  be  described,  and  Sartre falls into the  trap  of  taking  particular  kinds  of experience  and  generalizing  them  into universal features of human  reality.  Sartre thus shares Husserl's  conception  of phenomenology  as  description,  not  interpretation.  If  Sartre had  thought  of himself  as  interpreting  rather  than describing  experiences,  however,  he  might  ot n have  asserted  their  universality so  hastily.

Sartre does  not  really grasp  how  much  more  radical  Heidegger's  approach  is. Instead of  either  affirming or  denying  consciousness,  Heidegger  stops  using  the term,  with  the  intention  of  enerating g an  entirely  different  vocabulary from  that of  the  tradition.  Hence,  he  uses  the  term  Dasein,  and argues  that  doing so  allows him  to avoid the traditional  dichotomy  between  subject  and  object. Heidegger hopes  that  this  strategy  will  avoid  the  controversy  between  idealism  and  realism. This  debate  plagues  the  Cartesian  tradition  and  is not  solved  by  ant's  claim  that K one  can  be  both  an empirical  realist and  a transcendental  idealist.  Going  beyond Husserl's  rationalism,  Heidegger  abandons  the  search  for  the  invariable, atemporal  essences of  consciousness,  maintaining  instead that contexts can be varied  as  well  as  contents.  Most  significantly,  philosophy  becomes not  a phenomenology  of  the  self-evident,  but  a  hermeneutics  of  the  hidden.

Unlike Kant  or  Husserl,  Heidegger  would  not  describe the hidden as either ineffable or  inexhaustible. With  the hermeneutical insistence on  the connection of contents to their  interpretative  context,  neither term is  appropriate.  While contexts  are  hidden,  they are  not  ineffable.  Heidegger  speaks  of  what  I am  alling c a  context  as a Lichtung  (like  a clearing  in  the  forest).  The  learing c or  context  is not seen or  thought, not  because  it is  indefinitely far  away  rom  us,  but  only  because f it is so  close  to  us.  We an  and  do  become  aware  of  contexts,  for  instance,  when c we have moved  beyond  the limits of  particular  contexts and seen them as inadequate.  We  are  explicitly  aware  of  contexts  applied  in the  past  and  now  no longer  used. We re  not  explicitly  aware  of  our  present  contexts,  however,  since a we  focus instead on  the  particular  contents. But  these contents  would  not  seem significant  to  us  in  the way  they  do  unless  there  were  a  context  in  the  background against  which  they  figure.  Particular contents  always  presuppose  a  background context  that  allows  them  to stand  out  as  important.

However,  we  can  never  fully  articulate this  background to  ourselves,  and  it is

not  merely  inexhaustible. A  context  is not  completely  articulatable in the same sense  that  its contents  are. If  the  Husserlian  were  to object  that  an  ideal  observer could articulate  all  the  possible  contents of the context such that there was nothing  more left  over,  the  Heideggerian  could  challenge  the  very  idea of specifying  all  the  features  of  anything.  With this challenge  the  model of consciousness  as  an infinite  series  of  profiles on  things  no  longer appears adequate.

## DERRIDA'S  CRITIQUE  OF  HEIDEGGER

Heidegger's  substitution  of  the  term  Dasein  for  consciousness  does  not  eliminate from  itself, however,  all the connotations attached to the traditional notion of subjectivity. Heidegger  himself  comes  to  realize  this,  and  his later  work  criticizes the  vestiges  of  the  preoccupation  with human  subjectivity  that can  be  found  in Being  and  Time,  an unfinished and  perhaps  unfinishable work. Criticisms of Heidegger  by  ater  philosophers  like  Jacques  Derrida  are  thus  often  anticipated  in l Heidegger's  own later  writings  themselves. These  writings try  to avoid the privilege given  to  subjectivity,  and he  opposes  the  persistence, despite  Kant's original  criticism,  of  the  belief  that  we know  our  own  ubjectivity  better  than  we s know  the  objective  world.  At  the  same  time  Heidegger  maintains  that the  world is  not  merely 'objective',  that  is,  it  does not consist  exclusively  of  separate (vorhanden) objects  with  precisely  articulatable  properties.  As  agents moving about  and  transforming  the  world,  we  xperience  the  world  through e contexts in which these  objects  have a  use, and  what  sorts of  objects they  are  depends  on these  various  contexts  of  se. u Understanding  of  hings  in the  world  resupposes  a t p background  of shared  purposes  and  interests,  which are  constantly subject  to reinterpretation.

As  Derrida  and  other  commentators  show,  however,  these  hermeneutic  theses are  difficult  to  maintain  when Heidegger  turns  to justify  his  own project  in  Being and  Time.  Despite  Heidegger's  desire  to  avoid  making  consciousness  the  central focus of  philosophical investigation,  he does start with Dasein. Since we  are ourselves the  clearest  cases  we  now  of  Dasein,  the  investigation  of  Dasein  often k resembles  an  examination  of  human  consciousness. The  urpose  of  starting  with p Dasein  is,  for  Heidegger, not  to posit  man  as  the  measure  of  all  things, but  instead to undermine  the modern  preoccupation  with  self and  to shift  philosophy  back towards a concern with  Being (with  Sein instead  of  merely  with  Dasein). Heidegger's  abandonment  of  the  project  of  Being  and  Time  thus results in  part from  the  problem  Derrida  (1982)  notes  in  Heidegger's  act  of  choosing  asein  as D the  key  o  raising  the  question  of  the  meaning t of  Being:

It is this  self-presence ...  this  familiarity  with  itself of  the  being  ready to understand  Being ...  which  motivates the choice  of  the  exemplary  being, of  the  text,  the good  text  for  the  hermeneutic  of  the  meaning  of  Being.  It is

the  proximity  o  itself of  the  questioning  being  which  leads it to  be  chosen t as  the  privileged interrogated being....  We  can see then that  Dasein, though  not  man,  is nevertheless  nothing  other  than  man.

Derrida  thinks  that  Heidegger  s thus  equivocating.  This  equivocation  is  responi sible for  misleading  Sartre and  others who  misread  Being  and  Time  as a continuation  of  the  phenomenological  project  of  describing  human  consciousness.

Derrida  believes that  Heidegger's  move  in  Being  and  Time  from  phenomenology  to hermeneutics  is not  sufficiently  radical.  Heidegger's  hermeneutics  may not use the word  'consciousness',  but Derrida thinks that hermeneutics still privileges self-presence. Heidegger  perpetuates  the  history  of  metaphysics,  despite  his intention to overcome  metaphysics,  in  thinking  that the  place  to start philosophy  is from  a  paradigm case  where  the  interrogator  and  the  interrogated are fully  present  o  each  other.  This  presence  is assured  in that  Dasein  is both  the t interrogator  and the  interrogated.  Derrida  suggests  that  this  vestige  of the metaphysics  of  presence  is then  coupled  to a  conception  of hermeneutics that perpetuates  the  theological origins  of  hermeneutics  as  used  for  the  reading  f  the o Bible.  Heidegger's  concern  with  the  meaning  of  Being  leads  Heidegger to think of Dasein as a text that can be read. Derrida  believes that  Heidegger's style  of reading  carries over the  theological  model of  making  the  implicit explicit,  of bringing something  hidden to  light.  That  is,  Heidegger  will read our being-inthe-world in a  way  that will  bring  to consciousness features that  prior  theories (or  theologies)  had  overlooked  or  obscured.  This  tyle  of s reading  perpetuates  the 'onto-theological'  tradition  Heidegger  hopes  to  escape  in that it  approaches  the text  (here, Dasein)  as if it were  sacred  (and  the  only genuinely  sacred  text).  The interpretation  of such a text draws its  authority  and  pre-eminence  from the exclusive  authority  of  the  text,  and  the  interpretation brings  out  the  deep  truths the  text  wishes  us  to  heed.

For  Derrida,  even Heidegger's  later  turn  (or  Kehre)  from  the  overly  anthropological  concern with Dasein in  Being  and Time  to a  supposedly  more  radical focus on  Being  will  merely  accentuate  Heidegger's inability  to break  with the traditional  philosophical preoccupation  with  self-presence.  Heidegger's preoccupation  with the 'master word'  Being suggests  a  nostalgia  for a time when philosophy  had a  single  concern. Derrida  points  ahead to a different time for philosophy,  when  there will be no  unique  name,  not even that of  'Being',  for what  philosophy  is about.  This  new  time  has  been  called  'postmodern'  by  some, thereby  suggesting  that  philosophy  gets  liberated from  the  rational dilemmas  of modern  philosophy,  which  begins  with Descartes  and seems to  end with Nietzsche.  However,  the  label  of  postmodernity  obscures Derrida's  point. While  we  should  not  experience  the  disappearance  from  hilosophy  of  the  focus p on man or on  Being  as a  loss,  we  also should not  experience  it  as  complete liberation. Derrida  does not think we  can ever  entirely escape  the  problems  of metaphysics  or  the  antinomy  of  subject  and  object.

The effect of Derrida's  critique  of  Heidegger  is  not, therefore,  to  replace Heidegger's theory  with a  better  theory.  Instead,  Derrida could himself be described as  forcing philosophers  to focus on what was  previously ignored, namely,  how  the  writing  of  philosophy  conditions what  philosophy  is,  even though philosophy  has  failed  to  ask  the  question  about  what  writing  is. Philosophy  has  explored  the  nature  of  language,  Derrida  thinks,  but  has generally  taken  speech as the  paradigm  case  of  what  anguage  most l essentially  is. Speech  is  paradigmatic,  furthermore,  because  in  speech  speakers  are assumed  to be  fully  present  to  one  another,  and to  the truths  that  speech attempts  to articulate.  The  nterpretation  of  written  texts i requires  different  assumptions  since the author is  absent and the text is  capable  of  being brought  into different contexts  whose  appropriateness or  inappropriateness  is not  immediately self-evident.  Writing  has been  treated  as a marginal  phenomenon,  a  by-product of conscious intention. Derrida  challenges  the traditional  assumption  that the author's  intention  determines  the  meaning  of the  written  text,  and more generally  that truth is revealed undistorted  only  in  direct,  fully  self-conscious, perceptual  awareness. There is no such  thing  as  perception  in this sense,  says Derrida  (1981) (much  like  Hegel),  and  subjectivity  can  be  seen  as an  effect of  the structure of  writing (broadly  conceived  as  diffØrance),  rather than  writing  as an effect of  ubjectivity. s

By  shifting  philosophical  attention  from  the  paradigm  of  consciousness  to  that of  writing  and  extuality,  Derrida  isplaces  the  traditional  understanding  f  what t d o philosophy  is and  forces  an  examination  of  the  traditional  assumptions  about  the genre.  Thinking  of  hilosophy  s a  genre  instead  of  as the  only p a true  way  o  grasp t what  really  is  may  eem  like the  triumph  of  rhetoric  over s logic.  But  Derrida  can also be  interpreted  as  trying  to discover  what  riting  really  is,  or  as  discovering w the  conditions  of the  possibility  of  textuality. So he can  still  be called  a philosopher.  He is  a critical  philosopher  in  that he calls  into  question  the assumptions  of the  preceding paradigm  of  philosophy,  which in France was phenomenology.  In the  phenomenologists' attempt  to write about consciousness  they  neglect to  examine  riting  itself  and  to  ask  how   critical w a analysis  of  the conditions  of the  possibility  of  writing  affects  the  phenomenological programme.  Derrida's  expose  of the  metaphors  of  light,  presence  and voice in Husserl's and  Heidegger's  writings  thus  is not simply  an  nalysis  of  their  rhetoric a instead of their  arguments,  but it  leads  to  a displacement  of  philosophical attention  from  consciousness  to writing  or  extuality.  This  shift of  attention need t not  be  thought  f  as o finally  getting  down o  the  most  fundamental  level  of  eality, t r and  is not philosophy  in  that  foundationalist  sense.  But  it is still  philosophy  n  the i sense of the  investigation  of the  background  that conditions the  possibility  of understanding  and  interpreting anything.

This  background  is not  ineffable. Previous  philosophers  may  ave  ignored  the h textuality  of  their  own fforts  by  irtue  of  their  concentration  on  hat  hey e v w t were trying  to write about. But  many  philosophers  from  Plato on  do  seem  aware  of

the  textual  conditions  of  their  writing, even  if  they  do  not  make  these  conditions the  object  of  investigation. So  textuality can  be  investigated  and  is not mysterious.

Furthermore,  while  the  background  may  e  so  complex  s  to  be  inexhaustible, b a that does not mean that it  is  inaccessible to  philosophical  examination and articulation of  its more interesting  features. Thus  the  resources  of  textuality,  like those  of  anguage  in  general, may  e  inexhaustible,  since  new  texts can l b always  be generated by  new  devices. So a  'theory  of  textuality'  that would describe and explain  all  possible  textual devices and structures is not to be  expected,  either from Derrida or from  anyone  else.  But  scepticism  about the  possibility  of philosophical  clarification of  textuality  and  the  interpretation  of  texts does not follow.  I  think the  poststructuralist  tendency (for  which Derrida is  partly responsible)  to  stress the  infinite  number  of  ossible  interpretations  of  texts,  and p to conclude that the  meaning  of  any  given  text is  'undecidable',  is based  on  the mistaken  assumption  that  an interpretation  must  spire  to  a a complete  account  of all the  features  of  what  it  interprets.  But  I doubt  that  the  idea  of describing  'all the features'  of  anything really  makes sense.  Certainly  to  impose  that  goal  on interpretation  would  entail in effect that  no interpretation  could  ever  succeed.

Since  many  interpretations  are  successful,  and  since  success  comes  in  degrees, a different account  of  interpretation  is  required.  Derrida's own interpretations  of 'undecidable'  structures  in particular  texts  may rovide  us  with  some  xamples  of p e successful  interpretation  both of those  particular  texts,  and of more  general features of  textuality  as  such. But these  interpretations  do not establish the general  thesis that all  texts are  undecidable,  or that their  meanings  are never determinate.  Nor should such  pronouncements  be  expected  from Derrida. Universal statements with 'all' or 'never' in them would  be  generated only  in philosophy  conceived as  foundationalist  (or  'logocentric'),  not in  Derrida's alternative  approach to philosophy.

This alternative  approach  is still  philosophy,  however,  even  if its focus is on writing, textuality  and  ntertextuality,  instead  of  on  consciousness  and  eality,  or i r man and  Being.  Furthermore,  the  dichotomy  between rhetoric  and  logic evaporates.  This is  not to  say  that  logic  disappears  and rhetoric  triumphs exclusively.  Derrida  is still interested  in  making  philosophical  claims  about  what he takes to  be of  philosophical  interest.  Among  the  things  in which he is interested  philosophically,  however,  are  rhetorical  structures  (such  as  metaphor) and the  ways  in which  they  both enable  and limit  communication  (as  in translation).  So with Derrida we see  a  displacement,  if  not the  final  disappearance,  of  philosophical  interest in consciousness. But this  displacement does not entail a lack of interest in  philosophy,  and does not  signal  the final disappearance  of  philosophy.  Instead,  philosophy attempts  to  apply  itself to topics  like  textuality  and  ntertexuality,  which  ere i w previously  either  ignored or treated  marginally.  One  effect of this  new orientation is  that the traditional problem  of  logic versus  rhetoric  is dissolved. From  this new  erspective  rhetoric p

and  logic  are  not entirely  distinct  and opposed  domains,  but  are  instead  found  to be  always  operant  together  in  any  text,  including  the  texts of philosophy.  These texts,  furthermore,  will be  recognizably philosophical,  even if most of their readers do  not  pecialize  in the  more  traditional  approaches s to philosophy.

## FOUCAULT'S  CRITIQUE  OF  DERRIDA

If  Derrida's  approach to  philosophy  changes our  understanding  of  the  relation  of logic  and  rhetoric,  it still leaves us  with  uncertainty  about  the other  problem  I raised in the  introduction, namely,  the relation of truth and time. Derrida is challenged  on  recisely  this  problem  by  ichel  Foucault,  and  it is Foucault  who p M provides  us with the most  dramatic  reworking  of the  relationship  of  truth and time  since  Hegel.  Since  Foucault  does  not  offer  anything  ike a  system  n  Hegel's l i sense,  many  will  deny  that  he is  a  philosopher.  He writes  histories,  not philosophical  treatises,  and most of his  philosophical  claims  are  found in occasional  essays  or interviews.  Somehow,  though,  his histories  manage  to be philosophically interesting.  So  just  as  the usual distinction  between  literary criticism  and  philosophical analysis  fails  to  help  in  classifying  Derrida,  the distinction between  philosophy  and  historiography  fails to  help  us understand Foucault's effects.  In this section I  will  try  to  explain  these effects with the intention  of  figuring out  why  Foucault has  come to  replace Hegel  as  the paradigm  for  anyone  working  on  the  history  of  consciousness  today.

Foucault owes  the  inspiration  for his  rethinking  of  the  problem  of  truth and time  to  Nietzsche,  who  is also  difficult  to classify as a philosopher  since  he  rarely states  or  argues  for his  theses  systematically.  The  philosophical  interest  in Foucault  and  Nietzsche  comes  as much  from  the  traditional  philosophical  ideas that  they  riticize  as  from  their  own deas.  Moreover,  their  own deas  may  e  less c i i b novel and  original  than their  conception  and use of a certain  philosophical method. Foucault  borrows  the term  'genealogy'  from  Nietzsche  as the  label for the  method that  he  practises in  his  histories.  Nietzsche  himself  calls  for genealogical  histories  (for  instance,  of  morals),  but  never  really  does  the historiographical  work  that  would  substantiate  his historical  speculations.

Unlike  the  Hegelian  method  of  dialectic,  which  posits history  as  necessarily progressing  towards and  culminating  in  the  standpoint  of the  philosopherhistorian  recounting  the  story,  the  Nietzschean method of  genealogy  sees historical  change  as a matter of chance instead of  necessity,  and sees historical development  as  having  both  advantages  and  disadvantages.  So  the  category  of universal  progress  no longer  is  appropriate.  The  genealogist  will  be  interested  in why  we  experience  the need to  apply  this  category  when  we  could never have enough  data  to confirm  it.  Genealogy  suspects  that the belief  in  progress  serves an  ideological  purpose, namely,  to confirm  our  complacent assumptions  about the  superiority  of the  present. Therefore, genealogical  histories are written to

challenge  other  histories of  the  same  events  written  with  the  assumption  of  progress, precisely  to  disrupt  this  complacency  about  the  present.

This contrast  between  genealogy  and  dialectics comes  to a head  in Foucault's career in 1970 when  he succeeds  Jean Hyppolite  to the chair in the  history  of thought  at the  College  de  France. Foucault's  inaugural  address,  'L'ordre  du  discours', pays homage  to  Hyppolite,  the noted  Hegel  scholar,  at the same time that it asserts that the  age  of  Hegel  is  past.  To  express  his own  enterprise  in contrast to the  Hegelian  one, Foucault insists on  putting  the word  'systems' between  'history'  and  'thought'.  The  title for his first course, and  similarly  for his  chair,  at the  College  de France in 1970-1 is  thus  'History  of  Systems  of Thought'.

I  suggest  that this label contrasts  aptly  with  Hegel's  'Science of the  Experience  of  Consciousness'.  History  replaces  science  as the  first  term,  thus  implying a more  modest,  less  overarching conception  of  what  must  be  done.  Writing  the histories of various  systems  of  thought  need not  aspire  to  unifying  them  in a single  scientific account of how  they  evolve into one  another, telling  a  single story  that  guarantees  the absolute  knowledge  of  the scientific  philosopher.

The  second  term  brings  out  that there are  many  systems  instead  of  one  single system.  There is  also no  'system  of  systems'  that will make  the different  systems  commensurable,  but  only    history  of  their  contingent  expansion  and  cona traction.  Furthermore,  to  speak  of  'systems'  is  already  to  speak  of  something more  impersonal  than  Hegel's 'experience'.  Foucault  emphasizes  his break  with any  effort to  give  phenomenological  descriptions  of  experience.  He s interested i in other levels than those that could be accessed in self-consciousness. What must be studied is  not  merely  what  agents might  have said  self-consciously about themselves  but,  more  importantly,  how  their  patterns  of action reveal more  about  the  implicit background  of  their beliefs than  they  could  ever  introspect.

So instead of  studying  consciousness,  Foucault examines 'discursive  practices'. In  Discipline  and  Punish,  for  instance,  he studies the  history  of  ractices p of  punishment  instead of  philosophical  theories of  punishment. Although  discursive,  and therefore  linguistic  and  communicative,  these  practices  are not to be  thought  of as  being produced  first  as states of consciousness  by speakers with  explicit  intentions.  Hegel starts with consciousness at the level of the individual  mind,  and then  goes  on to use a  mentalistic  vocabulary (invoking Geist)  to describe social and  cultural  phenomena as well. In contrast to  Hegel, Foucault  (1977)  thinks that the mentalistic  vocabulary oversimplifies  the complexity  of events. Changes  in  discursive  practices  should therefore  not be characterized as a  general change  of  mentality,  collective  attitudes,  or  a state of  mind.  The transformation of a discursive  practice  is linked to a whole  range  of  usually complex  modifications that can occur outside of its  domain  (in  the

forms  of  production,  in  social  relationships,  in  political  institutions),  inside it (in  its techniques  for  determining  its  object,  in  the  adjustment  and refinement  of  its  concepts,  in its accumulation  of  facts),  or  to  the  side of  it (in  other  discursive  practices).

Consciousness  disappears  because  there is no  need  to  explain  the  discourses  by positing  Geist  behind  them  as  the  agency  producing them.

Subjectivity  reappears,  however,  as a  factor  in  the  discourses  which  needs  to  be taken  into  account.  Instead  of  ubjectivity  being  hat  which  xplains  what  ccurs, s t e o it is that  which  ets  explained  n  so  far  as  it results  from  social g i processes.  Foucault is not  trying  to  dismiss  subjectivity  entirely, or to  reduce it  to  objective behaviour.  However, he is  opposed  to the Cartesian and  phenomenological primacy standardly given  to  subjectivity.  His late  writings  on the  history  of sexuality  insist that  he  is interested  in  subjectivity,  and  pecifically  in how t  gets s i constituted in and  through  social  practices.  His  history  of the  prison  studies techniques  of  'power' whereby  institutions socialize  people  into  thinking  of themselves  in  acceptable  ways.  His  istory  of  sexual  ethics  then  describes  ways  n h i which individuals  subject  themselves to  norms and come to think of their sexuality  in  historically  distinct  ways.  The  Greek,  early  Christian and  modern sexual  self-fashionings  could  be  called  'systems',  then,  but  only  if we  emember r Heidegger's critique  of Husserl's  assumption  that consciousness consists  of articulatable  rules  and  beliefs. Foucault  is  studying not  the  explicit  moral  rules of behaviour  but  the  background  or 'ethical  substance'  that  gives  these  abstract  rules their  interpretation  in  concrete  contexts.  Systems  do  not change  all at  once,  but  at different rates on  different  levels.

So Foucault can  study  how  people experience  their  sexuality differently  at different times. But  he  is not describing  experience  as if it were  a private,  internal domain  accessible  only  through  introspection (since  this would  lead  to  thinking of  experience  as  unhistorical).  Experience  is  construed instead  through  the discursive  practices  to which the historian has  perhaps  better access than the contemporary agents  themselves. The  genealogist  will  study  what the moral agents  at one time take to be universal norms and show  that these norms are temporal  and  have  historical  origins.  The  orms n may  turn  out  to  be  estiges  of  an v earlier  self-understanding  and  may  ave  subtly changed  their  significance  over h time.  Genealogy  is a  form  of  critical  history  that shows  that beliefs and  values that the  present  takes as eternal and true are instead  temporal,  historical and subject  to reinterpretation.

Foucault thus rethinks the relation of truth and  time, treating  them not as opposites,  but  as intertwined. In  his  study  of  discipline  he  thus  joins knowledge and  power  with  a  slash. Unlike  the  traditional  epistemologist  who  ssumes  that a true  knowledge  could be  gained only  in the absence of  power,  which  distorts, Foucault  shows that  gathering  knowledge  often  goes  hand in  hand with administering  social institutions. He  studies those  disciplines  where  social needs

and  power  relations  condition  what  makes  certain kinds  of  statement  come  to  be considered  as  possibly true or  false in the  first  place.

When  he  turns to  the  history  of  sexual  ethics,  he  is  similarly  interested  in how certain moral  norms,  which  seem  universal,  can  be assented to  by  cultures that are  obviously  different in what  they permit (for instance, homosexuality  from the ancient Greeks to the  present).  While he finds that sexual  practices  have always  been  accompanied  by  n  ascetic  ethics,  he  discovers  that  this asceticism  is a understood and  interpreted differently through  the  ages.  What  observing  the supposedly  universal norms entails thus varies  dramatically  as  the historical background  changes.'

Critics  of  the  French  oststructuralists  often  accuse  them  of  ejecting  truth  and p r of  flirting  with  nihilism. Yet  neither  Derrida  nor  Foucault  deny  that we  eed  to n speak  of truth. What  Derrida criticizes is the  way  in which the  philosophical insistence on truth is  often overdone.  Although  there would be no  point  to denying  truth,  one  must  also  recognize  that  there  are more  ruths than  we  ould t c ever assert.  Many  rivial  things t are  true;  for  example,  that the  grass  is  green.  So there is no  reason to think  that  finding  out  what  all the  true statements are and separating  them  from  all the  false ones  is the  goal  of inquiry.

Similarly,  Foucault  does  not  deny  truth, but,  on  the  contrary,  is interested in uncovering  the  historical  conditions  that  make  it seem  worthwhile  to gather  and formulate certain kinds of truths  (e.g.  data about  population).  His  critique  of Derrida  is that  Derrida's  insistence  on  the  plurality  of  truths  is a merely  negative point,  and does not raise the more  interesting question  about  why  specific statements first  get uttered,  or why  they  ever 'come  up  for  grabs' (to  borrow  a phrase  from  Ian  Hacking).  Foucault  thinks  that  Derrida's  method  of  deconstruction  is incapable  of  recognizing  that  texts arise out  of  social  practices  where  hey t have  a  genuine use. As  a  result,  deconstruction  is accused  of being  methodologically  deficient  since it cannot  evaluate  itself  as a  social and  olitical  practice.4 p

More  recent work  by  Derrida and  other  practitioners  of  deconstruction has been  sensitive  to  this  criticism,  and  has  tried  to apply  deconstruction  in  social and political  contexts.  The  eason  I find  Foucault's  critique interesting  is not  because r I think it  shows a serious  deficiency  in the deconstructive method.  Instead,  I prefer  to draw  from  it the  broader  conclusion  that  philosophy  is now  pen  to a o much wider  range  of  questions  than  philosophers  dealt  with  traditionally. Instead of  focusing  exclusively  on  such  dualisms  as that between  consciousness and  reality,  the work  of  both  Derrida  and  Foucault  shows  that  philosophy can draw  on  other  disciplines  such  as history,  literary  studies,  or  he  social  sciences  to t approach  questions  about  such  topics  as  knowledge,  interpretation, morality, or social  theory.  The  disappearance  of consciousness as the  primary  concern of philosophy  is thus not  the end  of  philosophy  but  the  beginning  of  a search for new  kinds of  questions  and  tasks for  philosophy.  These  new questions  do  not preclude,  of  ourse,  the  possibility  that  subjectivity  may  ecome  of  interest  again c b in  a reconfigured  way,  as  it does  for  Foucault  in  his  last writings.  These  new  asks, t

though,  will not  be  purely  theoretical in the Kantian  fashion where  theoretical philosophy (the epistemology  of consciousness has little to do with  practical philosophy (moral,  social  and aesthetic  values).  Foucault's work in  ancient philosophy,  before  the  modern  separation  of  truth,  morals  and  aesthetics,  often points up  the need to rethink these matters in their interrelations instead of treating  them  as  entirely  separate  domains.

If the  story  that I have recounted in this article is  correct,  philosophy  also cannot  be  disconnected  from  its  history.  From  Kant  to  Foucault philosophy  has experienced  itself  as  the  need  to  rethink  how  e  can  ever  understand  ourselves  if w the consciousness that we  can  introspect  is not  who  we  eally  are.  Philosophy r continues  to  try  to  find ways  to  talk  about  who  e  eally w r are  and  does  not simply evaporate  into  'philosophy',  that  is,  into the  thought  that  these  texts are merely another  fictional  genre.  The  nswer  to  the  question  about  who  e  ave  become  is a w h conditioned  by  the  history  of these  philosophical ways  of  understanding  and fashioning  ourselves. I conclude  that  there  is no  reason  to  doubt  that  philosophy will continue  to  play a  central role in the  history  of  where  we  o g from  here.

University of  California,  Santa  Cruz

## NOTES

- 1 There are,  of  course,  other senses of  'knowing  what consciousness is'  that are not thereby  ruled out. Kant's method  of  transcendental deduction  has,  for  instance,  been cited  as an  influential  precursor of  recent cognitive  psychology.  See  Flanagan  (1984).
- 2  See  Hegel  (1970).
- 3  For  a more  detailed account  of  Foucault's  history  of  sexuality  see the introduction to Hoy  (1986).
- 4 For  more  discussion  of  Foucault's  critique  of  Derrida  see  Hoy  (1985).

## BIBLIOGRAPHY

Derrida,  J. (1981)  Positions,  trans. A.  Bass,  Chicago:  University  of  Chicago  Press:  28.

Derrida,  J. (1982)  'The  ends of  man',  in  Margins  of Philosophy,  trans. A.  Bass,  Chicago: University  of  Chicago  Press: 125-7. Flanagan,  O.  . (1984)  The  Science  of the  Mind,  Cambridge,  Mass.:  MIT  Press: 180-4. J Foucault,  M.  (1977)  'History  of  systems  of  hought',  in  D.  F. Bouchard  and  S. Simon  eds t ( and  trans) Language, Counter-Memory,  Practice: Selected  Essays  and  Interviews, Ithaca,  NY:  Cornell  University  Press:  200. Hegel,  G.  W.  F.  (1970)  'Introduction',  Phenomenology  of Spirit,  trans. K.  R.  Dove,  in M. Heidegger,  Hegel's Concept  of  Experience,  New ork:  Harper  &amp; Y Row:  14, 67.

Hoy,  D.  C.  (1985) 'Jacques  Derrida',  in  Q.  Skinner  (ed.),  The  Return  of Grand  Theory in the  Human  Sciences,  Cambridge:  Cambridge  University  Press: 58-60.

Hoy,  D.  C.  (ed.)  (1986)  Foucault:  A Critical  Reader,  Oxford and  New York: Blackwell: 14-23.

Nietzsche,  F.  (1967)  The Will to  Power,  trans. W. Kaufmann and R.  J.  Hollingdale, New  York:  Random  House:  264.