Journal of Experimental Psychology: General
1988, Vol. 117, No. 4,390-394Copyright I98S by the American Psychological Association, Inc.
0096-3445/88/S00.75
Reality Monitoring: An Experimental Phenomenological Approach
Marcia K. Johnson
Princeton University
This article briefly reviews three empirical articles (Johnson, Foley, Suengas, & Raye, 1988;
Johnson & Suengas, in press; Suengas & Johnson, 1988) investigating differences in qualitative
characteristics of memories for perceived and imagined events. Major results from these three
articles are highlighted and related issues are suggested.
In collaboration with students and colleagues, I have been
studying reality monitoring, that is, the processes involved in
discriminating between memories of real and imagined
events. In this work we assume that confusions between
memories for imagined events and memories for perceived
events arise from the same processes as do accurate classifi-
cations of memories: from processes of attribution or judg-
ment based on subjective (phenomenal) qualities of experi-
ence (Johnson, 1985, 1988a; Johnson & Raye, 1981).
In this issue of JEP: General, we present two articles (John-
son, Foley, Suengas, & Raye, 1988; Suengas & Johnson, 1988)
that illustrate research based on an approach that might be
called experimental phenomenology (also see Johnson &
Suengas, in press). I am not using the term phenomenology
in the technical way philosophers do (e.g., Casey, 1987; Ihde,
1977; Jennings, 1986), but the word captures a similar inten-
tion to systematically examine qualitative characteristics of
mental experience. The experimental phenomenology illus-
trated by our articles involves studying the impact of variables
on subjective reports. It usually requires collecting reports
from several subjects (e.g., Brown, Shevell, & Rips, 1986;
Johnson, Kahan, & Raye, 1984; Nigro & Neisser, 1983;
Reiser, Black, & Kalamarides, 1986), but experimental con-
trols also can be introduced with a single-subject design
(Linton, 1986). Our immediate goal in these articles was to
investigate differences in the representation in memory of
perceived and imagined events. Our long-term goal is to
develop ways of determining which aspects of mental experi-
ence create one's sense of a personal past and one's conviction
(accurate or not) that memories, knowledge, beliefs, attitudes,
and feelings are tied to reality in a veridical fashion.
In these studies either we asked people to remember an
autobiographical event (e.g., a trip to the library, a dream) or
Preparation of this article was supported by National Science
Foundation Grant BNS-8S10633. This article, and the other two
appearing in this issue (Johnson, Foley, Suengas, & Raye and Suengas
& Johnson) were completed when I was a Fellow at the Center for
Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences (CASBS).
I am grateful for financial support provided by the John D. and
Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation and Princeton University. I
would also like to express my appreciation to Carol Baxter, Lynn
Gayle, Deanna Knickerbocker, and Kathleen Much (members of the
CASBS staff), who provided excellent technical assistance, and to
Lincoln Moses for suggestions regarding statistical analyses.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to
Marcia K. Johnson, Department of Psychology, Princeton University,
Princeton, New Jersey 08544.we supplied them with simulated autobiographical events. We
call these simulated experiences "minievents"; they are such
things as wrapping a package, meeting someone, or having
coffee and cookies. Our minievents are very likely not as
extended in time nor so emotionally engaging as similar
naturally occurring events, and they are not embedded in
other personality relevant events, but they are considerably
more complex than the types of events usually studied in the
laboratory.
For both naturally occurring and simulated autobiograph-
ical events, we asked subjects to fill out the Memory Charac-
teristics Questionnaire (MCQ; Johnson et al., 1988), which
assesses a wide range of qualitative characteristics of the
experience of remembering an event (e.g., amount of percep-
tual and contextual detail, thoughts and feelings). In these
experiments, we manipulated the origin of the event, retention
interval, and number and type of rehearsals, and we observed
the impact of these variables on subjects' responses on various
scales on the MCQ. In addition, we analyzed responses to
questions asking subjects to explain how they knew a remem-
bered event happened or how they knew it was only imagined.
We also tried to determine what features of someone else's
description of events subjects used in deciding whether the
"witness" had described a perceived or an imagined event.
The findings we report, and issues they suggest, are indicated
in the first section. The second section briefly mentions two
additional areas in which a systematic consideration of phe-
nomenal qualities of memories might be useful: the analysis
of amnesia and the study of beliefs and knowledge.
Evidence and Issues from Studies of Complex Event
Memories
Differences in Qualitative Characteristics of Perceived
and Imagined Events
Compared with memories for imagined events, memories
for perceived events have more sensory and contextual infor-
mation, and they are more likely to give rise to supporting
memories (Johnson etal., 1988, Study 1; Suengas & Johnson,
1988). Furthermore, these differences between memories for
perceived and imagined events are used in reality monitoring
of naturally occurring autobiographical events (Johnson et
al., 1988, Study 2).
Over time, various characteristics of memories become
unavailable at different rates. Especially important is that
390

A PHENOMENOLOOICAL APPROACH 391
some qualitative characteristics are forgotten more quickly
for imagined than for perceived events (Suengas & Johnson,
1988, Experiment 3). The increasing difference between per-
ceived and imagined events as time passes provides some
protection against confusion between perceptions and fabri-
cations.
The Impact of Rehearsal
When people think about events, they do not completely
activate all potentially available aspects of the event. Rather,
our results show that thinking about events is a selective
process that typically involves activation of perceptual (espe-
cially visual) qualities (Suengas & Johnson, 1988, Experiment
2). Selectivity in the way characteristics are forgotten, and
selectivity in the aspects rehearsed, argue for viewing complex
memories as composed of different characteristics that can be
activated somewhat independently. Studying which charac-
teristics are truly independent in thought and which tend to
bundle together is an interesting direction for future research,
as are the appropriate types of cues for each.
We found similar effects on remembering when people
talked about events and when they just thought about them
(Suengas & Johnson, 1988, Experiment 1). Depending on the
specific nature of what people think or talk about—perceptual
aspects versus thoughts and feelings—there are somewhat
different effects on the rated qualitative characteristics of the
memory (Suengas & Johnson, 1988, Experiment 1). When
subjects rehearsed perceptual aspects of events, memories for
imagined events remained phenomenally less perceptual than
memories for perceived events. Thinking about thoughts and
feelings appears to reduce later access to perceptual informa-
tion. In addition, it also tends to make imagined and perceived
events more alike in the amount of thoughts and feelings the
memories include. Perhaps people can represent thoughts and
feelings to themselves better than they can represent percep-
tual information. Perhaps they can more easily fabricate
thoughts and feelings. Or perhaps because thoughts and feel-
ings are difficult to remember (Suengas & Johnson, 1988,
Experiment 3), people can easily convince themselves that
the thoughts and feelings they rehearsed are the ones that they
likely had initially. In any event, this finding suggests the
interesting possibility that reality monitoring is more likely to
suffer if, earlier, people focused on thoughts and feeh'ngs as
they remembered events than if they focused on perceptual
characteristics.
An important and interesting question is whether rehearsal
reinstates information that was initially present in memory
or causes new information to be fabricated. Our best guess is
that both effects commonly occur. A related question is
whether rehearsal acts on the original memory, perhaps
changing it (e.g., Loftus, 1979), or establishes new memories,
which then become part of the basis of remembering (e.g.,
Johnson & Raye, 1981). Eventually, we would like to be able
to answer such questions. The important points for the present
argument are that, whatever the mechanism, rehearsal will
have qualitative effects on remembering, and these qualitative
phenomenal characteristics play a central role in one's auto-
biographical experience.Social Aspects of Reality Monitoring
The same kind of information that people use to evaluate
the reality of their own memories is also used when they
evaluate the veridicality of other people's memories (Johnson
& Suengas, in press; also see Schooler, Gerhard, & Loftus,
1986; Undeutsch, 1982). Furthermore, people's overt descrip-
tions of events are affected by the aspects of memories they
have rehearsed (Johnson & Suengas, in press). Compared with
thinking about thoughts and feelings, thinking about percep-
tual aspects leads to descriptions of both real and imagined
events that judges are likely to assume came from perceived
events. This result implies that well-rehearsed testimony may
be specific and confident, but not an accurate picture of the
original event as remembered initially. (Of course, rehearsal
does not necessarily make remembering less accurate.)
There are many interesting social aspects of remembering
that deserve investigation (e.g., Hirst & Levine, 1985). One of
these is that people's attributions about the source of someone
else's memories and beliefs determine how they will respond
to them. If you say you made up an example that nicely
illustrates a point, your argument is not as persuasive as if
you say that it is a real example. Even if you do not acknowl-
edge that your example is made up, if I suspect it is, I will
probably give less weight to your argument. As I forget my
initial misgivings, however, your argument may take on more
force, producing a kind of "sleeper effect" (e.g., Greenwald,
Pratkanis, Leippe, & Baumgardner, 1986; Hovland & Weiss,
1951). Of course, the speaker as well as the listener might
forget that the example was invented to make a point. Thus
both speaker and listener may make errors in monitoring the
source of information. Furthermore, for both speaker and
listener, the characteristics on which source monitoring is
based may change over time and as a consequence of the type
of rehearsal engaged in.
Descriptions Versus Rating Phenomenal
Characteristics
Descriptions of events (i.e., recall protocols) may at first
appear to be more objective memory data than ratings of the
phenomenal qualities of memories for events, but descriptions
do not necessarily provide a truer picture of the nature of
what is represented in memory. For example, requiring sub-
jects to put memories into words may make memories, par-
ticularly memories of imagined events, seem more concrete
than they really are. If so, one consequence might be to
decrease differences between memories for real and imagined
events that have been described compared with differences
between memories for real and imagined events that have not
been described. (This may be one reason to keep fantasies to
oneself.)
We have only begun to explore the relation between asking
people to describe an event and asking them to rate their
subjective experience while remembering. Whereas we con-
sistently find some differences between perceived and imag-
ined events with rating measures, in one study (Johnson &
Suengas, in press) oral descriptions of real and imagined
events did not differ significantly. A subsequent study (Hash-

392 MARCIA K. JOHNSON
troudi, Johnson, & Chrosniak, in press), however, produced
significant differences between perceived and imagined events
with written descriptions. One possibility is that people might
use more stringent criteria for editing memories (e.g., Hasher
& Griffin, 1978; Johnson, 1988a; Lindsay & Johnson, in
press; Raye et al., 1980) when writing than when talking. We
also speculated that, compared with written descriptions, oral
descriptions might be more subject to social considerations
such as the speaker wanting to produce an interesting or
cohesive narrative. Such effects might influence descriptions
of imagined more than descriptions of perceived events, re-
ducing differences between them. A more general question is,
given constant acquisition conditions, what are the test con-
ditions that affect the magnitude of differences between per-
ceived and imagined events and are the effects similar across
memory measures? For instance, do payoffs, time restrictions,
or social factors (e.g., compliancy pressures, self-presenta-
tional concerns, demand characteristics) affect differences
observed between memories for perceived and imagined
events and, if so, in the same way for various measures?
Other Potential Applications of an Experimental
Phenomenological Approach
Amnesia
Our primary interest was in investigating the nature of the
representation in memory of perceived and imagined events
in order to understand normal reality monitoring processes.
Nevertheless, focusing on the qualitative characteristics of
mental experience may also help us in our analysis of cogni-
tive dysfunctions such as amnesia (Johnson, 1987, 1988b) or
delusions (Johnson, 1988a). For example, the Johnson et al.
(1988) and Suengas and Johnson (1988) articles suggest that
thinking and talking about events may play a critical role in
maintaining the clarity of memories and, thus, their autobio-
graphical quality. Patients with anterograde amnesia may
produce less integrated or embellished encodings of events
initially (e.g., see chapters in Cermak, 1982; Johnson, 1988b),
and they certainly will engage in less subsequent thinking and
talking about the events. Thus they suffer from deficits oper-
ating both when the event occurred and later when the event
might have been thought about but was not (Johnson, 1987).
Their problem is not just that they cannot recall events but
also that they cannot "compound the interest" from recalling
events. If people without amnesia never subsequently thought
or talked about autobiographical events, their memory for
these events would also have a nonspecific or vague, "free-
floating" (Schacter & Tulving, 1982) quality.
Baddeley and Wilson (1986) reported some interesting ob-
servations about qualitative aspects of amnesics' recall of
autobiographical events. They described an amnesic patient
with frontal lobe damage who has trouble separating experi-
ences he actually had from those he imagines. Interestingly,
his fabricated reports include a great deal of detail. A second
amnesic (also with frontal lobe damage) also has trouble in
evaluating the origin—real or imagined—of apparent mem-
ories. Thus, although many amnesics may have trouble spec-ifying the particular external source of information in memory
(e.g., Schacter, Harbluk, & McLachlan, 1984), some may
have severe reality monitoring problems in addition to then-
other memory deficits. (As illustrated in a study by Hash-
troudi, Johnson, & Chrosniak, in press, of normal aging
effects, a deficit in external source monitoring is not necessar-
ily accompanied by a deficit in reality monitoring.)
The Origin of Beliefs and Knowledge
Much research in the last 20 years has been based on the
idea that remembering and knowing reflect separate systems
(e.g., as represented by Tulving's, 1983, episodic-semantic
distinction). The problems with this approach are increasingly
apparent (see Johnson & Hasher, 1987, for recent references).
Although the distinction between remembering and knowing
captures a clear phenomenal difference between mental ex-
periences, evidence for a meaningful theoretical difference has
been harder to come by. But this clear phenomenal difference
is perhaps itself the heart of the matter. The distinction
between remembering and knowing (like that between reality
and fantasy) reflects attributions made on the basis of subjec-
tive qualities of mental experiences. In fact, some of the same
qualities that make a memory seem real (i.e., perceptually
derived) also give it the specificity of a memory for an auto-
biographical event (also see Johnson, 1987, 1988b; Klatsky,
1984; Reiser, 1987). If it is phenomenal characteristics that
discriminate between real and imagined events and that dis-
criminate between autobiographical memory and other types
of memory (e.g., knowledge and beliefs), then the systematic
study of subjective or phenomenal qualities of memories is
essential (also see Brewer & Pani, 1983).
Most of out work has been concerned with reality monitor-
ing of events. Nevertheless, the mechanisms and issues of
source monitoring (Hashtroudi et al., in press; Johnson,
1988a; Lindsay, 1987; Lindsay & Johnson, 1987) in general,
and reality monitoring (Johnson & Foley, 1984; Johnson &
Raye, 1981) in particular, apply equally to discriminating the
origin of event memories and to discriminating the origin of
beliefs and knowledge (Johnson, 1988a; Johnson & Lindsay,
1986). Take, for example, the event memory "John said he
would help me but he didn't." This could be an accurate
representation of an actual prior experience, or it could be a
memory for an imagined or anticipated event that never
happened. From events one also acquires knowledge, atti-
tudes, and beliefs, such as "John is unreliable" or (if John
happens to be a lawyer) "lawyers are unreliable." If no corre-
sponding event actually happened, the memory that "John
said he would help but didn't" is a failure of reality monitoring
at the event level; the belief that "John is unreliable" would
be a failure of reality monitoring at the level of beliefs and
knowledge. That is, knowledge and beliefs, like event mem-
ories, may or may not accurately reflect actual events. Thus
understanding reality monitoring requires not only an analysis
of the nature of memories of complex events (e.g., Johnson
et al., 1988; Johnson et al., 1984; Johnson & Suengas, in
press; Suengas & Johnson, 1988) but also an analysis of the
development and maintenance of knowledge and beliefs
(Johnson, 1988a; Slusher& Anderson, 1987).

A PHENOMENOLOGICAL APPROACH 393
Some of the same factors that are important in making
event memories seem real are important in making a belief
or knowledge seem compelling. These include embeddedness
in supporting knowledge and beliefs and even perceptual
detail, embeddedness in spatial and temporal context, and
embeddedness in supporting event memories. Such specificity
may at first seem contrary to what one usually means by
knowledge and beliefs. However, the conviction in the ab-
stractions one is willing to assert is very likely increased by
the availability of specific cases that "fit" (e.g., an example of
a lawyer behaving unreliably). "Normal" misconceptions and
clinical delusions often involve failures of reality monitoring
at the level of knowledge and beliefs, as well as at the level of
events (Johnson, 1988a). In addition, just as for event mem-
ories, the nature of knowledge representations, and hence the
potential for reality monitoring failure, will be affected by
rehearsal. Thus the similarity in processes operating in re-
membering and knowing should be as interesting as potential
differences.
Taken together, our studies suggest that similar relation-
ships are found with autobiographical events and simulated
autobiographical events and that simulation techniques can
help clarify results found for natural memories. Laboratory
experiments and autobiographical studies, as well as obser-
vations of how memory operates in natural contexts (e.g.,
Bruce, 1985; Neisser, 1978; and other chapters in Gruneberg,
Morris, & Sykes, 1978), should converge on an understanding
of the mechanisms of memory and their functional impor-
tance. For both natural remembering and laboratory remem-
bering, reports of the phenomenal qualities of mental experi-
ence provide a potentially rich source of data. Such data can
help clarify the role of qualitative characteristics of memories
in identifying their origin and the selective impact of time
and rehearsal on event memories,. Studying the phenomenal
qualities of mental experience associated with amnesia, or
with knowing, or with believing might augment our analyses
of these mental experiences as well.
References
Baddeley, A., & Wilson, B. (1986). Amnesia, autobiographical mem-
ory, and confabulation. In D. C. Rubin (Ed.), Autobiographical
memory (pp. 225-252). Cambridge, England: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Brewer, W. F., & Pani, J. R. (1983). The structure of human memory.
In G. H. Bower (Ed.), The psychology of learning and motivation:
Advances in research and theory (Vol. 17, pp. 1-38). New York:
Academic Press.
Brown, N. R., SheveH, S. K., & Rips, L. J. (1986). Public memories
and their personal context. In D. C. Rubin (Ed.), Autobiographical
memory (pp. 137-148). Cambridge, England: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Bruce, D. (1985). The how and why of ecological memory. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: General, 114, 78-90.
Casey, E. S. (1987). Remembering: A phenomenological study.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Cennak, L. S. (1982). Human memory and amnesia. HUlsdale, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Greenwald, A. G., Pratkanis, A. R., Leippe, M. R., & Baumgardner,
M. H. (1986). Under what conditions does theory obstruct research
progress? Psychological Review, 93, 216-229.Gruneberg, M. M., Morris, P., & Sykes, R. H. (Eds.). (1978). Practical
aspects of memory. New York: Academic Press
Hasher, L., & Griffin, M. (1978). Reconstructive and reproductive
processes in memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Learning and Memory, 4, 318-330.
Hashtroudi, S., Johnson, M. K., & Chrosniak, L. D. (in press). Aging
and source monitoring. Psychology and Aging.
Hashtroudi, S., Johnson, M. K., & Chrosniak, L. D. (1988). Aging
and qualitative characteristics of memories for complex events.
Manuscript submitted for publication.
Hirst, W., & Levine, E. (1985). Ecological memory reconsidered: A
comment on Bruce's "The how and why of ecological memory."
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 114, 269-271.
Hovland, C. I, & Weiss, W. (1951). The influences of source credi-
bility on communication effectiveness. Public Opinion Quarterly,
IS, 635-650.
Ihde, D. (1977). Experimental phenomenology. New York: Putnam.
Jennings, J. L. (1986). Husserl revisited: The forgotten distinction
between psychology and phenomenology. American Psychologists,
41, 1231-1240.
Johnson, M. K. (1985). The origin of memories. In P. C. Kendall
(Ed.), Advances in cognitive-behavioral research and therapy (Vol.
4, pp. 1-27). New York: Academic Press.
Johnson, M. K. (1987, February). Origin of memories. Paper pre-
sented at annual Lake Ontario Visionary Establishment conference,
Niagara Falls, Ontario, Canada.
Johnson, M. K. (1988a). Discriminating the origin of information. In
T. F. Oltmanns & B. A. Maher (Eds.), Delusional beliefs: Interdis-
ciplinary perspectives (pp. 34-65). New York: Wiley.
Johnson, M. K. (1988b). Functional forms of human memory. In J.
L. McGaugh, N. M. Weinberger, & G. Lynch (Eds.), Brain orga-
nization and memory: Cells, systems and circuits. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Johnson, M. K., & Foley, M. A. (1984). Differentiating fact from
fantasy: The reliability of children's memory. Journal of Social
Issues, 40, 33-50.
Johnson, M. K., Foley, M. A., Suengas, A. G., & Raye, C, L. (1988).
Phenomenal characteristics of memories for perceived and imag-
ined autobiographical events. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 117, 371-376.
Johnson, M. K., A Hasher, L. (1987). Human learning and memory.
Annual Review of Psychology, 38,631-668.
Johnson, M. K., Kahan, T. L., & Raye, C. L. (1984). Dreams and
reality monitoring. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
113, 329-344.
Johnson, M. K., & Lindsay, D. S. (1986, August). Reality monitoring.
Paper presented at the 94th annual convention of the American
Psychological Association, Washington, DC.
Johnson, M. K., & Raye, C. L. (1981). Reality monitoring. Psycho-
logical Review, 88, 67-85.
Johnson, M. K., & Suengas, A. G. (in press). Reality monitoring
judgments of other people's memories. Bulletin ofthePsychonomic
Society.
Klatsky, R. L. (1984). Armchair theorists have more fun. The Behav-
ioral and Brain Sciences, 7, 223-268.
Lindsay, D. S. (1987). Whence comes this memory? Unpublished
doctoral dissertation, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ.
Lindsay, D. S., & Johnson, M. K. (1987). Reality monitoring and
suggestibility: Children's ability to discriminate among memories
from different sources. In S. J. Ceci, M. P. Toglia, & D. F. Ross
(Eds.), Children's eyewitness memory (pp. 92-121). New York:
Springer-Verlag.
Lindsay, D. S., & Johnson, M. K. (in press). The eyewitness suggest-
ibility effect and memory for source. Memory & Cognition.
Linton, M. (1986). Ways of searching and the contents of memory.

394 MARCIA K. JOHNSON
In D. C. Rubin (Ed.), Autobiographical memory (pp. 50-70).
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Loftus, E. F. (1979). Eyewitness testimony. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Neisser, U. (1978). Memory: What are the important questions? In
M. M. Gruneberg, P. Morris, & R. H. Sykes (Eds.), Practical aspects
of memory (pp. 3-24). New York Academic Press.
Nigro, G., & Neisser, U. (1983). Point of view in personal memories.
Cognitive Psychology, 15, 467-482.
Raye, C. L., Johnson, M. K., & Taylor, T. H. (1980). Is there
something special about memory for internally-generated infor-
mation? Memory & Cognition, 8, 141-148.
Reiser, B. J. (1987). The content of event knowledge structures. Paper
presented at the 94th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science
Society, Seattle, WA.
Reiser, B. J., Black, J. B., & Kalamarides, P. (1986). Strategic memory
search processes. In D. C. Rubin (Ed.), Autobiographical memory
(pp. 100-121). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Schacter, D. L., Harbluk, J. L., & McLachlan, D. R. (1984). Retrieval
without recollection: An experimental analysis of source amnesia.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 23, 593-611.Schacter, D. L., & Tulving, E. (1982). Memory, amnesia, and the
episodic/semantic distinction. In R. L. Isaacson & N. E. Spear
(Eds.), The expression of knowledge. New York: Plenum Press.
Schooler, J. W., Gerhard, D., & Loftus, E. F. (1986). Qualities of the
unreal. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning. Memory,
and Cognition, 12, 171-181.
Slusher, M. P., & Anderson, C. A. (1987). When reality monitoring
fails: The role of imagination in stereotype maintenance. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology, 52, 653-662.
Suengas, A. G., & Johnson, M. K. (1988). Qualitative effects of
rehearsal on memories for perceived and imagined complex events.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 117, 377-389.
Tulving, E. (1983). Elements of episodic memory. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Undeutsch, U. (1982). Statement reality analysis. In A. Trankell
(Ed.), Reconstructing the past: The role of psychologists in criminal
trials. Deventer, The Netherlands: Kluwer.
Received July 22, 1987
Revision received February 17, 1988
Accepted April 11, 1988 •
Correction to Ceci and Liker
In the commentary "Stalking the IQ-Expertise Relation: When the Critics Go Fishing" by
Stephen J. Ceci and Jeffrey K. Liker (JEP: General, 1988, Vol. 117, No. 1, pp. 96-100),
subjects #24 and #25 were incorrectly listed as failing race 5 (Os). There ought to have been
Is next to them for this race, making the marginal totals add up to 90% for each.
In addition, in Footnote 2 of their article, a line was inadvertently deleted during produc-
tion. The line should have read: "b) D & S contend that a restricted scale range compromises
the trustworthiness of a reliability estimate. Scale restrictions may ..." (p. 99).