Psychological Bulletin
1993. Vol. 114. No. 1.3-28Copyright 1993 by the American Psychological Association, Inc.
0033-2909/93/S3.00
Source Monitoring
Marcia K. Johnson, Shahin Hashtroudi, and D. Stephen Lindsay
A framework for understanding source monitoring and relevant empirical evidence is described,
and several related phenomena are discussed: old-new recognition, indirect tests, eyewitness testi-
mony, misattributed familiarity, cryptomnesia, and incorporation of fiction into fact. Disruptions
in source monitoring (e.g., from confabulation, amnesia, and aging) and the brain regions that are
involved are also considered, and source monitoring within a general memory architecture is
discussed. It is argued that source monitoring is based on qualities of experience resulting from
combinations of perceptual and reflective processes, usually requires relatively differentiated phe-
nomenal experience, and involves attributions varying in deliberateness. These judgments evaluate
information according to flexible criteria and are subject to error and disruption. Furthermore,
diencephalic and temporal regions may play different roles in source monitoring than do frontal
regions of the brain.
Past experience affects us in many ways. It influences the
ease of identifying stimuli under degraded conditions (e.g., Ja-
coby & Dallas, 1981), changes the probability that we will think
certain thoughts (e.g., Dominowski & Ekstrand, 1967; Kihl-
strom, 1980), affects emotional responses such as preferences
(e.g., Johnson, Kim, & Risse, 1985; Zajonc, 1980), manifests
itself as expert or semantic knowledge (e.g., Chase & Simon,
1973; Tulving, 1983), and creates the potential for what we take
to be memories of autobiographical events from our personal
past (e.g., Rubin, 1986).
This review focuses on expressions of memory that involve
judgments about the origin, or source, of information. The
term source refers to a variety of characteristics that, collec-
tively, specify the conditions under which a memory is acquired
(e.g., the spatial, temporal, and social context of the event; the
media and modalities through which it was perceived). This
concept is closely related to, but somewhat more inclusive than,
that of memory for context. A central claim of the source-moni-
toring approach is that people do not typically directly retrieve
an abstract tag or label that specifies a memory's source, rather,
activated memory records are evaluated and attributed to partic-
Marcia K. Johnson, Department of Psychology, Princeton Univer-
sity; Shahin Hashtroudi, Department of Psychology, George Washing-
ton University; D. Stephen Lindsay, Department of Psychology, Univer-
sity of Victoria, Victoria, British Columbia, Canada.
Shahin Hashtroudi died on February 24,1992.
Preparation of this article was supported by National Institute on
Aging Grant 1-R01-AG09253. We would like to thank Carol Raye,
Sam Glucksberg, Colleen Kelley, Bill Hirst, the 1990-91 crew of the
Princeton memory lab (Chad Dodson, Allison Hermann, Tina Loose,
Kristi Multhaup, and Carolyn Weisz) and several anonymous re-
viewers for helpful comments on drafts of this article.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to
Marcia K. Johnson, Department of Psychology, Princeton University,
Princeton, New Jersey 08544-1010 or to D. Stephen Lindsay, Depart-
ment of Psychology, University of Victoria, P.O. Box 3050, Victoria,
British Columbia, Canada V8W 3P5.ular sources through decision processes performed during re-
membering.
The ability to identify the source of remembered information
is critical for many cognitive tasks. In laboratory studies of
memory, for example, it helps subjects differentiate between
test items they recognize or recall from a study list and test
items that seem familiar or come to mind from other sources.
In everyday life, memory for source contributes to our ability to
exert control over our own opinions and beliefs; if you re-
member that the source of a "fact" was a supermarket tabloid
such as the National Enquirer and not Consumer Reports, you
have information that is important for evaluating the veridica-
lity of the purported fact. Perhaps most important, the subjec-
tive experience of autobiographical recollection—the feeling of
remembering a specific experience in one's own life—depends
on source attributions made on the basis of certain phenome-
nal qualities of remembered experience. (When memory infor-
mation enters consciousness without these qualitative charac-
teristics, it is experienced as knowledge or belief.)
Inability to specify source information can be mildly discon-
certing, as in not being able to remember whether the person to
whom you are about to tell a joke is the one who told you the
joke in the first place. Failures to remember source can also be
profoundly disruptive, as in delusions (e.g., Oltmanns & Maher,
1988) and confabulation (e.g., Stuss, Alexander, Lieberman, &
Levine, 1978). In fact, a severe disruption in remembering
source is a salient feature of some, and perhaps all, forms of
amnesia (Hirst, 1982; Mayes, Meudell, & Pickering, 1985).
Source monitoring refers to the set of processes involved in
making attributions about the origins of memories, knowledge,
and beliefs (Hashtroudi, Johnson, & Chrosniak, 1989; Johnson,
1988a, 1988b; Lindsay & Johnson, 1987; Lindsay, Johnson, &
Kwon, 1991). There has been a recent upsurge of interest in
such questions (e.g., R. E. Anderson, 1984; Eich & Metcalfe,
1989; Foley, Durso, Wilder, & Freidman, 1991; Hanley & Col-
lins, 1989; Intraub & Hoffman, 1992; Jacoby, Kelley, & Dywan,
1989 Johnson & Raye, 1981; Kahan & Johnson, 1992; Masson,

M. JOHNSON, S. HASHTROUDI, AND S. LINDSAY
1989; Mclntyre & Craik, 1987; Rabinowitz, 1989; Schacter,
Harbluk, & McLachlan, 1984; Schooler & Engstler-Schooler,
1990; Schooler, Gerhard, & Loftus, 1986; Slusher & Anderson,
1987; Voss, Vesonder, Post, & Ney, 1987; Zaragoza & Kosh-
mider, 1989), including applications of ideas about source mon-
itoring to a variety of phenomena (e.g., eyewitness memory,
persuasion, amnesia, and aging) and the development of spe-
cial mathematical techniques for analyzing source-monitoring
data (Batchelder & Riefer, 1990). Such activity reflects a grow-
ing appreciation of the central role that source monitoring plays
in cognition. Source monitoring and failures in source monitor-
ing constantly color one's memory for events and influence the
development and expression of knowledge and beliefs. In the
present article, we describe an integrative theoretical frame-
work for exploring the critical cognitive function of source
monitoring and discuss recent empirical work in relation to
this framework.
We begin the first section by presenting the basic framework
and then reviewing some available evidence for it. In the second
section, we examine the relation between source monitoring
and a variety of phenomena—such as recognition memory,
eyewitness testimony, and the incorporation of fiction into fac-
tual knowledge—and illustrate how the source-monitoring
framework points to relations among such diverse phenomena.
In the third section, we examine the consequences of disrup-
tion in source-monitoring processes and discuss the brain re-
gions that are implicated. In the fourth section, we briefly dis-
cuss how issues of source monitoring might fit within a more
general processing architecture of cognition and memory.
A Source-Monitoring Framework
We build on previously presented ideas about source moni-
toring (Hashtroudi et al., 1989; Johnson, 1988a, 199la, 1991b;
Johnson & Foley, 1984; Lindsay & Johnson, 1987; Lindsay et al.,
1991). A general overview is followed by a discussion of evi-
dence for major points represented in the framework.
Overview
The source-monitoring framework is an extension of the real-
ity-monitoring framework proposed by Johnson and Raye
(1981). Reality monitoring refers to discriminating memories of
internally generated information from memories of externally
derived information, such as distinguishing memories for
thoughts and imaginations from memories for perceived
events. In addition to these internal-external discriminations,
two other source-monitoring situations are of particular inter-
est: (a) discriminating between externally derived sources (ex-
ternal source monitoring), for example, discriminating memo-
ries of statements that were made by person A from those made
by person B, and (b) discriminating between internally gener-
ated sources (internal source monitoring), for example, discrimi-
nating memories of what one thought from memories of what
one said.1 According to the present framework, source moni-
toring of all types is based on characteristics of memories in
combination with judgment processes. Among the most im-
portant memory characteristics are records of perceptual infor-
mation (e.g., sound and color), contextual information (spatialand temporal), semantic detail, affective information (e.g., emo-
tional reactions), and cognitive operations (e.g., records of or-
ganizing, elaborating, retrieving, and identifying) that were es-
tablished when the memory was formed.2
Source-monitoring decisions capitalize on average differ-
ences in characteristics of memories from various sources. For
example, compared with memories for imagined events, memo-
ries for perceived events tend to include more perceptual, spa-
tial and temporal, semantic, and affective information and less
information about cognitive operations. Consequently, a mem-
ory with, say, a great deal of visual and spatial detail and very
little cognitive operations would be judged to have been exter-
nally derived. Decisions may also be made on the basis of a
match between the qualities of memories and activated sche-
mas that represent particular sources. For example, if the audi-
tory quality in a memory of a statement matches your idea of
(or schema for) Sam's voice, you attribute the statement to Sam.
Many source-monitoring decisions are made rapidly and rela-
tively nondeliberatively on the basis of qualitative characteris-
tics of activated memories (e.g., amount or type of perceptual
detail). That is, often we identify the sources of our memories
in the course of remembering them, without any awareness of
decision-making processes. Sometimes, however, source moni-
toring involves more strategic processes. Such decisions tend to
be slower and more deliberate and involve retrieval of support-
ing memories, noting or discovering relations, and initiation of
reasoning (e.g., "Does this seem plausible, given other things
that I know?"). Thus, you might correctly attribute a memory of
a conversation to imagination on the basis of the knowledge
that you are not acquainted with that person. Or you might
attribute a statement to a particular speaker on the basis of
general knowledge about them (e.g., "Sam was the only person
there who would have said this sort of thing, so he must have
said it").
1 Reality monitoring can be denned in two somewhat different ways
(and we have used both). One way emphasizes the self, or internally
generated as opposed to externally derived origin of some information.
According to this definition, discriminating what one said aloud from
what one heard would be classified as reality monitoring, as would
discriminating what one only thought from what one heard. The sec-
ond way emphasizes the covert or nonpublic quality of mental events
such as imagination or inference as opposed to the public quality of
other events. According to this definition, discriminating what one
imagined oneself doing from what one did (here called internal source
monitoring) would be an instance of reality monitoring. Neither of
these definitions of reality monitoring is more obviously correct than
the other. The issue is whether in any particular investigation or theo-
retical analysis, one is emphasizing the self versus external source as
origin of information or the actual (public) versus imaginal (private)
status of the information. Our more general point is that there are
various types of source discrimination problems and that investigating
a variety of them can enrich the understanding of mechanisms that
underlie source monitoring. The classification of source-monitoring
situations used here is not intended to be final or exhaustive.
2 Affective information was added to the model later in response to
several empirical findings (e.g., Hashtroudi, Johnson, & Chrosniak,
1990; Suengas & Johnson, 1988). For a description of this memory
characteristic, see Hashtroudi et al., 1990. Note that these categories of
memory characteristics are analytically useful for what are probably
"fuzzy set" relations.

SOURCE MONITORING
Different concepts could be invoked to characterize the na-
ture of these two types of judgment processes. The first has
been called relatively "automatic," and the second has been
called more "controlled" (Hasher & Zacks, 1979; Norman &
Shallice, 1986; Posner & Snyder, 1975; Shiffrin & Schneider,
1977) or "analytic" (Jacoby & Dallas, 1981). The first also has
been called more "heuristic," and the second has been called
more "systematic" (e.g., Chaiken, Lieberman, & Eagly, 1989).
The heuristic-systematic contrast as described by Chaiken et
al. comes closest to the contrast that Johnson and Raye (1981)
proposed between judgments that are based on qualitative
characteristics of activated information (e.g., amount of percep-
tual information or match to a schema or template) and judg-
ments that are based on more extended reasoning (e.g., retriev-
ing additional information or discovering inconsistencies be-
tween what is remembered and what is otherwise known).
Chaiken et al. (1989) provided a multifaceted conceptualiza-
tion of the cognition involved in evaluating information in a
persuasion context:
[Systematic processing is an] analytic orientation in which per-
ceivers access and scrutinize all informational input for its rele-
vance and importance to their judgment task, and integrate all
useful information in forming their judgments. . . . When pro-
cessing heuristically, people focus on that subset of available infor-
mation that enables them to use simple inferential rules, sche-
mata, or cognitive heuristics to formulate their judgments and
decisions.. . .Although. . . systematic processing [is] generally
controlled and intentional, the status of heuristic processing is
lessclear. . . perceiverssometimesuseheuristicsinahighlydelib-
erate, self-conscious fashion, but at other times they may use heur-
istics more spontaneously, with relatively little awareness of hav-
ing done so. (pp. 212-213)
In the source-monitoring framework, both heuristic and sys-
tematic processes require setting criteria for making a judg-
ment and procedures for comparing activated information with
criteria. For example, heuristic judgments involve criteria such
as "if the familiarity level is above X, the event probably hap-
pened," or "if the amount of perceptual detail exceeds X, the
event was probably perceived." Criteria for systematic processes
might include, for example, limits on the degree of inconsis-
tency between the known and remembered that will be accept-
able.
Source judgments are typically made heuristically; system-
atic processes are engaged less often and tend to be slower and
more subject to disruption. Both can provide important checks
on each other. For example, systematic processes can, on the
basis of implausibility, provide a challenge to memories that,
say, passed a heuristic check for reality monitoring because of
high vividness. Conversely, heuristic processes can challenge
recollections (on bases such as lack of sensory detail) that would
otherwise be readily accepted because they fitted with one's
general knowledge and beliefs (Johnson, 1988a, 199la).
Both heuristic and systematic processes involve a range of
types of criteria and can be influenced by biases, metamemory
assumptions, and current goals and agendas. For example, you
might identify a vague recollection as a memory for a previous
imagination if you believed that you would remember the event
more clearly if it had actually happened. Setting criteria in-
cludes a number of important aspects: assigning weights to di-mensions that might be used in any given decision (e.g., weight-
ing perceptual information as more important than affective
information), assigning confidence to different levels of this
weighted information, and assigning particular overt responses
(e.g., yes in an old-new recognition task) to specific levels of
confidence. For example, one might require a substantial
amount of perceptual detail before accepting an experience as a
memory of an actual recent event and require less to accept it as
a memory of an actual long-ago event. Because source monitor-
ing depends on ongoing goals or agendas, it should be affected
by the sorts of motivational and social factors that influence
any goal-directed activity. In particular, source monitoring will
be done more carefully, with more stringent criteria, under
some circumstances than under others. For example, we expect
people to be more careful about the origin of information when
they are testifying in court than when they are recounting
events on a social occasion. What "more careful" means is us-
ing both heuristic and systematic judgment processes rather
than one type alone and tightening the criteria used.
Source is not an either-or concept. Rather, source can be
specified to differing degrees. For example, you may remember
that Mary told you a fact and when and where she told you. Or
you may only remember that Mary conveyed the information,
but not where, or when, or how (e.g., in person, by letter, or by
phone). Or you may remember that somebody told you the fact
sometime recently but have no idea who. Or you may remember
virtually no information about source, as when you recognize
someone only as familiar but have no idea when or where you
met that person before. According to the current source-moni-
toring framework, source attributions are made to differing
degrees of specificity, with differing degrees of confidence, de-
pending on the information available, criteria used, task de-
mands, and so forth.
Because source monitoring depends on the information avail-
able from activated memory records, it relies fundamentally on
the quality of the information recorded about events initially.
These memory records are the product of the specific percep-
tual and reflective processes engaged during the initial experi-
ence (Johnson, 1983; Johnson & Hirst, 1991; Johnson & Mul-
thaup, 1992). Anything that prevents, a person from fully con-
textualizing information at acquisition (i.e., creating an "event")
will reduce encoding of potentially relevant source informa-
tion. For example, stress or divided attention may disrupt nor-
mal perceptual and reflective processes, resulting in relatively
impoverished encoded information from which source could
be later derived. Similarly, any factors that reduce the likeli-
hood that an event will become embedded in other events
should reduce the amount of potentially useful source informa-
tion. For example, imagine that at a cocktail party you overhear
a remark, but the conversation in which you are engaged pre-
vents you from turning to identify the speaker and remember-
ing a related statement made by them earlier, and from con-
sidering the implications of this particular person making this
remark at a cocktail party. The statement has not been contex-
tualized. In the extreme case, the occasion of overhearing this
remark will not become an "event," and you will later have little
source-specifying information for the idea expressed. Nonethe-
less, you might later find the idea familiar or have it come to
mind relatively easily as a consequence of this experience.

M. JOHNSON, S. HASHTROUDI, AND S. LINDSAY
Because source monitoring depends not only on the quality
of the information as encoded but also on the quality of the
decision processes when source-monitoring judgments are
made, anything limiting these decision processes at test should
also disrupt source monitoring. For example, time pressure,
severe stress, distraction, or alcohol should decrease people's
abilities to engage in reflective processes, particularly relatively
deliberate processes (e.g., retrieving related information). Evi-
dence for the dependence of source monitoring on the quality
of the information available and the quality of the decision
processes applied is discussed in the following sections.
The present framework is in the spirit of Tulving's (1983) call
for work on recollective experience: "In theories of episodic
memory, recollective experience should be the ultimate object
of interest, the central aspect of remembering that is to be ex-
plained and understood" (p. 184). He lamented the fact that
researchers have "evaded problems entailed in recollective expe-
rience" (p. 185). Tulving suggested that recollective experience
may range from clear and precise to vague and fuzzy. He specu-
lated that "the subjective feelings of pastness and veridicality of
memory must be provided by intrinsic properties of ecphoric
information" (p. 187). (Ecphory is a hypothetical process by
which cues combine with trace information to yield a com-
bined product called ecphoric information) Tulving also noted
that considering recollective experience raises the issue of the
distinction between memory and decision processes (which in
his General Abstract Processing System [GAPS ] framework are
part of the more general conversion processes that operate on
ecphoric information).
Thus, Tulving has emphasized the idea that information is
not simply accessed, but combines with cue information in a
joint product that is the input to further processing. The
source-monitoring framework takes this notion as axiomatic
and further attempts to characterize the qualitative nature of
this ecphoric product and the factors that enter into its conver-
sion into a feeling of pastness, veridicality, and belief in source.
As the following review illustrates, there is less cause to lament
than Tulving once had; there is a growing body of research on
which to draw in understanding recollection.
In summary, according to the source-monitoring framework,
there are at least three important types of source monitoring:
external source monitoring, internal source monitoring, and
internal-external reality monitoring. In all three situations
there are multiple cues to source. We categorized these cues as
sensory/perceptual information, contextual (spatial and tem-
poral) information, semantic detail, affect, and cognitive oper-
ations. The ease and accuracy with which the source of a mem-
ory is identified is determined by several factors: (a) the type
and the amount of these memory characteristics included in
activated memory records (or in the ecphoric information), (b)
how unique these characteristics are for given sources (the more
similar the memory characteristics from two or more sources,
the more difficult it will be to specify the source correctly), and
(c) the efficacy of the judgment processes by which source deci-
sions are made and nature of the criteria used. These attribu-
tion processes vary in the extent to which they might be charac-
terized as less deliberative (heuristic) or more deliberative (sys-
tematic). In general, source-monitoring attributions should be
relatively easy and accurate when the event memory in questionis richly detailed, its attributes are uniquely characteristic of its
source, and appropriate decision processes and criteria are used
during remembering. In the next section, we examine evidence
for the approach to source monitoring that we have outlined.
Evidence for the Basic Framework
Role of memory characteristics in source monitoring.
Memories for perceived events include more perceptual and
contextual information than memories for imagined events,
and differences in the amount of these memory characteristics
may be used as a basis for reality-monitoring decisions (Hash-
troudi, Johnson, & Chrosniak, 1990; Johnson, Foley, Suengas,
& Raye, 1988; Johnson, Raye, Foley, & Kim, 1982; Schooler et
al., 1986; Suengas & Johnson, 1988). For example, Johnson,
Foley, Suengas, and Raye (1988) asked subjects to remember
past actual events and past dreams or fantasies and to rate them
on a number of memory characteristics. In a separate study,
different subjects indicated how they knew that a remembered
autobiographical event was real or imagined. Subjects in the
first study rated real events as having clearer temporal and spa-
tial information and greater perceptual detail. Subjects in the
second study offered such information as evidence that particu-
lar remembered events were real (e.g., "[I know it really hap-
pened because] I can remember what the dentist's office
looked like.").
In addition, confusion between memories of perceived and
imagined information increases with decreases in the informa-
tion about cognitive operations characteristically associated
with imagination (Durso & Johnson, 1980; Finke, Johnson, &
Shyi, 1988; Foley et al., 1991; Intraub & Hoffman, 1992; John-
son, Finke, Danzer, & Shyi, cited in Johnson, 1991b; Johnson,
Raye, Foley, & Foley, 1981; Rabinowitz, 1989). In a study by
Finke et al. (1988), for example, subjects' ratings indicated that
it was easier to imagine half of a form as complete when the
form was symmetrical about the vertical axis than when it was
symmetrical about the horizontal axis, suggesting that com-
pleting forms about the vertical axis requires fewer cognitive
operations than completing forms about the horizontal axis. In
a second reality-monitoring study, subjects at test indicated
which of a set of whole forms had earlier been shown in com-
plete or incomplete versions. In relation to controls, subjects
who had imagined vertical forms as complete had more diffi-
culty in reality monitoring than did subjects who had imagined
horizontal forms as complete. This outcome is consistent with
the idea that records of cognitive operations can be used to
identify oneself as the origin of a memory.
There is also evidence that confusion is increased by percep-
tual similarity between memories from external and internal
sources (Johnson, Foley, & Leach, 1988; Johnson, Raye, Wang,
& Taylor, 1979) or between two external sources (Ferguson,
Hashtroudi, & Johnson, 1992; Lindsay et al., 1991). In an exper-
iment by Johnson, Foley, and Leach (1988), subjects who had
imagined themselves saying some words and had heard a con-
federate say other words were quite good at later discriminating
the words that they had imagined saying from the words that
the confederate had actually said. If, however, subjects were
asked to imagine hearing the words in the confederate's voice,
they had much more difficulty discriminating what they had

SOURCE MONITORING
heard from what they had imagined. Likewise, increasing the
semantic similarity between external and internal sources
(Johnson et al., 1981) or between two external sources (Lindsay,
1990; Lindsay et al., 1991) increases confusion. Lindsay et al.
found that subjects were more likely to misattribute statements
made by one speaker to another when the two speakers had
described the same events than when they had described differ-
ent events.
The importance of memory characteristics for source moni-
toring is also revealed by asymmetries in source-monitoring
errors. For example, Belli, Lindsay, Gales, and McCarthy (1992)
noted that subjects were much more likely to err by saying that
they had seen in a visual event something that they had actually
read about in a text describing the event than to err by saying
that they had read something in the text that they had actually
seen in the visual event (see also Belli, Windschitl, McCarthy, &
Winfrey, 1992; Durso & Johnson, 1980). Presumably, reading
about an event often gives rise to imagery related to the event,
whereas viewing an event is less likely to give rise to imagined
reading.
Given that source monitoring is based on qualitative charac-
teristics of memory records, it is especially important that the
encoding situation is conducive to engaging in the kind of con-
solidating and integrative processing that produces the various
qualitative characteristics of memories discussed here. In keep-
ing with this, evidence to be presented below indicates that
disruption (e.g., from brain damage, aging, and divided atten-
tion) in encoding various qualitative characteristics of events
results in deficits in source monitoring.
Role of decision processes. Evidence that source monitoring
involves decision or attribution processes comes from studies
showing that source monitoring depends on the criteria that
subjects adopt (Dodson & Johnson, in press; Hasher & Griffin,
1978; Lindsay & Johnson, 1989; Raye, Johnson, & Taylor, 1980).
For example, the more times subjects had generated an item
during a study phase, the more times they later thought that
they had seen it (Raye et al., 1980). However, when subjects were
given a limit to their judgment by being asked to use numbers
between 0 and 10, the amount of confusion between internally
generated and externally presented events was reduced, sug-
gesting that subjects could selectively gate out inappropriate
memories with a stricter criterion.
Findings of systematic biases in the source attributions that
are made when new items are falsely recognized also support
the idea that memories are attributed to sources through deci-
sion processes performed during remembering. For example,
subjects tend to attribute falsely recognized new items to an-
other's action rather than to their own action, the "it-had-to-be-
you effect" (Johnson & Raye, 1981). Source monitoring also
improves with the time between a probe and signal to respond
(Johnson, Kounios, & Reeder, 1992), with the cues available
while making test judgments (Johnson, Kahan, & Raye, 1984),
and with full as opposed to divided attention at the time of test
(Jacoby, 1991; Jacoby, Woloshyn, & Kelley, 1989; Kelley & Lind-
say, 1993; Zaragoza & Lane, 1991). The hypothesis that source
monitoring involves both heuristic evaluation of characteristics
of memories and more systematic retrieval and reasoning re-
ceives support from analyses of source monitoring of autobio-
graphical memories (Johnson, Foley, Suengas, & Raye, 1988),from developmental studies (Foley & Johnson, 1985; Foley,
Johnson, & Raye, 1983), and from clinical data on amnesia and
confabulation (Johnson, 1991 a). We discuss some of these stud-
ies in detail below.
Distinguishing among types of source monitoring. The idea
that reality monitoring, external source monitoring, and inter-
nal source monitoring constitute distinguishable classes of
source-monitoring problems that deserve systematic investiga-
tion is supported by evidence that poor performance in one
situation does not necessarily mean poor performance in an-
other. In one study, for example, older adults were impaired in
internal source monitoring and external source monitoring but
not in reality monitoring (Hashtroudi et al., 1989). In other
studies, young children had particular difficulty in internal
source monitoring but not in external source monitoring (Foley
& Johnson, 1985; Foley et al., 1983). Harvey (1985) found that
thought-disordered manics did not have difficulty in internal
source monitoring but that their performance was disrupted in
external source monitoring. These and other instances of group
differences in source monitoring (Durso, Reardon, & Jolly,
1985; Durso, Reardon, Shore, & Delys, 1991) demonstrate the
importance of comparing subjects under a variety of source-
monitoring situations.
These patterns of selective deficit should not be taken as evi-
dence that different source-monitoring tasks involve entirely
different memory characteristics or judgment processes. How-
ever, insofar as different source-monitoring tasks differentially
draw on different characteristics of memories (e.g., cognitive
operations are ordinarily more important in distinguishing in-
ternal from external sources than for distinguishing two exter-
nal sources), the pattern of deficits across source-monitoring
tasks can help us identify which aspects of memories are not
being encoded, reactivated, or weighted properly by popula-
tions with various source-monitoring deficits.
Evidence from developmental studies of source monitoring.
If source is not simply provided by a memory trace but, rather,
is a result of relatively complex attribution processes, source-
monitoring abilities should develop with age. In fact, young
children perform as well as adults in some source-monitoring
situations but not in others (Foley, Aman, & Gutch, 1987; Foley
et al., 1991; Foley & Johnson, 1985; Foley et al., 1983; Lindsay et
al., 1991). For example, Foley and Johnson investigated memo-
ries for actions (e.g., "Did you really touch your nose, or did you
just imagine yourself touching your nose?"). Compared with
adults, 6-year-olds were far more likely to confuse memories of
imagining doing and memories of actually doing (internal
source monitoring), but they were not more likely to confuse
memories of what they had done with memories of what an-
other person had done (reality monitoring), nor did they more
often misidentify which of two confederates had performed
particular actions (external source monitoring). A similar devel-
opmental pattern was obtained for source monitoring of spo-
ken and imagined words (Foley et al., 1983).
Foley et al. (1983; see also Foley, Santini, & Sopasakis, 1989)
noted that children had special difficulty in internal source
monitoring such as was required for differentiating expressed
thoughts or actions from those that were imagined but not ex-
pressed (referred to as realization judgments). Recent studies
suggest that this finding may reflect a more general problem

M. JOHNSON, S. HASHTROUDI, AND S. LINDSAY
that young children have in coping with similarity among
sources. Lindsay et al. (1991) found, across a variety of source-
monitoring tasks, that age differences in source monitoring
tended to be greater when the to-be-discriminated sources
were highly similar. For example, 8-year-old children also had
difficulty discriminating actions that they imagined another
person doing from actions that they saw that person do (see also
Markham, 1991). One idea to be explored is that as sources
become more similar on one dimension, other potentially use-
ful source-relevant information becomes more important.
Children may have difficulty managing multiple cues to source
simultaneously (see also Ferguson et al., 1992). Another possibil-
ity is that more difficult source-monitoring problems may be
more likely to require more deliberative or extended retrieval
and reasoning, the types of processes that develop later (Fla-
vell, 1985).
Earlier studies of source monitoring. Although here we
focus on relatively recent work, aspects of source monitoring
have been investigated for many years in a variety of contexts:
temporal (Underwood & Malmi, 1978) and spatial (Rothkopf,
1971) discrimination, list differentiation (Hintzman, Block, &
Summers, 1973; Winograd, 1968), intrusions in recall or false
recognition of associates of studied words (e.g., Cramer, 1965;
Deese, 1959; Underwood, 196 5) or of tacit implications of sen-
tences (e.g., Bransford & Franks, 1971; Corbett & Dosher, 1978;
Johnson, Bransford, & Solomon, 1973), intrusions of schema-
based knowledge (see Alba & Hasher, 1983, for a review and
Hirt, 1990, and M. Ross, 1989, for recent treatments), memory
for surface details (e.g., Craik & Kirsner, 1974; Fisher & Cuervo,
1983; Geiselman & Belleza, 1976, 1977; Hintzman, Block, &
Inskeep, 1972; Kolers, 1976), and context reinstatement effects
(e.g., Eich, 1980; Godden & Baddeley, 1975; Smith, Glenberg, &
Bjork, 1978). For example, list differentiation was of interest in
attempting to understand interference effects (e.g., Abra, 1972;
Winograd, 1968). Studies of list differentiation demonstrated
the importance of factors such as semantic similarity and tem-
poral separation of two lists in determining whether subjects
could correctly identify the list from which a word came. These
findings fit easily within the source-monitoring framework.
Relation to Other Memory Phenomena
In this section, we examine the relation between source mon-
itoring and several different memory phenomena and describe
how these diverse phenomena fit within the general source-
monitoring framework.
Source Monitoring and Old-New Recognition
From the beginning of our work on source monitoring, we
have emphasized that source identification and old-new recog-
nition may draw on different aspects of memories and involve
different processes, depending on the specifics of the two tasks
(e.g., Johnson & Raye, 1981; Raye, 1976). For example, subject
groups may be equated on old-new recognition yet show differ-
ences in source-monitoring accuracy, as in the case of compar-
ing different age groups (Ferguson et al., 1992; Foley & Johnson,
1985; Lindsay et al., 1991; Schacter, Kaszniak, Kihlstrom, &
Valdiserri, 1991) or amnesics and normal controls (Johnson,Hirst, Phelps, Multhaup, & Volpe, 1992; Schacter et al., 1984;
Shimamura & Squire, 1991). Recognition scores can be near
perfect while source-monitoring performance is at chance (Ka-
lian & Johnson, 1990). Manipulations that affect source-moni-
toring performance may have no effect on old-new recognition
(e.g., Johnson & Raye, 1981; Lindsay et al., 1991), and manipula-
tions that improve recognition may impair source monitoring
(Lindsay & Johnson, 1991).
Our claim is not that source monitoring and recognition are
two fundamentally different processes. On the contrary, be-
cause both the new (nonstudied) and old items on recognition
tests are often familiar to the subjects from extraexperimental
sources, recognition judgments typically involve some degree
of source monitoring (i.e., subjects must attribute memories of
studied items to the study list; cf. J. R. Anderson & Bower,
1974). Both source monitoring and old-new recognition can be
described within the framework we use for source monitoring,
and both can be viewed as drawing on the same family of heur-
istic and systematic processes.
Thus, the processes involved in recognition and source moni-
toring are not different at a general level. But across situations
both vary in the range and type of information used and in the
specific decision processes applied; in a particular experiment,
the kinds of memory information and decision processes used
to discriminate between old and new items (recognition) may
be the same as or different from those used to discriminate
among old items from various sources (source monitoring). In
the following paragraphs, we explore the similarities and differ-
ences in heuristic processes for recognition and source deci-
sions, then discuss the roles of systematic processes in these
two types of decisions.
The observed relation between source monitoring and recog-
nition should depend on the extent to which, in a particular
situation, they use the same or different information as input.
One way of characterizing potential differences among tasks in
the input used is shown in Figure 1. The shading in the first
panel of Figure 1A indicates that a complex stimulus usually
creates a complex pattern of initial activation, including activa-
tion attributable to memory records. Different stimuli would
give rise to different levels and kinds of initial activation. The
second and third panels in Figure 1A show that over the course
of a few milliseconds or seconds, activation may become more
differentiated, that is, may yield more specific attributes of
memory. In connectionist terms, certain activated units might
mutually support each other's activation and, hence, cohere or
settle into groupings (indicated by squares, circles, and trian-
gles in the second and third panels) that correspond to memory
characteristics such as perceptual, contextual, and semantic de-
tail. Increasing differentiation does not refer to an increase of a
single type of information (e.g., strength or activation level). A
manipulation might, for example, increase undifferentiated ac-
tivation without increasing differentiation. Different memory
characteristics may revive and differentiate at different rates,
and activation from some stimuli might asymptote at relatively
low levels of differentiation, whereas activation from others
might reach high levels of differentiation very rapidly.
Figure IB represents the idea that different memory tasks
have different average differentiation requirements. Identifica-
tion of degraded stimuli might benefit from activation of rec-

SOURCE MONITORING
1A.
O
To•J=
I(DOld/NewRBcognition
PrimingSource
Monitoring
1B.Time
Figure 1. (A) Activation becomes increasingly differentiated, yield-
ing memory characteristics (e.g., perceptual or contextual); (B) Differ-
ent tasks typically require different degrees of differentiation.
ords of prior exposure (priming) whether or not the activation
achieves higher levels of differentiation.3 Old-new recognition
typically requires more differentiation than does priming, and
source monitoring requires even more so. This is not to say that
old-new decisions do not benefit from more differentiated in-
formation (as indicated by the overlap in circles designating
recognition and source-monitoring tasks in Figure IB) but sim-
ply that they can be made at lower differentiation levels than
can source decisions. In general, the phenomenological experi-
ence of conscious remembering is associated with higher levels
of differentiation, which give memories an eventlike quality.
Recent work by Johnson, Kounios, and Reeder (1992) illus-
trates the point that source monitoring typically depends on
higher levels of differentiation than does recognition. They
used a response-signal, speed-accuracy trade-off technique
(Dosher, 1984; Reed, 1973; Wickelgren, 1977) to investigate the
time course of source monitoring and old-new recognition for
previously perceived or imagined pictures. Across one series of
experiments, the signal to respond varied from 300 to 1,500 ms
after the presentation of a test word. For each test word, sub-
jects were required to indicate whether it corresponded to a
previously perceived picture, a previously imagined picture, or
a new item. Above chance source monitoring, in this case dif-
ferentiating memories of perceived from imagined pictures, re-
quired more time than did old-new recognition, consistent
with the idea that source monitoring typically requires more
complete or differentiated information than does recognition.
Perhaps even more interesting was that subjects were able to
identify the source of imagined items before they could identifythe source of perceived items. Assuming that memories for
imagined items include more information about cognitive
operations and memories for perceived items include more per-
ceptual detail, the pattern suggests that in this situation, infor-
mation about cognitive operations is more salient or revives
more quickly than does information about perceptual detail.
We are currently using this technique to explore the rate at
which different memory attributes become differentiated.
It is important not to lose sight of the fact that both source
and old-new decision processes can be flexibly directed to
various points in the revival functions relating various memory
characteristics to time. As illustrated by the overlap in the cir-
cles in Figure IB, in any particular situation, the information
used for a recognition response could be quite different from
(e.g., noting perceptual fluency) or quite similar to (e.g., noting
perceptual detail) that used in source monitoring for the same
situation. In fact, correlations between source monitoring and
recognition vary considerably from situation to situation (e.g.,
see Craik, 1989), as would be expected if the information each
drew on was not fixed but was somewhat flexible and overlap-
ping.
In summary, heuristic source-monitoring processes set deci-
sion criteria to evaluate the amount and nature of various types
of information in activated memory records (e.g., criteria to
evaluate the degree of match between the qualitative character-
istics of a memory record and the known properties of particu-
lar sources). Heuristic old-new recognition judgments can use
similar criteria and can use much less differentiated input to
evaluate familiarity derived from such information as degree of
activation of individual representations (Mandler, 1991), flu-
ency (Jacoby & Dallas, 1981), amount of associative spread of
activation (Gillund & Shiffrin, 1984), or "echo" intensity
(Hintzman, 1988).4 Speed-accuracy trade-off is one promising
technique for mapping these attributional processes in more
detail.
The class of heuristic processes used in memory decisions
can, of course, serve functions other than recognition and
source-monitoring judgments; they assess preferences, persua-
siveness, similarity, and so forth. Clearly, heuristic decision
making is quite flexible in the type of information that is taken
as input and in the type of evaluations, attributions, and so on
3 The concept of differentiation can be distinguished from that of
specificity. Specificity is illustrated by the fact that priming is usually
better when modality of input stays the same than when it changes
(Kirsner & Smith, 1974). Differentiation is a psychological concept to
express variations in phenomenal experience.
4 Dual-process models of old-new recognition (Atkinson & Juola,
1973; Jacoby & Dallas, 1981; Mandler, 1980,1991; see also Gardiner,
1989) include both a heuristic and systematic component. However,
they typically treat only undifferentiated information (i.e., familiarity)
as a potential input to heuristic recognition judgments. The second
process, retrieval or recollection, tends to be treated as a search or
retrieval with an all-or-none outcome. Both the heuristic and system-
atic components of dual-process theories would need to be elaborated
along the lines that we describe to account for source monitoring, as
well as to better describe old-new recognition decisions. The present
discussion suggests ways in which the notions of familiarity and re-
trieval can be incorporated into a more embellished and general frame-
work for memory attributions.

10 M. JOHNSON, S. HASHTROUDI, AND S. LINDSAY
that is produced as output. In addition, the same information
may sometimes be used for different purposes. For example, as
Jacoby has also argued (e.g., Jacoby & Dallas, 1981), subjects
might use perceptual fluency not only as an index of familiar-
ity, but as an index for such diverse judgments as preference
(Kunst-Wilson & Zajonc, 1980; Seamon, Brody, & Kauff, 1983),
darkness or lightness of stimuli (Mandler, Nakamura, & Van
Zandt, 1987), or ease of problem solution (Jacoby & Kelley,
1990; Kelley & Jacoby, 1993).
Similarly, both recognition and source monitoring can draw
on more systematic processes, such as retrieving additional in-
formation, discovering relations, initiating new search strate-
gies, and so forth. Important questions include whether the
probability of using particular systematic processes (e.g., plausi-
bility checks) differs for old-new recognition and source moni-
toring and how the criteria applied might differ. Like heuristic
processes, systematic processes are recruited for a wide range of
activities in addition to recognition .and source monitoring,
such as memorizing text (Intons-Peterson & Smyth, 1987) and
evaluating persuasiveness of communications (Chaiken et al.,
1989). Like heuristic cognition, systematic cognition is quite
flexible in the information used as input and the types of evalu-
ations, attributions, and so forth that are produced as output.
The source-monitoring framework focuses on how these heur-
istic and systematic cognitive processes operate in source moni-
toring. (For further discussion about how a flexible cognitive
system with a limited set of components might be configured to
perform a wide range of tasks, see the last section, Source Mon-
itoring Within a General Memory Architecture, and Johnson,
1991b; Johnson & Hirst, in press; Johnson & Multhaup, 1992.)
Source Monitoring and Indirect Tests of Memory
Dissociations between direct and indirect tests. Recently, con-
siderable research effort has focused on dissociations between
direct (recall and recognition) and indirect (especially priming)
tests of memory (e.g., Richardson-Klavehn & Bjork, 1988; Roe-
diger, Weldon, & Challis, 1989; Schacter, 1987a). Priming oc-
curs when a prior exposure to an item facilitates subsequent
performance on that item in tasks that are not presented to
subjects as memory tests—for example, when prior exposure
increases the probability that a word will be identified under
degraded stimulus conditions; the speed with which a word can
be responded to in a lexical decision task; or the likelihood that
it will be given as a response in free association, word stem
completion, or homophone spelling. Amnesic patients who are
impaired in recall and recognition show intact priming in a
variety of tasks (Schacter, 1987a; Shimamura, 1986,1989; Tul-
ving & Schacter, 1990; Warrington & Weiskrantz, 1968,1970).
In normal subjects, priming may occur even when recognition
is at chance levels (Eich, 1984). Certain experimental manipula-
tions that improve recall and recognition (e.g., elaborative pro-
cessing) are less likely to affect priming (Graf & Mandler, 1984;
Hashtroudi, Ferguson, Rappold, & Chrosniak, 1988; Jacoby &
Dallas, 1981; but see Rappold & Hashtroudi, 1991; Toth &
Hunt, 1990). Changes in modality of presentation decrease per-
formance on priming tests but have less effect on recall and
recognition (Graf, Shimamura, & Squire, 1985; Jacoby, 1983;
Roediger & Blaxton, 1987a, 1987b).According to the source-monitoring framework, one reason
that dissociations between direct and indirect tests arise is be-
cause priming typically reflects facilitated processing (e.g., facil-
itated perceptual processing) of an undifferentiated sort (see
Figure IB) and need not engage the source-monitoring pro-
cesses that we have described, whereas direct memory tests
always involve processes that result in some specification of
source. Amnesic subjects are not impaired in priming because
the primary memory deficit in these subjects is in reflective
processes that are not required in priming but that establish
differentiated information critical for source monitoring (John-
son, 1990; Johnson & Hirst, 1991; see also the Disruption of
Source Monitoring section). Elaborative manipulations do not
affect priming because elaborative processing contextualizes
information and because differentiated contextual information
is not necessary in most priming tasks. Changes in modality
reduce priming because they reduce the chances that test
probes will activate previous records (Bransford, Franks,
Morris, & Stein, 1979; Kolers & Roediger, 1984).
Indirect tests oj source information. Elsewhere in this review,
we are primarily concerned with memory for source as a phe-
nomenal experience (i.e., the subjective experience of remem-
bering source). However, evidence of source-specific informa-
tion in memory records can be obtained without subjects phe-
nomenally experiencing the source. Greater priming or
recognition (Craik & Kirsner, 1974; Kirsner, 1974) when presen-
tation modality is constant between study and test provide indi-
rect indexes of source information (see also Kelley et al., 1989).
The advantage of source constancy may occur even when sub-
jects have difficulty in directly specifying the source (cf. Jacoby
& Brooks, 1984).
This dissociation between direct and indirect tests of source
information can be described in terms of the framework used
here for understanding source monitoring. Enhanced recogni-
tion memory when modality is constant between study and test
can be mediated by relatively undifferentiated information
(e.g., fluency in perceptual processing) that contributes input to
a heuristic-recognition judgment process. Direct decisions re-
garding source, however, usually involve an attribution that is
based on more differentiated information as input to heuristic
and, perhaps, more systematic processes.
Direct and indirect tests of memory will not always be disso-
ciated as both types of tests may be based on the same informa-
tion (see Figure IB). For example, Kelley, Jacoby, and Hollings-
head's (1989) subjects read some words and heard others. In a
subsequent combined visual-perceptual identification and mo-
dality-judgment task, compared with items not perceptually
identified, identified items were more likely to be called "read"
than "heard" regardless of whether the item had actually been
read, heard, or was new. Kelley et al. suggested that fluent
perceptual processing is experienced by subjects as familiarity
and that more familiar items will seem to have been presented
in the same modality at test as at study. In a second experiment,
during the study phase, some subjects thought about positive
aspects of read items and negative aspects of heard items (or
vice versa). In the subsequent perceptual identification and mo-
dality-judgment tasks, the bias to respond "read" to percep-
tually identified words was markedly reduced. Evidently, sub-
jects in the elaboration group relied less on perceptual fluency

SOURCE MONITORING 11
for making modality judgments because they had an alterna-
tive basis for judgment: the different semantic information as-
sociated with read and heard items. Thus, like source monitor-
ing and recognition, direct and indirect tests may or may not be
dissociated, depending on the type of information that is used
in the two tests.
Eyewitness Testimony
The fact that subjects are susceptible to misleading sugges-
tions regarding recently witnessed events is of considerable
practical and theoretical interest (e.g., Loftus, 1979a; D. F. Ross,
Read, & Toglia, in press; Wells & Loftus, 1984). The standard
suggestibility procedure involves presenting visual information
followed by verbal misinformation and then later testing sub-
jects' memory of the visual information. Subjects often claim
to have seen things that were presented only in the verbal sug-
gestions. Recent debate has focused on whether misleading sug-
gestions impair subjects' memorial records of the visual infor-
mation (e.g., Belli, Windschitl, McCarthy, & Winfrey, 1992;
Ceci, Ross, & Toglia, 1987; Chandler, 1991; Lindsay, 1990; Lof-
tus, Donders, Hoffman, & Schooler, 1989; McCloskey & Zara-
goza, 1985; Tversky & Tuchin, 1989). Although the memory
impairment question is important, the question of whether
misled subjects remember seeing suggested details in the event
is equally important (Lindsay, in press; Lindsay & Johnson,
1989; Zaragoza & Moore, 1990). The source-monitoring frame-
work suggests guidelines for predicting the likelihood of such
source confusions.
According to the source-monitoring hypothesis, memory
errors may occur at test when misled subjects erroneously iden-
tify memories derived from the misleading information as
memories derived from the witnessed event itself. Subjects'
source judgments should be affected by the decision-making
processes and criteria they adopt on the test (Hasher & Griffin,
1978; Johnson, 1988a; Raye et al., 1980). The criteria that sub-
jects use to attribute a memory to a particular source will vary
with factors such as the purpose of the remembering, the biases
that are active, and the weight given to plausibility (Johnson,
1988a). Under some conditions, it might be sufficient that an
item is vaguely familiar and fits with other details derived from
that source; under other circumstances, other information,
such as a perceptually detailed recollection, might be required.
The recognition tests that are typically used in studies of
eyewitness suggestibility may tacitly induce subjects to make
source-monitoring errors on the critical items. In the standard
procedure, subjects receive a series of recognition trials consist-
ing of items from the original event and new distractor items (in
the form of either forced-choice pairs or individual yes-no
items). The critical test items, in which the suggested objects
appear, are embedded among these filler items. Because most
of the test items require subjects to discriminate between ob-
jects presented in the visual event and completely new distrac-
tors, subjects may adopt an undifferentiated familiarity crite-
rion (Atkinson & Juola, 1973; Jacoby & Dallas, 1981; Mandler,
1980) early on in the test and stop attending to potentially use-
ful information about the sources of their memories (e.g., the
amount and nature of perceptual detail). When a suggested
item is encountered on the test, subjects may recognize it assomething that was presented during the experimental session
and, because they are using a familiarity criterion, indicate that
they remember seeing that item in the original event. On a
forced-choice test, the suggested item in a test pair may seem
more familiar than the original item for a number of reasons
(e.g., recency or salience). Thus, standard testing procedures
with both yes-no and forced-choice recognition tests may lead
subjects to base judgments on familiarity and, hence, to ignore
memory information about the source of an item's familiarity
(cf. Raye, 1976). Subjects should thus make fewer errors if they
are oriented toward source-monitoring judgments (e.g., Raye &
Johnson, 1980) rather than familiarity judgments (e.g., Loftus,
1979a).
Lindsay and Johnson (1989) and Zaragoza and Koshmider
(1989) recently found evidence that was in keeping with this
prediction. In the Lindsay and Johnson studies, subjects first
viewed pictorial target information and then received verbal
postevent information with or without misleading suggestions.
Later, half of the subjects received a yes-no recognition test that
required them to indicate which items they had seen in the
picture and which they had not. The other half received a
source-monitoring test that required them to indicate the
source (picture, verbal narrative, or both) of their memory of
each item that they recognized as old. As is typically found,
when tested with the recognition procedure, misled subjects
often claimed that they had seen things that had only been
suggested in the text. In contrast, there was no suggestibility
effect among subjects tested with the source-monitoring test:
These subjects correctly attributed suggested details to the
narrative. Zaragoza and Koshmider(1989) found similar results
with a slightly different source-monitoring test. These results
are consistent with the idea that source attributions are the
result of decision processes that are subject to criteria effects.
Subsequent experiments have demonstrated that even sub-
jects given a source-monitoring test sometimes claim to have
seen suggested details (e.g., Lindsay, 1990; Zaragoza & Muench,
1989). In the Lindsay (1990) study, subjects in the easy source-
monitoring condition received misleading suggestions 2 days
after viewing the event, minutes before taking the test, and
under conditions that differed from those in which they viewed
the event. Subjects in the difficult condition, on the other hand,
received the misleading suggestions minutes after viewing the
event, under very similar conditions, 2 days before taking the
test. Before taking a recall test, subjects were correctly in-
formed that anything mentioned in the postevent narrative that
was relevant to any test question was wrong. That is, subjects
were explicitly told not to report anything that they remem-
bered from the postevent narrative (an adaptation of Jacoby's
"logic of opposition," e.g., Jacoby, Woloshyn, & Kelley, 1989).
Subjects in the easy condition showed no tendency to report
suggested details, indicating that subjects understood and at-
tempted to follow the injunction against reporting information
from the postevent narrative. Nonetheless, subjects in the diffi-
cult condition quite often reported seeing the suggested details.
Taken together, two points are clear from these studies: (a) The
likelihood of source misattributions depends on the criteria
subjects adopt in making source-monitoring judgments (see
also Dodson & Johnson, in press; Hasher & Griffin, 1978; Raye

12 M. JOHNSON, S. HASHTROUDI, AND S. LINDSAY
et al, 1980), and (b) source misattributions may occur even
under quite stringent criteria.
In addition to helping to characterize criteria effects in eye-
witness testimony, the source-monitoring framework suggests
other factors that will influence such memory errors. For exam-
ple, source misattributions should be more likely when subjects
incidentally visualize misleading information (e.g., Durso &
Johnson, 1980; Finke et al., 1988; Intraub & Hoffman, 1992;
Zaragoza, 1991) or imagine suggested utterances in one of the
actor's voices (e.g., Johnson, Foley, & Leach, 1988). Subjects
should also be more likely to make source confusions when
they consider misleading information tangential and do not
contextualize it as part of an event distinct from the original
event. This may be one reason that it is easier to induce subjects
to make errors on peripheral than on central details (Loftus,
1979b; Tousignant, Hall, & Loftus, 1986). Source misattribu-
tions should also be more likely when subjects are stressed or
distracted at the time that the misinformation is introduced (or
tested) because, again, they would be less likely to engage in
processes that would produce potential source cues for the mis-
information (Zaragoza & Lane, 1991). In keeping with evidence
that source-monitoring processes develop and change with age
(see sections in this article on development, p. 7, and aging, p.
16), there are age-related changes in children's (Ceci & Bruck,
1993) and elderly adults' (Cohen & Faulkner, 1989) susceptibil-
ity to misleading suggestions.
Misattributing Familiarity
Failures in source monitoring may give rise to the feeling that
a name or a fact that is familiar from a recent exposure was
known previously (e.g., Begg, Robertson, Gruppuso, Anas, &
Needham, 1992; Jacoby, Kelley, Brown, & Jasechko, 1989; Kel-
ley & Lindsay, 1993; Neely & Payne, 1983; Schacter et al., 1984).
For example, Jacoby and colleagues reported a number of inter-
esting experiments all involving two phases. In Phase I, subjects
read a list of nonfamous names (e.g., Sebastian Weisdorf), and
in Phase II, subjects made fame judgments for a list containing
both Phase I nonfamous names, new nonfamous names, and
famous names. Before they made their fame judgments, sub-
jects were told that all Phase I names were nonfamous. On an
immediate test, subjects were less likely to call Phase I nonfa-
mous names famous than to call new nonfamous names fa-
mous. When Phase II was delayed, however, subjects were
more likely to call Phase I nonfamous names famous than to
call new nonfamous names famous, suggesting that subjects
based fame judgments on overall familiarity of the name and
had forgotten, or were not accessing or using, source informa-
tion. Thus, they misjudged the basis for the familiarity of Phase
I items as preexperimental. These findings illustrate that peo-
ple sometimes recognize information but not its source (e.g.,
Johnson & Foley, 1984; Johnson & Raye, 1981; Lindsay & John-
son, 1987) and that recognition and identification of origin may
be based on different aspects of memory or different relative
contributions of heuristic and systematic processes (e.g., Foley
et al., 1983; Johnson, 1985; Johnson & Raye, 1981; Lindsay &
Johnson, 1991; Raye & Johnson, 1980).
The criteria subjects use will affect the extent to which they
confuse information from two sources (e.g., Lindsay & Johnson,1989; Raye et al., 1980; also see Hasher & Griffin, 1978). In
keeping with this, Jacoby, Kelley, Brown, and Jasechko (1989)
found that discrimination between famous and nonfamous
names was better when the test list included names that had
been presented earlier than when it did not. Thus, when sub-
jects realized that they might be confused about the source of a
familiarity response, they would tighten their criteria for cal-
ling a name famous. For example, they might not say someone
was famous unless they could remember what he or she did.
Limiting reflective activity at either encoding or source judg-
ments will also produce impoverished memories or judgment
processes that may lead to errors in source monitoring (Jacoby,
1991). Jacoby, Woloshyn, and Kelley (1989) varied whether sub-
jects simply read names in the first phase (full-attention condi-
tion) or at the same time listened for runs of three odd numbers
in a tape-recorded series of random digits (divided-attention
condition). Divided attention reduced old-new recognition but
not the increment of error in fame judgments caused by recent
exposure. This was true even when subjects were informed that
all names on the initial list were nonfamous and that if they
remembered a name from the initial list, they should say that it
was nonfamous. Thus, when study was under conditions of
divided attention, subjects were unable to "correct" the sense of
familiarity (that might be misattributed to fame) with further
information, presumably because under divided-attention con-
ditions, they were less likely to engage in the additional process-
ing necessary to establish information that could later be used
to identify the source of the familiarity response.
In interpreting these results, Jacoby and colleagues suggested
that such misattributions of familiarity to past knowledge were
an example of a more general class of misattributions, which
was based on "fluency" of processing (Jacoby, Kelley, & Dy-
wan, 1989; Jacoby, Woloshyn, & Kelley, 1989; Kelley & Jacoby,
1990). For example, briefly flashing a word immediately before
its presentation as a recognition probe increases the likelihood
that subjects will identify that word as a word from the study
list; presumably the flashed preview of the word facilitates pro-
cessing of the recognition probe, and that fluent processing is
taken as evidence of having previously encountered the word on
the list (Jacoby & Whitehouse, 1989). Likewise, prior exposure
to solution words facilitates solving anagrams, which in turn
leads subjects to underestimate the difficulty of those ana-
grams for others (Kelley & Jacoby, 1993).
Jacoby's ideas and those presented here are not contradictory,
but they do differ substantially in emphasis. Like the view ex-
pounded here, Jacoby and colleagues (e.g., Jacoby & Dallas,
1981; Jacoby. Kelley & Dywan, 1989) hold that the subjective
experience of remembering is not the result of some intrinsic
quality of "memory traces," but rather reflects the operation of
a decision process that attributes current mental events to par-
ticular sources (e.g., memory). Jacoby's work has focused pri-
marily on attributions that are based on fluency. The feeling of
familiarity is said to arise from an undifferentiated (see discus-
sion of Figure 1) or global assessment of processing ease or
fluency; specific qualitative characteristics of memories do not
enter into fluency judgments. Our work on source monitoring,
on the other hand, has focused on attributions that are based on
qualities of memories such as perceptual detail, cognitive oper-
ations, contextual information, and affect.

SOURCE MONITORING 13
Jacoby contrasts judgments that are based on familiarity, an
automatic process, with judgments that are based on controlled
recollection. Jacoby's idea that recollection can counteract the
results of a fluency-based familiarity judgment is similar to our
idea that more systematic processing can counteract judgments
that might otherwise be based on heuristic processing (e.g.,
Johnson, 199la; Johnson & Raye, 1981). However, in Jacoby's
work, recollection of prior episodes has often been treated as
something that either occurs or does not occur. Research on
source monitoring, in contrast, has emphasized the idea that
recollection occurs in degrees and produces variations in the
phenomenal qualities of memories. Finally, the term recollec-
tion, in Jacoby's work, usually refers to direct retrieval of re-
cords of past episodes. Source monitoring processes include
not only retrieval but also interpretation of what is retrieved.
Work on source monitoring addresses the question of what
gives rise to the feeling that a specific past episode has been
retrieved. The source-monitoring framework attempts to char-
acterize the various dimensions of phenomenal experience that
are relevant for attributing memories to particular sources, the
way conditions affect which aspects of memory will be criter-
ial, and the way such information interacts with decision (attri-
bution) processes.
Cryptomnesia
Cryptomnesia is inadvertent plagiarism that occurs when a
person produces something and believes that it is an original,
self-generated product of the moment when, in fact, it was per-
ceived (or generated) earlier. A. S. Brown and Murphy (1989)
obtained Cryptomnesia experimentally. Small groups of sub-
jects took turns generating exemplars of categories. Later, sub-
jects tried to recall the items they had themselves generated and
to produce new items not given before by anyone. Cryptomne-
sia was obtained from most subjects in that during the initial
generation phase they gave items given earlier by others and
also in that they later claimed to have generated exemplars that
had been produced by others in the group. Furthermore, sub-
jects were more likely to plagiarize from subjects who came
before them in the generation order than from subjects who
came after them. A. S. Brown and Murphy suggested that sub-
jects were especially likely to be thinking of their next response
just before it was time for them to give it and probably pro-
cessed the events just preceding their turn less completely than
the events after their turn (Brenner, 1973). Thus, subjects might
have failed to establish memories with the kind of perceptual,
contextual, and reflectively generated detail on which correct
source attributions depend. The source-monitoring framework
also suggests that subjects jnay have in fact covertly generated
an item that was subsequently given by another subject before
they had a chance to report it. The discrimination (thought and
heard vs. thought and said) would be even harder in such cases.
Considered together with the Jacoby, Kelley, Brown, and Ja-
sechko (1989) and Jacoby, Woloshyn, and Kelley (1989) "false-
fame" studies, the results reported by A. S. Brown and Murphy
(1989) suggest that phenomenal differences between material
that has been recently experienced and material that has not
been recently experienced (e.g., differences in perceptual flu-
ency, differences in familiarity, and differences in availability)can become the bases for particular decisions, depending on
task demands (see also Hasher, Goldstein, & Toppino, 1977;
Mandler et al., 1987), especially when other kinds of source
information are not readily available. If the task is to recognize
famous names, the familiarity that comes from recent activa-
tion can be interpreted heuristically as familiarity from preex-
perimental experience. If the task is to generate new items (A. S.
Brown & Murphy, 1989; Kubovy, 1977), to solve problems (Kel-
ley & Jacoby, 1993), or to answer questions (Begg & Armour,
1991; Kelley & Lindsay, 1993), the availability that comes from
recent activation may be interpreted as (unaided) generation of
the moment. Subjects are "fooled" in both cases because the
discrimination is difficult; the familiarity from recent activa-
tion of a new name may be indistinguishable from the familiar-
ity from preexperimental experience of the sort that creates a
vaguely familiar name. The false-fame effect should thus be
much reduced if the familiarity of the famous names on the test
list is increased, because this should increase the criterion sub-
jects use for judging a name famous from prior experience.
Similarly, it is hard to distinguish the cognitive operations
that go into generating from those that go into inadvertent pla-
giarizing in the category-exemplar-generation task. In both
cases, subjects presumably retrieve exemplars activated by the
category name that have little other operations information to
distinguish them. Johnson et al. (1981; see also Rabinowitz,
1989) found that compared with high-frequency instances, sub-
jects were better able to identify whether they had generated or
the experimenter had presented low-frequency instances of cat-
egories, presumably because lower frequency instances took
more cognitive operations to generate, which could then be
used as cues to the origin of the information. From the Johnson
et al. (1981) finding, we would expect that subjects in the A. S.
Brown and Murphy (1989) procedure would make fewer cryp-
tomnesia errors if instructed to generate low-frequency cate-
gory instances. Although A. S. Brown and Murphy did not
specifically manipulate instance frequency in their experi-
ment, in keeping with what we would expect, they reported
that errors were more likely on the higher frequency exemplars
given by subjects in their experiment.
Incorporating Fiction as Fact
Another clearly important source-monitoring problem con-
cerns the extent to which the fictional accounts that we read or
hear are incorporated, along with accurate accounts and our
own direct experiences, into our general knowledge and beliefs.
Movies, television, books, magazines, newspapers—all are
sources of fictional information that may, under some circum-
stances, be treated as reliable information. A particularly strik-
ing example of this phenomenon was illustrated in a "60 Min-
utes" program broadcast on CBS television that showed then-
president Ronald Reagan recounting a story to Navy personnel
about an act of heroism that he attributed to a real U.S. pilot but
that bore an uncanny resemblance to a scene from a Dana
Andrews movie released in the 1940s. According to the report
of this incident, no record of a similar, real act of heroism could
be found.
As with other source-monitoring situations, we would expect
confusion between fact and fiction to be related to factors that

14 M. JOHNSON, S. HASHTROUDI, AND S. LINDSAY
affect the quality of source-specifying information encoded at
acquisition and to factors that affect source-monitoring pro-
cesses later. Some evidence in support of this general idea
comes from reports of attempts to study the incorporation of
fictional accounts into general knowledge (J. R. Anderson &
Ross, 1980; Gerrig & Prentice, 1990, 1991; Potts & Peterson,
1985; Potts, St. John, & Kirson, 1989). For example, subjects in
the Potts et al. experiment read passages including information
about a bird called a "takehe" and its ancestor the "pukeko."
Subjects were told either that the information to be studied was
real or that it was fictional. Later, subjects responded "true" or
"false" to statements such as "The pukeko is a bird" or "The
pukeko has feathers." If most of the verification questions con-
cerned story concepts, response times were faster for subjects
who were told that the material was artificial. If most of the
questions did not concern the story, response times were faster
for subjects who were told that the material was real. Potts et al.
suggested that subjects who were told that the material was real
had fast response times in the nonstory context because they
had integrated the material into general knowledge in such a
way that it would, like semantic knowledge in general, be less
dependent on any particular context for its retrieval.
Potts et al. (1989) further suggested that subjects had some
degree of strategic control over whether information would be
incorporated into their knowledge base or compartmentalized.
We interpret compartmentalized to mean that source-specify-
ing information is available. The strategic activities that Potts et
al. had in mind presumably were the sorts of reflective activities
that establish complex memory records of the sort that form
the basis for source monitoring (e.g., Johnson, 1983,1992). For
example, if subjects process information reflectively (e.g., re-
trieve additional information and note potential differences
between fictional birds and real birds when presented with fic-
tional information), the records of this reflection may be avail-
able for source-monitoring decisions later.
In another study of confusion between fact and fiction,
Gerrig and Prentice (1990) had subjects read a story and rate
how interesting it was. After a brief filler task, subjects indi-
cated their opinions about a number of topics, including some
that had been discussed in the story. Subjects' opinions were
affected by false facts introduced in the stories (e.g., that choco-
late might be carcinogenic). Particularly interesting was the
finding that subjects who rated a story as less interesting were
more likely to have their opinions affected by it. Gerrig and
Prentice suggested that compartmentalization required special
effort that was correlated with interest. In the source-monitor-
ing framework, the special effort would be the sorts of reflec-
tive activities that would embed the information in related in-
formation that could later help identify its source when subjects
were making their opinion ratings and that would allow them
to discount the information. Subjects who are not interested in
a story should be less likely to engage in such activity and,
paradoxically, later might be more influenced by information
from the story than are more interested and therefore more
reflective subjects. As in the "sleeper effect" (Pratkanis, Green-
wald, Leippe, & Baumgardner, 1988), long retention intervals
might also be expected to increase the influence of fictional
information.Disruption of Source Monitoring
Source monitoring is an integral part of normal cognition,
but source-monitoring processes are imperfect, so errors are
inevitable. Although many of these errors are of no great conse-
quence, some have important practical, social, and emotional
consequences (e.g., errors in courtroom testimony and failure to
credit another's ideas). Under some circumstances, people suf-
fer even more profound disruptions in source monitoring—as
in hypnosis, hallucinations, delusions, confabulation, and am-
nesia and as a consequence of aging. The breakdowns that oc-
cur in source monitoring under such conditions of disrupted
cognition provide potentially valuable information about the
nature of source-monitoring processes (and, indeed, monitor-
ing processes in general), as well as an opportunity to evaluate
the usefulness of the source-monitoring framework in under-
standing disrupted cognition.
Delusions, Hallucinations, and Confabulations
As we argue here and elsewhere (e.g., Johnson, 1988a; John-
son & Raye, 1981), reality is not given directly in perceptual and
memory representations but is a product of judgment pro-
cesses. The characteristics of mental experience that provide it
with the quality of reality are similar for perceptions, event
memories, and beliefs: sensory detail; embeddedness in spatial
and temporal context; embeddedness in supporting memories,
knowledge, and beliefs; affect; and the relative absence of con-
sciousness of the cognitive operations producing the event or
belief. Reality testing of ongoing perception and reality moni-
toring of memories and beliefs are complex judgment pro-
cesses that are subject to error and are more difficult in some
situations than in others. The importance of qualitative charac-
teristics of memories and of intact judgment processes is espe-
cially clear in considering such phenomena as delusions (see
chapters in Oltmanns & Maher, 1988), hallucinations (Hilgard,
1977; Horowitz, 1978), and confabulations (Baddeley & Wil-
son, 1986; Johnson, 199 la; Moscovitch, 1989;Stusset al., 1978).
Clinically significant false or implausible personal beliefs
that are firmly held in spite of evidence to the contrary are
classified as delusions (Oltmanns & Maher, 1988). Many of the
factors that we have postulated to be important in reality moni-
toring under ordinary circumstances are implicated in the de-
velopment and maintenance of delusions (Johnson, 1988a). De-
lusions are likely to involve imagined sensory information (e.g..
another person's voice) that even nondelusional people some-
times find difficult to distinguish from real perceptual events
(Johnson, Foley, & Leach, 1988). Delusions involve a loss of
control over thoughts and typically involve thoughts that come
automatically, or unbidden. Such thoughts produce little reflec-
tive, cognitive-operations information and so are particularly
easy to confuse with external stimuli (e.g., Durso & Johnson,
1980; Finke et al., 1988; Johnson, 1991b). Furthermore, a delu-
sional person may find elaborate connections among many sep-
arate events. Because the retrieval of supporting memories is
taken as evidence that an event occurred (Johnson, Foley, Suen-
gas, & Raye, 1988), this may lead to incorrectly identifying
imagined events as perceived. Finally, cognitive habits or the

SOURCE MONITORING 15
intermixture of cognitive and motivational effects (e.g., Johnson
& Sherman, 1990) may induce delusional people to use inappro-
priately lax criteria for evaluating mental experiences. As de-
scribed earlier, even normal people, when induced to use lax
criteria, make misattributions about the source of information
that they would not make if they were using more stringent
criteria (e.g., Lindsay & Johnson, 1989; Raye et al., 1980).
Similar points can be made about the reality-testing errors
that produce hallucinations (Perky, 1910; Segal, 1970). That is,
hallucinations can be analyzed according to many of the same
factors that have been shown to influence reality monitoring in
normal individuals (e.g., Bentall, 1990; Horowitz, 1978; John-
son, 1988a). Kunzendorf (1985-1986) specifically suggested
that certain hallucination phenomena occurring in hypnosis
result from the suspension of a reality "monitor" (p. 258). An
important difference between Kunzendorf s notion of a reality
monitor and our notion of reality-monitoring processes is that
Kunzendorfs monitor is a relatively simple device for reading
an unambiguous "tag" (p. 257) that specifies that a given sensa-
tion is an image or a percept. In contrast, we assume that
various qualitative characteristics of activated information are
evaluated and that the decision processes are more complex
than simply "reading out" a single index of source information.
Patients who have suffered organic brain damage sometimes
make false statements, apparently without intending to deceive,
which are classified as confabulations (Talland, 1961; Whitlock,
1981). Published descriptions of confabulating patients are par-
ticularly interesting because they are generally consistent with
the idea that reality monitoring involves at least two kinds of
judgment processes: one that is based on a nondeliberative eval-
uation of the characteristics of activated information, such as
the type and amount of perceptual detail, and the other that is
based on a more deliberate evaluation of the meaningful con-
tent of activated information in the light of other memories and
knowledge (Johnson, 1991a).
Patients who have had a cingulectomy (to treat obsessive-
compulsive behavior) sometimes experience reality-monitoring
failures that appear to be the consequence of unusually vivid
mental experiences. They will report something as real, but
they may catch themselves (e.g., in answer to a question, one
patient said "I have been having tea with my wife" but then
said, "Oh, I haven't really. She's not been here today.. . . The
scene occurs so vividly, I can see the cups and saucers and hear
her pouring out" (Whitty & Lewin, 1957, p. 73). It is as if vivid
imaginations initially pass a heuristic reality-monitoring check
on the basis of qualitative characteristics and are accepted as
real until caught by more systematic processes. In contrast,
patients with frontal damage who confabulate may experience
reality-monitoring failures that appear to be the consequence of
errors resulting from disruption in more extended reasoning
processes. These patients sometimes make bizarre or implausi-
ble statements. For example, one frontal patient claimed that he
was shot and killed by a young woman during World War II but
that the surgeons brought him back to life (Stuss et al., 1978).
More systematic processes are responsible for catching implau-
sible ideas that may pass a more heuristic reality-monitoring
check.Amnesia
There is considerable evidence that failure to remember
source may be an important component of amnesia (J. Brown &
Brown, 1990; Graf, Squire, & Mandler, 1984; Hirst, 1982; Hirst
& Volpe, 1982,1984; Huppert & Piercy, 1976; Johnson & Hirst,
in press; Mayes et al., 1985; Meudell, Mayes, Ostergaard, &
Pickering, 1985; Pickering, Mayes, & Fairbairn, 1989; Schacter
et al., 1984; Schacter & Tulving, 1982; Shimamura & Squire,
1987, Smith & Milner, 1989; Weinstein, 1987, cited in Johnson,
1990). Various studies have shown disruptions in amnesics for
memory for temporal (Squire, 1982) and spatial (Mayes, Meu-
dell, & MacDonald, 1991; Shoqeirat & Mayes, 1991) informa-
tion and modality of presentation (Pickering et al., 1989).
Schacter et al. (1984) investigated source monitoring in amne-
sics by means of a memory-for-trivia-facts paradigm. They pre-
sented amnesic patients with statements that included fictional
information about well-known people (e.g., "Bob Hope's father
was a fireman"). After brief intervals, amnesic patients could
sometimes produce the studied information when cued with
questions but often could not remember whether they learned
those facts in the experiment or from an extraexperimental
source (e.g., television or newspapers). Schacter et al. (1984) re-
ferred to this finding as "source amnesia," which they defined
as "retrieval of experimentally presented information in the
absence of a corresponding recollection of how it was acquired"
(p. 593).
Schacter et al. (1984) distinguished between source amnesia
and source forgetting. Source amnesia occurs when subjects do
not remember whether an item was learned in the experiment
or outside the experiment. Source forgetting occurs when sub-
jects can remember that an item was learned in the experiment
but do not remember the specific source (e.g., which of two
speakers said it). From the present perspective, source is a
shorthand way of referring to a variety of types of information
(e.g., spatial, temporal, and voice) that may be accessible to dif-
ferent degrees or with varying probability and thus may yield
source identifications of varying degrees of specificity. The is-
sues here are analogous to those concerning the relation be-
tween old-new recognition and source monitoring. From the
source-monitoring point of view, source forgetting and source
amnesia are both examples of source-monitoring failures that
simply reflect differences in either the amount or the specificity
of information available about various external sources. In any
case, the fact that some amnesic subjects have so little source
information available after so short a retention interval is a
striking phenomenon.
These findings suggest that those aspects of memory that
would ordinarily support source monitoring are profoundly
impaired in amnesia. Thus, severely amnesic subjects may have
access to relatively little differentiated information about quali-
tative characteristics of memories such as perceptual detail (e.g.,
the voice in which something was said). They also may have
little access to records of prior reflective activity such as noting
relations among events. Without such source-relevant informa-
tion, they may base their source-monitoring judgments in the
context of trivia questions on combinations of cues and criteria
that lead to many errors (e.g., "Why would 'fireman' come to

16 M. JOHNSON, S. HASHTROUDI, AND S. LINDSAY
mind when I think about Bob Hope's father unless I had read or
heard about it someplace before; it must be true but I don't
remember the specifics of learning it, and I'm not very good at
learning new things, so I probably learned it a long time ago"; cf.
Begg & Armour, 1991; Kelley & Lindsay, 1993).
Some further clues about the nature of amnesic source moni-
toring might be obtained by comparing amnesic patients' per-
formance in various source-monitoring situations. That is, am-
nesics may not be disrupted equally in all source-monitoring
situations. To investigate this possibility, Johnson, Hirst,
Phelps, Multhaup, and Volpe (1992) tested 5 mixed-etiology,
nonalcoholic amnesics (and 5 control subjects) in two tasks that
required subjects to identify who said what. In one, subjects
watched a video in which an experimenter asked questions (e.g.,
"Name a type of coin that used to be larger than a quarter") and
2 people alternated giving the answers (e.g., a penny). Subjects
later were read the words given as answers and had to indicate
who said each item (external source monitoring). In the other
task, 1 person gave some of the answers (again on video), and
the subject was required to give the others (cued by first letters).
Here, too, subjects were asked who said each word (an internal-
external discrimination, or reality monitoring). Amnesics
showed source-monitoring deficits for both external source
monitoring and reality monitoring, but the deficit in external
source monitoring appeared to be greater than the deficit in
reality monitoring. Even so, in the reality-monitoring task, am-
nesics were particularly poor at identifying the source of items
they had generated (also the case in a follow-up experiment).
These results, although preliminary, suggest that amnesics may
be disproportionately disadvantaged in remembering what
they have generated compared with what they have perceived.
Assuming that source identification of self-generated items
draws on records of cognitive operations more than does identi-
fication of perceived items, these findings are consistent with
the suggestion that amnesics are more disrupted in self-gener-
ated, reflective memory than in perceptual memory processes
(Hirst et al., 1986; Hirst, Johnson, Phelps & Volpe, 1988; John-
son, 1983,1990; Johnson & Hirst, 1991).
More generally, systematic comparisons of which aspects of
source (e.g., temporal, spatial, modality of presentation, and
person's voice) are particularly difficult for various memory-
disordered subjects would be especially useful in clarifying the
role of source memory in memory disorders (cf. Smith &
Milner, 1984). As is discussed in the Brain Regions Implicated
in Source Monitoring section, various aspects of source may be
differentially disrupted by damage to various regions of the
brain.
Aging
One line of evidence for age deficits in remembering source
comes from studies demonstrating that older adults have diffi-
culty in remembering contextual information (Burke & Light,
1981). Older adults have trouble in remembering spatial loca-
tion (e.g., Light & Zelinski, 1983; Park, Puglisi, & Lutz, 1982;
Perlmutter, Metzger, Nezworski, & Miller, 1981), sex of voice
(Kausler & Puckett, 1981), upper versus lower case format
(Kausler & Puckett, 1980), and list membership (Zelinski &
Light, 1979 [cited in Burke & Light, 1981]) of presented infor-mation. Burke and Light suggested that the inability to use
contextual information may be a key mechanism involved in
age deficits in memory. This idea is consistent with the finding
that age differences tend to be greatest when testing procedures
provide the least amount of contextual support for retrieval, as
in free recall, in which subjects must reconstruct the original
events (Craik, 1984; Hultsch & Dixon, 1990; Light & Singh,
1987).
Another line of evidence comes from more recent studies in
the source-monitoring tradition. Mclntyre and Craik (1987),
using a procedure similar to Schacter et al.'s (1984), found that
after a week, older adults remembered trivia facts as well as
young adults but had difficulty determining whether a particu-
lar fact was learned in the experiment or outside the experi-
ment. Older adults also had trouble remembering presentation
modality (experimenter vs. an overhead projector). Similarly,
Dywan and Jacoby (1990), using the fame judgment task de-
scribed earlier (Jacoby, Kelley, Brown, & Jasechko, 1989), found
that older subjects were more likely than young subjects to mis-
takenly call the nonfamous names from an earlier presentation
phase famous.
Rabinowitz (1989) reported that older subjects had more dif-
ficulty discriminating between previously read and previously
generated (e.g., A_CO_OL) words than did young subjects. In a
conceptually similar study (subjects read some entire sentences
and filled in the last word for others), Mitchell, Hunt, and
Schmitt (1986) did not find age differences in remembering the
source of information but noted that a ceiling effect may have
masked a source-monitoring deficit among the older subjects.
In a study by Cohen and Faulkner (1989), older and younger
subjects watched, performed, or imagined themselves perform-
ing a series of simple actions (e.g., "Put the spoon next to the
toothbrush"). At test, older subjects were more likely than
young subjects to say that imagined actions had been watched
and that watched actions had been performed. Cohen and
Faulkner also showed that older subjects were more often
misled by false information than were younger subjects in an
eyewitness-testimony paradigm (Loftus, 1979a). In a study by
Kausler, Lichty, and Freund (1985), however, older adults did
not have difficulty discriminating between memories for activi-
ties (e.g., card sorting) that were planned and those that had
been performed. Similarly, in another study (Guttentag& Hunt,
1988), only a minority of older subjects had difficulty discrimi-
nating between performed and imagined actions.
These studies suggest that there are age differences in source
monitoring, but taken together, they also suggest that these
differences depend on the type of source-monitoring task a
person confronts. Direct evidence for this point was reported
by Hashtroudi et al. (1989). Older and younger adults were
presented with a list of common words originating from differ-
ent sources. Compared with young adults, older adults had dif-
ficulty discriminating memories of words they had said from
memories of words they had imagined saying (internal source
monitoring) and difficulty discriminating which of two other
people had said particular words (external source monitoring;
see also Schacter et al., 1991). In contrast, they did not have
more difficulty in discriminating words they had said from
words someone else had said or words they imagined saying
from words someone else had said (reality monitoring). (Real-

SOURCE MONITORING 17
ity-monitoring difficulties have been demonstrated in older
subjects in other situations, e.g., Hashtroudi, Johnson, & Chros-
niak, 1990; Rabinowitz, 1989.)
Hashtroudi et al. (1989) suggested that the particular pattern
of source-monitoring deficits obtained provided a clue about
which memory characteristics contributed to the age deficit in
their experiment. On the basis of previous evidence (Johnson et
al., 1981; Rabinowitz, 1989), it was assumed that with verbal
material, the amount and kind of information about cognitive
operations were especially salient cues for source monitoring.
In the Hashtroudi et al. study, older adults did not have diffi-
culty discriminating either what they said aloud or what they
thought from what they heard another person say. In these con-
ditions, the amount of cognitive operations presumably could
be used as a cue that an item was generated rather than per-
ceived. This suggests that older adults used these cues as well as
young subjects. In contrast, the cognitive operations involved in
saying and thinking are likely to be similar, thereby reducing
the effectiveness of cognitive operations as a cue to source in
discriminating what one said from what one only imagined
saying. Presumably, subjects then have to rely either on memory
for motoric and kinesthetic information or on memory for spe-
cific perceptual information about voice quality. In this situa-
tion, older adults seemed to have difficulty in discriminating
source. Similarly, discriminating which of two other people said
something should also depend on evaluating perceptual infor-
mation such as specific voice quality, because the amount or
kind of cognitive operations would not provide a reliable cue to
source. Again, older adults had difficulty in this condition.
Thus the results of this experiment provided a hint that older
adults have the most trouble in conditions in which perceptual
information is particularly important.
In a second study, Hashtroudi et al. (1990) directly examined
age-related differences in various memory characteristics. The
question addressed was whether some memory characteristics
(e.g., perceptual and contextual) were affected more by aging
than others. In this study, all subjects participated in some every-
day situations (e.g., packing a picnic basket) and imagined
themselves participating in other situations. On a second day,
subjects recalled all they could remember about each situation.
Recollections were evaluated for mention of information such
as colors, objects, spatial references, and thoughts and feelings.
Older adults had particular difficulty in remembering percep-
tual and contextual (spatial) information. In addition, in a real-
ity-monitoring test given 3 weeks later, older adults had lower
performance than young adults. Because perceptual informa-
tion is likely to be a salient cue for reality monitoring, Hash-
troudi et al. suggested that reality-monitoring difficulties
might be related to older adults' difficulty remembering sen-
sory-perceptual information.
Further evidence that older subjects have difficulty encoding
perceptual cues is that an age deficit in identifying which of two
female speakers had said particular words was eliminated when
one speaker was a female and one a male (Ferguson et al., 1992;
see also Lindsay et al., 1991). Ferguson et al. also found that
increasing the salience of the spatial cues in the male-female
condition by having the two speakers sit in distinctive spatial
locations improved young adults' source-monitoring perfor-
mance but not that of older subjects. We are currently exploringthe hypothesis that older adults have difficulty encoding or
using multiple cues to source.
These studies demonstrate how predictions generated by the
source-monitoring framework can be used to explicate the
mechanisms of source-monitoring deficits. Given that source
monitoring is based on memory characteristics, one can system-
atically examine the contribution of various types of memory
characteristics to source-monitoring deficits. This method of
examining cue effectiveness of various memory characteristics
provides a powerful tool for understanding source-monitoring
processes.
Brain Regions Implicated in Source Monitoring
Frontal areas. A number of lines of evidence suggest that
frontal-lobe dysfunction may produce deficits in source moni-
toring. Patients with frontal damage may recall or recognize
information at normal levels yet show disrupted memory for
temporal order (Milner, 1971; Milner, Petrides, & Smith, 1985;
Shimamura, Janowsky, & Squire, 1990). Disruptions in tem-
poral-order judgments that are disproportionate to disruptions
in item recognition or cued recall have also been shown in
Korsakoff patients (Huppert & Piercy, 1976; Meudell et al.,
1985; Shimamura, Janowsky, & Squire, 1991; Squire, 1982;
Squire, Nadel, & Slater, 1981). Patients with Korsakoff syn-
drome are often impaired in tests such as the Wisconsin Card
Sorting Test (Heaton, 1981) and the Benton Verbal Fluency
Test (Benton, 1968), which are sensitive to frontal-lobe pathol-
ogy (e.g., Squire, 1982) and sometimes show computed tomogra-
phy scans indicating frontal-lobe damage (Kopelman, 1989;
Shimamura, Jernigan, & Squire, 1988). Similarly, other popula-
tions in which there may be frontal damage, namely Parkin-
son's disease and multiple sclerosis patients, also show deficits
in temporal judgments (Beatty & Monson, 1991; Sagar, Cohen,
Sullivan, Corkin, & Growdon, 1988; Sagar, Sullivan, Gabrieli,
Corkin, & Growdon, 1988). Within subjects, impaired tem-
poral-order scores may be correlated with scores on neuropsy-
chological tests sensitive to frontal damage (Squire, 1982), but
note that such a correlation is not always found (Kopelman,
1989; Shimamura et al., 1990).
Disrupted memory for the source of trivia facts also appears
to be related to measures of frontal-lobe dysfunctions in some
studies of amnesics (Schacter et al., 1984) and is also found in
frontal-lobe patients who do not show disrupted memory for
the facts themselves (Janowsky, Shimamura, & Squire, 1989).
There is also evidence from both physiological and behavioral
studies that the frontal cortex is particularly sensitive to the
effects of aging (Albert & Kaplan, 1980; Woodruff, 1982). On
the basis of these findings, Mclntyre and Craik (1987) sug-
gested that memory deficits in remembering source in older
normal subjects may be linked to frontal-lobe dysfunction.
Some evidence for this suggestion was provided in a recent
study by Craik, Morris, Morris, and Loewen (1990), who re-
ported a correlation in older subjects between source-monitor-
ing scores (deciding whether a fact was learned in the experi-
ment or outside the experiment) and performance on the Wis-
consin Card Sorting Test and the Verbal Fluency Test.
In addition, disruptions in reality monitoring described in
case reports of confabulation in patients suffering from organic

18 M. JOHNSON, S. HASHTROUDI, AND S. LINDSAY
brain disease form a systematic and suggestive picture (John-
son, 199la). The relatively controlled lesions made in anterior
cingulectomy patients produce dramatic but temporary con-
fabulation, lasting several days (Whitty & Lewin, 1957,1960).
Damage to the basal forebrain region produces confabulation
that may last weeks to months (Damasio, Graif-Radford, Es-
linger, Damasio, & Kassell, 1985), and damage to various areas
in the frontal lobes can produce confabulation that may last
months to years (Stuss et al., 1978). Stuss et al. made a persua-
sive argument for the role of frontal-lobe damage in confabula-
tion. They reported five patients with demonstrable frontal-
lobe lesions who all showed spontaneous, persisting confabula-
tion (see also Baddeley & Wilson, 1986; Kapur & Coughlan,
1980; Moscovitch, 1989). At least temporary, and sometimes
long-lasting, confabulation is found in Korsakoff patients, who
often show prefrontal symptomatology as well as damage to
thalamic nuclei that project to prefrontal and anterior cingulate
cortex. The fact that confabulators often show recognized
symptoms of frontal damage such as perseverative tendencies,
difficulty in shifting response sets, and lack of concern about
inappropriate behavior also suggests frontal involvement. In
summary, disruption of areas immediately adjacent to the fron-
tal lobes produces marked but transient effects. Structural dam-
age to the frontal lobes themselves produces more permanent
effects. Thus, overall, there is a fairly consistent pattern of evi-
dence pointing to confabulation as a potential consequence of
disruption of frontal-lobe functioning.
Taken together, these observations of relations between
disruption in frontal-lobe functions and disruptions in source
monitoring in amnesic patients and older people and, particu-
larly, confabulation in organic-brain-disease patients strongly
implicate the frontal lobes in normal source-monitoring pro-
cesses. As the next section argues, however, this does not mean
that the frontal lobes are uniquely responsible for source mem-
ory.
Temporal and diencephalic areas. Some investigators have
considered the possibility that the type of memory disruption
that is associated with damage to the medial temporal lobes or
diencephalon is primarily a problem of disrupted source
(usually called context) memory (J. Brown & Brown, 1990;
Hirst, 1982,1989; Huppert & Piercy, 1976; 1978; Mayes, 1988,
1992; Mayes et al., 1985; Schacter, 1987b; Stern, 1981). Accord-
ing to this view, the disrupted memory for content shown in
anterograde amnesia is secondary to a more fundamental
disruption in source memory (e.g., context no longer provides
an effective recall cue). One conceptual problem with this idea
is that the cognitive processes (e.g., reactivating information and
elaborating relations among items) that contribute to source or
contextual information contribute to factual or content mem-
ory as well (cf. Johnson, 1992; Mayes et al, 1985). For example,
improving organization among items on a particular list should
both boost item recall and improve subjects' ability to correctly
attribute items to that list (assuming the same organizational
categories were not used for other lists). Thus, from a process-
ing point of view, it is hard to differentiate those cognitive activi-
ties that produce good memory for content from those that
produce good memory for context (Johnson, 1992).5
Others have argued that the memory disruption associated
with temporal/diencephalic damage does not involve disrup-tion of source memory but rather that disruptions in source
memory occur as a consequence of additional frontal-lobe dam-
age found in some temporal/diencephalic patients (e.g, Shima-
mura et al, 1990; Shimamura & Squire, 1987; Squire, 1982).
According to this view, memory for content is a function of
temporal/diencephalic regions, and memory for source is a
function of frontal regions. Again, this is based on too simple a
notion of the processes that are involved in both memory for
content and memory for source.
We think it more likely that although the frontal lobes con-
tribute to memory for source, they contribute to memory for
content as well. Similarly, although the temporal lobes and dien-
cephalon are critical for memory for content, they contribute to
memory for source as well. Given the likely overlap in processes
that promote memory for source and memory for content (see
also Mayes et al, 1985), patients who have disruptions of source
memory should show disrupted memory for content under
some circumstances and vice versa. In keeping with this, fron-
tal patients show disruption in content recall if they are tested
in multitrial free-recall learning—a type of memory test more
dependent on reflective organizational processes than the
more commonly used, single-trial free-recall, cued-recall, or
recognition tests, on which they show "intact" content memory
(Janowsky et al. [cited in Shimamura et al, 1991]; also see
Moscovitch, 1989; and Smith & Milner, 1984). Similarly, amne-
sics, even those without obvious frontal damage, would have
poor source memory if they were directly compared with con-
trols under the same acquisition and test conditions.
Usually, amnesics and controls are not compared under the
same acquisition and test conditions. A common methodologi-
cal practice is to equate patients and controls on recognition or
cued recall and then compare source-monitoring scores (e.g,
Cave & Squire, 1991; Meudell et al, 1985; Pickering et al, 1989;
Schacter et al, 1984; cf. Hirst et al, 1986; Hirst et al, 1988). For
example, amnesics might be given longer to study the items, or
controls might be given a longer retention interval. Using this
procedure, it is tempting to interpret a deficit in performance
on a source task that is disproportionate to a deficit on the
content task as demonstrating that source memory is
disrupted. However, it does not follow that either content or
source memory has been uniformly disrupted or that they have
been localized to particular brain areas. Such a result only im-
plies that some process or type of information is involved to a
greater extent in one task than in the other. For example, pre-
dictions for a situation in which, say, recognition is equated
between groups and in which source monitoring is tested
would depend on the type of information used by subjects in
evaluating content and source (see Source Monitoring and Old-
New Recognition section). Suppose, in this particular test, both
amnesics and controls used only perceptual information for
making both recognition and source-monitoring judgments. If
5 Another reason to not take as fundamental the content versus con-
text distinction but rather to treat them as heuristic categories is that
they may be impossible to separate on a priori grounds. What is core
content and what is incidental context may vary with the situation,
especially with a person's activated goals (e.g, Allport, 1955; Johnson,
1992; Menzel & Johnson, 1976).

SOURCE MONITORING 19
the groups were equated on recognition, they would also be
equated on source monitoring. Nevertheless, this would not
mean that the groups would remain equated in a source-moni-
toring task that demanded more reflectively elaborated infor-
mation for accurate performance (e.g., Weinstein, 1987, cited in
Johnson, 1990). In short, whether amnesics show dispropor-
tionate deficits in source monitoring in relation to controls de-
pends on what types of information the two groups use in the
content and source tests. Similarly, the correlation within a
group between recognition (or cued recall) and source-monitor-
ing scores should depend on the extent to which subjects use
similar information for the two types of tests. Because criteria
are flexible and individually determined and the number of
subjects per group is typically small, the size of these correla-
tions may not be consistent across labs or even within labs.6
Linking aspects of source memory to different brain areas.
Although both temporal/diencephalic and frontal areas contrib-
ute to memory for source, they presumably do so in different
ways. One possibility is that temporal/diencephalic areas are
involved in consolidating (e.g., Milner, 1970; Squire, 1987; Zola-
Morgan & Squire, 1990) memory characteristics such as percep-
tual and spatial detail through a process of reactivating mem-
ory records (Johnson, 1992; Johnson & Hirst, 1991; cf. Spear &
Mueller, 1984) and that frontal areas are involved in discovering
relations among events, strategic retrieval, and setting criteria
in memory tasks (e.g., Johnson, 1990; Moscovitch, 1989). As we
have argued, all of these processes are important for both con-
tent and source memory. The fact that they may be important
to different degrees in different situations produces the vari-
able relation between content and source and between patterns
shown by memory-disordered patients with and without fron-
tal damage. A more general point is that given the complex
processes involved in establishing particular memory charac-
teristics relevant to source (e.g., perceptual, temporal, spatial,
and affective; see the next section, Source Monitoring Within a
General Memory Architecture) and the complex processes in-
volved in source monitoring, it is unlikely that any single brain
area is alone responsible for memory for source (see, also Mayes
etal., 1985; Mishkin, 1982).
In summary, the source-monitoring framework suggests that
disruptions in source monitoring can occur for a number of
reasons, which fall into two broad categories: (a) disruption in
the encoding of events initially—for example, disruption in
processes that might limit encoding or consolidation of some
types of perceptual, contextual, affective, semantic, and cogni-
tive operations information—or disruption in retrieving and
noting relations between prior and ongoing events that would
severely limit relational information and (b) disruption in heur-
istic or systematic source-monitoring judgment processes—for
example, when subjects do not access available relevant infor-
mation, use lax or inappropriate criteria for making source
decisions, or do not use heuristic and systematic processes to
check each other. Such disruptions can come about, for exam-
ple, when subjects at either acquisition or test are pressed for
time, stressed, depressed, distracted, or under the influence of
alcohol or other drugs or if they have suffered damage to certain
areas of the brain. Given these more specific hypotheses about
the cognitive mechanisms underlying source monitoring, it
should be possible to design studies that are more analyticabout exactly which of these factors might operate under
various conditions and involve various brain areas. New devel-
opments in neuroimaging techniques provide increasingly pre-
cise and detailed anatomical information about cognitively im-
paired patients (e.g., Squire, Amaral, & Press, 1990). To maxi-
mally exploit these exciting technical developments, we need to
use a correspondingly sophisticated characterization of the
mental processes involved in the tasks we study.
Source Monitoring
Within a General Memory Architecture
Our primary goal in this article is to illustrate that a wide
variety of phenomena can be usefully discussed in a common
set of terms, which suggest additional directions for empirical
research. For the future, greater theoretical specificity in char-
acterizing the memory records and processes involved in
source monitoring will require embedding discussions of
source monitoring within the context of a specific processing
model of memory. We briefly consider what the outlines of such
an approach might look like, using the Multiple-Entry, Modular
(MEM) memory framework (Johnson, 1983,1991a; Johnson &
Hirst, 1991, in press; Johnson & Multhaup, 1992).
The aim of the MEM framework is to describe a relatively
small set of cognitive processes (the component processes) that
are jointly sufficient to account for changes in memory and
performance from cognitive activity. That is, any task involves
some combination of these component processes, and memory
is viewed as a record of the operation of the component pro-
cesses. At present, MEM consists of 16 component processes,
largely derived from prior findings or concepts in the cognitive
literature. These component processes are grouped into four
proposed functional subsystems, two (P-1 and P-2) that are com-
posed of perceptual processes contributing to memory records
(e.g., those involved in seeing) and two (R-l and R-2) that are
composed of reflective processes, such as the self-generated
activities involved in organizing and elaborating. The compo-
nent processes of each subsystem are P-1 (locating, resolving,
extracting, and tracking), P-2 (placing, identifying, examining,
and structuring), R-l (reactivating, refreshing, shifting, and not-
ing), and R-2 (retrieving, rehearsing, initiating, and discovering).
Although specific processes from two or more subsystems
may be analogous, in relation to P-l and R-l, the processes of
P-2 and R-2 operate on more complex data structures (Johnson
& Hirst, in press). So, for example, locatingcan be applied to an
undifferentiated external stimulus (Weiskrantz, 1986) whereas
placing can compute relative positions of two differentiated and
usually identified objects. Similarly, noting can compute over-
lapping relations from associations activated by two items (e.g.,
dog and cat both activate animal), whereas discovering finds
relations that are less direct, for example, relations that depend
'Similarly, Sagar and colleagues (Sagar, Downes, & Mayes, 1991;
Sagar, Gabrieli, Sullivan, & Corkin, 1990) have discussed the possibil-
ity that source judgments might be made in different ways—depend-
ing on such factors as the severity of a patient's recognition deficit,
etiology of the amnesic deficit, and the nature of the task and matching
procedure used (cf. Schacter, Kaszniak, Kihlstrom, & Valdiserri,
1991).

20 M. JOHNSON, S. HASHTROUDI, AND S. LINDSAY
on other relations as in computing analogies (e.g., Gentner,
1988). The two reflective subsystems also include the capability
of "executive" control and monitoring functions (e.g., Miller,
Galanter, & Pribram, 1960; Norman & Shallice, 1986; Stuss &
Benson, 1986). Control and monitoring functions are drawn
from sets of potential agendas. An agenda comprises a recipe or
program for cognitive action consisting of component subpro-
cesses. Agendas are often learned and are activated by ongoing
stimulus conditions, including ongoing cognitive activities.
These component processes and their proposed structure serve
as a basis for modeling a variety of memory phenomena (John-
son, 1983,1990,199 la, 1991b, 1992; Johnson & Hirst, 1991, in
press; Johnson & Multhaup, 1992).
Further research may necessitate adding additional compo-
nent processes, and much more work will be needed to clearly
define the nature of particular components and to unambigu-
ously differentiate among them (e.g., to know whether a particu-
lar performance involves locating or placing). Despite its provi-
sional nature, a component-processes approach to memory has
many potential benefits, especially compared with simple di-
chotomies such as conceptualizing processes as automatic or
controlled, or data driven or conceptually driven or conceptua-
lizing the content of memories as procedural or declarative, or
semantic or episodic (Johnson & Hirst, in press). A relatively
small increase in theoretical complexity in moving from any of
these dichotomies to a component-processes framework, such
as MEM, provides substantial increases in both specificity and
generality.
MEM provides a mid-level vocabulary for integrating work
from more specific theoretical and empirical efforts. For exam-
ple, locating is explicated by research on visual-spatial atten-
tion (e.g., Yantis & Johnson, 1990), identifying by research on
object identification (e.g., Biederman, 1987), reactivating by re-
search on reinstatement effects (e.g., Rovee-Collier & Hayne,
1987), and rehearsing by research on working memory (Badde-
ley, 1986). At the same time, MEM components themselves can
be used to decompose other concepts. For example, organiza-
tion and elaboration (e.g., Tulving, 1962) can be described in
terms of specific component processes of MEM such as refresh-
ing, shifting, noting, and reactivating (Johnson, 1990, 1992).
MEM also provides a vocabulary for discussing issues such as
the cognitive activities required for the binding and consolida-
tion of central and contextual information (Johnson, 1992),
processes fundamental to determining cue effectiveness. MEM
not only offers parsimonious language for describing a range of
phenomena, it also provides rich enough detail to make predic-
tions about the breakdown of functioning from brain damage,
aging, and psychological distress (Johnson, 1990; Johnson &
Hirst, 1991, in press).
With respect to source monitoring, MEM can be useful in
conceptualizing both the memory characteristics and the deci-
sion processes discussed here. The memory characteristics (i.e.,
perceptual, contextual, affective, semantic, and cognitive oper-
ations) postulated by the source-monitori ng framework are sum-
mary labels for the outcomes of combinations of underlying
cognitive activities. Within MEM, various component subpro-
cesses of perception (e.g., locating, identifying, and trackingslim-
uli and placing objects in spatial relations) and of reflection
(e.g., rehearsing, reactivating, and retrieving events and notingrelations among them) combine to determine what characteris-
tics are encoded in memory. For example, affective information
may arise from perceptual processes (e.g., fear arising from sud-
denly locating a stimulus in your peripheral vision) or from
more reflective processes (e.g., fear arising from discovering an
inconsistency in your argument just before it is your turn to
speak; Johnson & Multhaup, 1992). Similarly, temporal aspects
of memory might arise from perceptual records of identified
objects (e.g., a moon in the memory implies that it was night) or
from reflective records of noted relations (e.g., "I remember
thinking that I also saw him as I left the seminar last week, and
the seminar meets on Wednesdays"). With respect then to tem-
poral information, records of perceptual activity may be suffi-
cient to indicate that an event took place at night, but records of
reflective activity may be necessary for specifying that an event
took place on Wednesday or after another particular event (cf.
Tzeng, Lee, & Wetzel, 1979).
In short, there is not a single mental computation, identifi-
able with a single brain region, that is responsible for affect or
for temporal information (cf. Olton, 1989), spatial information
(cf. Smith & Milner, 1984) and so forth. Furthermore, the MEM
framework can be used to help characterize the likely complex-
ity of the mental computations involved in encoding, reactivat-
ing, and using various memory characteristics for various pur-
poses. An example is our earlier suggestion that frontal damage
disrupts processes such as retrieving and discovering relations
that would help specify that an event occurred on Wednesday or
after another related event, whereas temporal/diencephalic
damage disrupts reactivation processes critical for the consolida-
tion even of within-event characteristics such as the perceptual
information indicating that an event occurred at night. This
would account for the profound absence of source-specifying
information in patients with combined medial/temporal dam-
age and frontal damage.7
Another aspect of MEM that is relevant to conceptualizing
source attribution, and decision processes in general, is that
MEM divides reflection into two subsystems, R-1 and R-2, each
capable of executive control and each able to recruit processes
for prolonging activation (refreshing and rehearsing), for intro-
ducing change in an activation pattern (shifting and initiating),
for goi ng back to earl ier objects of perception and thought (reac-
tivating and retrieving), and for creating relations among events
(noting and discovering). Compared with R-l processes, R-2
processes are more controlled or deliberate (systematic). The
more a task draws exclusively from the set of R-1 components
(and the fewer the components engaged), the less deliberate it
will seem; the more it draws from R-2 components (and the
more components it engages), the more deliberate it will seem.
However, R-I and R-2 do not map simply onto two discrete
categories, nondeliberative and deliberative (or automatic and
controlled), or to any simple dimension. As noted by Chaiken
et al. (1989), a "strict automatic-controlled dichotomy is too
restrictive to capture many phenomena of interest" (p. 213).
7 Of course, medial/temporal and frontal areas of the brain are com-
plex structures; different component processes of MEM very likely are
differentially supported by or distributed across various substructures
of these more general regions.

SOURCE MONITORING 21
Thus, rather than using terms that imply a unidimensional anal-
ysis of cognition, R-l and R-2 can be used as shorthand terms to
refer, respectively, to prototypical types of heuristic (relatively
automatic) and systematic (relatively controlled) processing
drawn from a multiply determined family of processing possi-
bilities (e.g., Johnson, 199la; Johnson & Hirst, in press; Kahan
& Johnson, 1992). An advantage of the terms R-l and R-2 is that
they are not proposed as primitives and can remind us that the
task ahead is to further decompose concepts such as "control"
into component processes such as those specified in MEM.
Dividing reflection into two cohesive subsystems (R-l and
R-2) has a number of advantages similar to advantages gained
from computer software designed to execute as cooperating
processes: It easily allows two agendas to be engaged at once.
For example, source monitoring can simultaneously involve as-
sessing qualitative characteristics of activated information
through R-1 processes and retrieving additional information to
check plausibility through R-2 processes. Dividing reflection
into two subsystems provides a way of understanding how
some aspects of reflection might be disrupted without fully
disorganizing thought (e.g., Johnson, 199la; Johnson & Hirst,
in press). Hence, the disruption of R-2 processes evident in
divided attention tasks or in some frontal patients may disrupt
some aspects of source monitoring without disrupting other
aspects of memory. An equally important idea represented in
MEM is that R-l and R-2 also normally interact, that is, they
call on each other's agendas and evaluate the outcomes of pro-
cesses. Thus the outcomes of heuristic and systematic processes
can correct each other, as when vivid mental experiences do not
pass a plausibility check in source monitoring. More generally,
working together, R-l and R-2 yield the experience of thinking
about thinking. Such a conceptual organization of reflective
processes provides a way of discussing how the phenomenal
experience of control, intention, and agency might arise and
suggests mechanisms underlying self-awareness (Johnson,
1991b; Johnson & Hirst, in press).
We believe that this component-process approach has advan-
tages over both structural models and processing dichotomies.
The brief overview of MEM offered here is not intended to fully
explicate the model but rather to communicate the general fla-
vor of the component-process approach. Interested readers are
referred to Johnson (1990,1991a,1991b,1992) and Johnson and
Hirst (in press) for more detailed presentations.
Conclusions
Source monitoring is a critical everyday memory function.
The feeling that a memory has a specific source is a compelling
reason for experiencing it as belonging to our personal past.
Furthermore, source-monitoring processes differentiate fact
from fantasy in remembering (e.g., whether your neighbors
yelled at you or you only imagined they might), reliable from
unreliable sources of information (e.g., your doctor vs. the Na-
tional Enquirer for nutrition tips), and actions from intentions
(e.g., taking pills vs. only thinking about it). Disruption in any
or all of these situations has serious implications both in poten-
tial impact on event memory and on development and use of
knowledge and beliefs.
In this article, we outlined an integrative theoretical frame-work for understanding the processes involved in source moni-
toring. A consideration of recent findings and theorizing in a
number of domains suggests that this framework can point to
connections among diverse phenomena. Ultimately, however,
the value of such a framework lies in the extent to which it helps
explain otherwise confusing results and guides future research
in a meaningful direction.
We believe that the framework has been helpful in account-
ing for disparate results. For example, the framework can ex-
plain why under some circumstances performance on recogni-
tion memory and source tests are dissociated, whereas under
other conditions they are correlated. In addition, it predicts the
dissociations as well as parallel effects found in studying the
relation between direct and indirect tests of memory. Similarly,
it can account for why in some situations memory-disordered
patients have difficulty in remembering both source and con-
tent, whereas in other situations the source deficit occurs in the
absence of a deficit in remembering content. The framework
also suggests factors that determine whether misleading infor-
mation will affect memory for recently experienced events and
whether people will misattribute familiarity to prior knowledge
(e.g., the false-fame effect), will show cryptomnesia, or will be
influenced by fictional information.
As a general research strategy, the framework suggests con-
sidering both memory characteristics and decision processes in
source monitoring and encourages investigating different
source-monitoring situations under comparable conditions or
in the same subject populations. It also suggests several specific
research questions. For example, can the boundary conditions
for appropriating fictional information into one's knowledge
base or using it later be related to specific component processes
involved in processing information? To what extent do develop-
mental changes in source monitoring reflect growth of more
complex heuristic and systematic reflective processing, such as
the ability to combine information from two or more dimen-
sions or the ability to engage in strategic retrieval? Can a source-
monitoring analysis contribute to the understanding of differ-
ences in susceptibility to misleading information between
young adults and children or between young adults and older
adults? To what extent do deficits in source monitoring experi-
enced by older adults arise from difficulties in encoding or
reviving particular aspects of memories or from the criteria
they adopt in source-monitoring decisions? Can differences in
source-monitoring problems among various brain-damaged or
memory-disordered populations be identified and classified?
And can differences between patients in source amnesia, types
of delusions, confabulation, source misattributions, and other
source-monitoring phenomena be understood in terms of dif-
ferent combinations of disruption of memory characteristics
and decision processes? Finally, can progress be made in relat-
ing factors that cognitive studies have identified as important
for source monitoring to underlying brain structures or mecha-
nisms? Questions such as these provide exciting new opportuni-
ties for understanding the critical cognitive function of source
monitoring.
References
Abra, J. C. (1972). List differentiation and forgetting. In C. P. Duncan,
L. Sechrest, & A. W Melton (Eds.), Human memory: Festschrift in

22 M. JOHNSON, S. HASHTROUDI, AND S. LINDSAY
honor of Benton J. Underwood(pp. 25-57). New York: Appleton-Cen-
tury-Crofts.
Alba, J. W, & Hasher, L. (1983). Is memory schematic? Psychological
Bulletin, 93, 203-231.
Albert, M. S., & Kaplan, E. (1980). Organic implications of neuropsy-
chological deficits in the elderly. In L. W Poon, J. L. Fozard, L. S.
Cermak, D. Arenberg, & L. W Thompson (Eds.), New directions in
memory and aging: Proceedings of the George A. Talland Memorial
Conference (pp. 403-432). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Allport, F. H. (1955). Theories of'perception andthe concept of'structure.
New York: Wiley.
Anderson, J. R., & Bower, G. H. (1972). Recognition and retrieval pro-
cesses in free recall. Psychological Review, 79, 97-123.
Anderson, J. R., & Bower, G. H. (1974). A prepositional theory of
recognition memory. Memory & Cognition, 2, 406-412.
Anderson, J. R.,&Ross, B. H. (1980). Evidence against a semantic-epi-
sodic distinction. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Learning and Memory, 6, 441-465.
Anderson, R. E. (1984). Did I do it or did I only imagine doing it?
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 113, 594-613.
Atkinson, R. C., & Juola, J. F. (1973). Factors influencing speed and
accuracy of word recognition. In S. Kornblum (Ed.), Attention and
Performance IV (pp. 583-612). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Baddeley, A. (1986). Working memory: Oxford Psychology Series No. 11.
London: Oxford University Press.
Baddeley, A. D., & Wilson, B. (1986). Amnesia, autobiographical mem-
ory and confabulation. In D. Rubin (Ed.), Autobiographical memory
(pp. 225-252). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Batchelder, W H., & Riefer, D. M. (1990). Multinomial processing mod-
els of source monitoring. Psychological Review, 97, 548-564.
Beatty, W W, & Monson, N. (1991). Memory for temporal order in
multiple sclerosis. Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society, 29,10-12.
Begg, I., & Armour, V (1991). Repetition and the ring of truth: Biasing
comments. Canadian Journal of Behavioral Science, 23,195-213.
Begg, I. M., Robertson, R. K., Gruppuso, V, Anas, A., & Needham,
D. R. (1992). The illusory-knowledge effect. Manuscript submitted for
publication.
Belli, R. F, Lindsay, D. S., Gales, M. S., & McCarthy, T. T. (1992).
Memory impairment and source misattribution in postevent misinfor-
mation experiments with short retention intervals. Manuscript sub-
mitted for publication.
Belli, R. F, Windschitl, P. D., McCarthy, T. T., & Winfrey, S. E. (1992).
Detecting memory impairment with a modified test procedure: Ma-
nipulating retention interval with centrally presented event items.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cogni-
tion, 18, 356-367.
Bentall, R. P. (1990). The illusion of reality: A review and integration of
psychological research on hallucinations. Psychological Bulletin,
107, 82-95.
Benton, A. L. (1968). Differential behavioral effects in frontal lobe
disease. Neuropsychologia, 6, 53-60.
Biederman, I. (1987). Recognition-by-components: A theory of human
image understanding. Psychological Review, 94, 115-147.
Bransford, J. D, & Franks, J. J. (1971). The abstraction of linguistic
ideas. Cognitive Psychology, 2, 331-350.
Bransford, J. D., Franks, J. J., Morris, C. D., & Stein, B. S. (1979). Some
general constraints on learning and memory research. In L. S. Cer-
mak & F. I. M. Craik (Eds.), Levels of processing in human memory
(pp. 331-354). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Brenner, M. (1973). The next-in-line effect. Journal of Verbal Learning
and Verbal Behavior, 12, 320-323.
Brown, A. S., & Murphy, D. R. (1989). Cryptomnesia: Delineating in-
advertent plagiarism. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 15, 432-442.Brown, J., & Brown, M. W (1990). The effects of repeating a recogni-
tion test in Lorazepam-induced amnesia: Evidence for impaired con-
textual memory as a cause of amnesia. Quarterly Journal of Experi-
mental Psychology, 42A, 279-290.
Burke, D. M., & Light, L. L. (1981). Memory and aging: The role of
retrieval processes. Psychological Bulletin, 90, 513-546.
Cave, C. B., & Squire, L. R. (1991). Equivalent impairment of spatial
and nonspatial memory following damage to the human hippocam-
pus. Hippocampus, 1, 329-340.
Ceci, S. 1, & Bruck. M. (1993). The suggestibility of the child witness:
A historical review and synthesis. Psychological Bulletin, 113, 403-
439.
Ceci, S. J., Ross, D. F, &Toglia, M. P. (1987). Suggestibility of children's
memory: Psychological implications. Journal of Experimental Psy-
chology: General, 116, 38-49.
Chaiken, S., Lieberman, A., & Eagly, A. H. (1989). Heuristic and sys-
tematic information processing within and beyond the persuasion
context. In J. S. Uleman & J. A. Bargh (Eds.), Unintended thought (pp.
212-252). New York: Guilford Press.
Chandler, C. C. (1991). How memory for an event is influenced by
related events: Interference in modified recognition tests. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 17,
115-125.
Chase, W G., & Simon, H. A. (1973). Perception in chess. Cognitive
Psychology, 4, 55-81.
Cohen, G., & Faulkner, D. (1989). Age differences in source forgetting:
Effects on reality monitoring and on eyewitness testimony. Psychol-
ogy and Aging, 4, 10-17.
Corbett, A. T, & Dosher, B. A. (1978). Instrument inferences in sen-
tence encoding. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 17.
479-481.
Craik, F. I. M. (1984). Age differences in remembering. In L. R. Squire
& N. Butters (Eds.), Neumpsychology of memory (pp. 3-12). New
York: Guilford Press.
Craik, F. I. M. (1989). On the making of episodes. In H. L. Roediger III
& F. I. M. Craik (Eds.), Varieties of memory and consciousness: Essays
in honour ofEndel Tulving (pp. 43-57). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Craik, F. I. M., & Kirsner, K. (1974). The effects of speaker's voice on
word recognition. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 26,
274-284.
Craik, F. I. M., Morris, L. W, Morris, R. G., & Loewen, E. R. (1990).
Relations between source amnesia and frontal lobe functioning in
older adults. Psychology and Aging, 5, 148-151.
Cramer, P. (1965). Recovery of a discrete memory. Journal of Personal-
ity and Social Psychology, 1, 326-332.
Damasio, A. R., Graff-Radford, N. R., Eslinger, P. J., Damasio, H., &
Kassell, N. (1985). Amnesia following basal forebrain lesions. Ar-
chives of Neurology, 42, 263-271.
Deese, J. (1959). On the prediction of occurrence of particular verbal
intrusions in immediate recall. Journal of Experimental Psychology,
58, 17-22.
Dodson, C. S., & Johnson, M. K. (in press). The rate of false source
attributions depends on how questions are asked. American Journal
of Psychology.
Dominowski, R. L., & Ekstrand, B. R. (1967). Direct and associative
priming in anagram solving. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 74,
84-86.
Dosher, B. A. (1984). Degree of learning and retrieval speed: Study
time and multiple exposures. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 10, 541-574.
Durso, F. T, & Johnson, M. K. (1980). The effects of orienting tasks on
recognition, recall, and modality confusion of pictures and words.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 19, 416-429.
Durso, F. T, Reardon, R., & Jolly, E. J. (1985). Self-nonself-segregation

SOURCE MONITORING 23
and reality monitoring. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
48, 447-455.
Durso, F. T., Reardon, R., Shore, W J., & Delys, S. M. (1991). Memory
processes and hypochondriacal tendencies. Journal of Nervous and
Mental Disease, 179, 279-283.
Dywan, J., & Jacoby, L. (1990). Effects of aging on source monitoring:
Differences in susceptibility to false fame. Psychology and Aging, 5,
379-387.
Eich, J. E. (1980). The cue-dependent nature of state-dependent re-
trieval. Memory & Cognition, 8, 157-173.
Eich, E. (1984). Memory for unattended events: Remembering with
and without awareness. Memory & Cognition, 12,105- 111.
Eich, E., & Metcalfe, J. (1989). Mood dependent memory for internal
versus external events. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learn-
ing, Memory, and Cognition, 15, 443-455.
Ferguson, S., Hashtroudi, S., & Johnson, M. K. (1992). Age differences
in using source-relevant cues. Psychology and Aging, 7, 443-452.
Finke, R. A., Johnson, M. K., & Shyi, G. C.-W (1988). Memory confu-
sions for real and imagined completions of symmetrical visual pat-
terns. Memory & Cognition, 16,133-137.
Fisher, R. P., & Cuervo, A. (1983). Memory for physical features of
discourse as a function of their relevance. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Human Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 9,130-138.
Flavell, J. H. (1985). Cognitive development (2nd ed.). Englewood Cliffs,
NJ: Prentice Hall.
Foley, M. A., Aman, C, & Gutch, D. (1987). Discriminating between
action memories: Children's use of kinesthetic cues and visible con-
sequences. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 44, 335-347.
Foley, M. A., Durso, F. T., Wilder, A., & Freidman, R. (1991). Develop-
mental comparisons of explicit versus implicit imagery and reality
monitoring. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 51, 1-13.
Foley, M. A., & Johnson, M. K. (1985). Confusion between memories
for performed and imagined actions. Child Development, 56,1145-
1155.
Foley, M. A., Johnson, M. K., & Raye, C. L. (1983). Age-related changes
in confusion between memories for thoughts and memories for
speech. Child Development, 54, 51-60.
Foley, M. A., Santini, C., & Sopasakis, M. (1989). Discriminating be-
tween memories: Evidence for children's spontaneous elaborations.
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 48, 146-169.
Gardiner, J. M. (1989). A generation effect in memory without aware-
ness. British Journal of Psychology, 80, 163-168.
Geiselman, R. E., & Belleza, F. S. (1976). Long-term memory for
speaker's voice and source location. Memory & Cognition, 4, 483-
489.
Geiselman, R. E., & Belleza, F. S. (1977). Incidental retention of
speaker's voice. Memory & Cognition, 5, 658-665.
Gentner, D. (1988). Analogical inference and analogical access. In A.
Prieditis (Ed.), Analogica (pp. 63-88). Los Altos, CA: Morgan Kauf-
mann.
Gerrig, R. J., & Prentice, D. A. (1990). The incorporation of fictional
information into real-world knowledge. Unpublished manuscript.
Gerrig, R. J., & Prentice, D. A. (1991). The representation of fictional
information. Psychological Science, 2, 336-340.
Gillund, G., & Shiffrin, R. M. (1984). A retrieval model for both recog-
nition and recall. Psychological Review, 91,1-67.
Godden, D. R., & Baddeley, A. D. (1975). Context-dependent memory
in two natural environments: On land and underwater. British Jour-
nal of Psychology, 66, 325-331.
Graf, P., & Mandler, G. (1984). Activation makes words more accessi-
ble, but not necessarily more retrievable. Journal of Verbal Learning
and Verbal Behavior, 23, 553-568.
Graf, P., Shimamura, A. R, & Squire, L. R. (1985). Priming across
modalities and priming across category levels: Extending the do-main of preserved function in amnesia. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 11, 386-396.
Graf, P., Squire, L. R., & Mandler, G. (1984). The information that
amnesic patients do not forget. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 10, 164-178.
Guttentag, R. E., & Hunt, R. R. (1988). Adult age differences in mem-
ory for imagined and performed actions. Journal ofGerontology, 43,
107-108.
Hanley, G. L., & Collins, V L. (1989). Metamemory judgments of the
origin and content of course information: Comparing text and lec-
ture materials. Journal of Educational Psychology, 81, 3-8.
Harvey, P. D. (1985). Reality monitoring in mania and schizophrenia:
The association of thought disorder and performance. Journal of
Nervous and Mental Disease, 173, 67-73.
Hasher, L., Goldstein, D., & Toppino, T. (1977). Frequency and the
conference of referential validity. Journal o/Verbal Learning and Ver-
bal Behavior, 16, 107-112.
Hasher, L., & Griffin, M. (1978). Reconstructive and reproductive pro-
cesses in memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Learning and Memory, 4, 318-330.
Hasher, L., & Zacks, R. T. (1979). Automatic and effortful processes in
memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 108, 356-
388.
Hashtroudi, S., Ferguson, S. A., Rappold, V A., & Chrosniak, L. D.
(1988). Data-driven and conceptually driven processes in partial-
word identification and recognition. Journal of Experimental Psy-
chology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 14, 749-757.
Hashtroudi, S., Johnson, M. K., & Chrosniak, L. D. (1989). Aging and
source monitoring. Psychology and Aging, 4, 106-112.
Hashtroudi, S., Johnson, M. K., & Chrosniak, L. D. (1990). Aging and
qualitative characteristics of memories for perceived and imagined
complex events. Psychology and Aging, 5, 119-126.
Heaton, R. K. (1981). A manual for the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test.
Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources.
Hilgard, E. R. (1977). Controversies over consciousness and the rise of
cognitive psychology. Australian Psychologist, 12, 7-26.
Hintzman, D. L. (1988). Judgments of frequency and recognition mem-
ory in a multiple-trace memory model. Psychological Review, 95,
528-551.
Hintzman, D. L., Block, R. A., & Inskeep, N. R. (1972). Memory for
mode of input. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 11,
741-749.
Hintzman, D. L., Block, R. A., & Summers, J. J. (1973). Contextual
associations and memory for serial position. Journal of Experimen-
tal Psychology, 97, 220-229.
Hirst, W (1982). The amnesic syndrome: Descriptions and explana-
tions. Psychological Bulletin, 91, 435-460.
Hirst, W (1989). On consciousness, recall, recognition, and the archi-
tecture of memory. In S. Lewandowsky, J. C. Dunn, & K. Kirsner
(Eds.), Implicit memory: Theoretical issues (pp. 33-46). Hillsdale,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Hirst, W, Johnson, M. K., Kim, J. K., Phelps, E. A., Risse, G., & Volpe,
B. T. (1986). Recognition and recall in amnesics. Journal of Experi-
mental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 12, 445-451.
Hirst, W, Johnson, M. K., Phelps, E. A., & Volpe, B. T. (1988). More on
recognition and recall in amnesia. Journal of Experimental Psychol-
ogy: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 14, 758-762.
Hirst, W, & Volpe, B. T. (1982). Temporal order judgments with amne-
sia. Brain and Cognition, 1, 294-306.
Hirst, W, & Volpe, B. T. (1984). Encoding of spatial relations with
amnesia. Neuropsychologia, 22, 631-634.
Hirt, E. R. (1990). Do I see only what I expect? Evidence for an expec-
tancy-guided retrieval model. Journal of Personality and Social Psy-
chology, 58,931-951.

24 M. JOHNSON, S. HASHTROUDI, AND S. LINDSAY
Horowitz, M. J. (1978). Image formation and cognition (2nd ed.). New
York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Hultsch, D. F, & Dixon, R. A. (1990). Learning and memory in aging.
In J. E. Birren & K. W Schaie (Eds.), Handbook of the psychology of
aging (3rd ed., pp. 258-274). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Huppert, F. A., & Piercy, M. (1976). Recognition memory in amnesic
patients: Effects of temporal context and familiarity of material.
Cortex, 12, 3-20.
Huppert, F. A., & Piercy, M. (1978). The role of trace strength in re-
cency and frequency judgments by amnesic and control subjects.
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 30, 347-354.
Intons-Peterson, M. J., & Smyth, M. M. (1987). The anatomy of reper-
tory memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Mem-
ory, and Cognition, 13, 490-500.
Intraub, H., & Hoffman, J. E. (1992). Reading and visual memory:
Remembering scenes that were never seen. American Journal of Psy-
chology, 105, 101-114.
Jacoby, L. L. (1983). Remembering the data: Analyzing interactive pro-
cesses in reading. Journal ofVerbal Learning and'Verbal Behavior, 22,
485-508.
Jacoby, L. L. (1991). A process dissociation framework: Separating
automatic from intentional uses of memory. Journal of Memory and
Language, 30, 513-541.
Jacoby, L. L., & Brooks, L. R. (1984). Nonanalytic cognition: Memory,
perception, & concept learning. In G. H. Bower (Ed.), The psychol-
ogy of learning and motivation: Advances in research and theory (Vol.
18, pp. 1-47). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Jacoby, L. L., & Dallas, M. (1981). On the relationship between autobio-
graphical memory and perceptual learning. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General, 110, 306-340.
Jacoby, L. L., & Kelley, C. M. (1990). An episodic view of motivation:
Unconscious influences of memory. In E. T. Higgins & R. M.
Sorrentino (Eds.), Handbook of motivation and cognition: Founda-
tions of social behavior (Vol. 2, pp. 451-481). New York: Guilford
Press.
Jacoby, L. L., & Kelley, C. M. (1992). Unconscious influences of mem-
ory: Dissociations and automaticity. In D. Milner & M. Rugg (Eds.),
Theneumpsychology of'consciousness(pp. 201-233). San Diego, CA:
Academic Press.
Jacoby, L. L., Kelley, C., Brown, J., & Jasechko, J. (1989). Becoming
famous overnight: Limits on the ability to avoid unconscious influ-
ences of the past. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 56,
326-338.
Jacoby, L. L., Kelley, C. M., & Dywan, J. (1989). Memory attributions.
In H. L. Roediger & F. I. M. Craik (Eds.), Varieties of memory and
consciousness: Essays in honour of Endel Tulving (pp. 391-422).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Jacoby, L. L., & Whitehouse, K. (1989). An illusion of memory: False
recognition influenced by unconscious perception. Journal of Exper-
imental Psychology: General, 118, 126-135.
Jacoby, L. L., Woloshyn, V, & Kelley, C. (1989). Becoming famous with-
out being recognized: Unconscious influences of memory produced
by dividing attention. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
118, 115-125.
Janowsky, J. S., Shimamura, A. P., & Squire, L. R. (1989). Source mem-
ory impairment in patients with frontal lobe lesions. Neuropsycholo-
gia, 27. 1043-1056.
Johnson, M. K. (1983). A multiple-entry, modular memory system. In
G. H. Bower (Ed.), The psychology of learning and motivation (Vol.
17, pp. 81-123). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Johnson, M. K. (1985). The origin of memories. In P. C. Kendall (Ed.),
Advances in cognitive-behavioral research and therapy (Vol. 4, pp.
1-26). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Johnson, M. K. (1988a). Discriminating the origin of information. InT. F. Oltmanns, & B. A. Maher(Eds.), Delusional beliefs (pp. 34-65).
New York: Wiley.
Johnson, M. K. (1988b). Reality monitoring: An experimental pheno-
menological approach. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Gen-
eral, 117, 390-394.
Johnson, M. K. (1990). Functional forms of human memory. In J. L.
McGaugh, N. M. Weinberger, & G. Lynch (Eds.), Brain organization
and memory: Cells, systems and circuits (pp. 106-134), New York:
Oxford University Press.
Johnson, M. K. (1991 a). Reality monitoring: Evidence from confabula-
tion in organic brain disease patients. In G. P. Prigatano & D. L.
Schacter (Eds.), Awareness of deficit after brain injury: Clinical and
theoretical issues (pp. 176-197). New York: Oxford University Press.
Johnson, M. K. (199lb). Reflection, reality monitoring and the self. In
R. Kunzendorf (Ed.). Mental imagery: Proceedings of the Eleventh
Annual Conference of the American Association for the Study of Men-
tal Imagery (pp. 3-16). New York: Plenum Press.
Johnson, M. K. (1992). MEM: Mechanisms of recollection. Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 4, 268-280.
Johnson, M. K., Bransford, J. D.,& Solomon, S. K. (1973). Memory for
tacit implications of sentences. Journal of Experimental Psychology,
98, 203-205.
Johnson, M. K., & Foley, M. A. (1984). Differentiating fact from fan-
tasy: The reliability of children's memory. Journal of Social Issues,
40(2), 33-50.
Johnson, M. K., Foley, M. A., & Leach, K. (1988). The consequences
for memory of imagining in another person's voice. Memory & Cog-
nition, 16, 337-342.
Johnson, M. K.. Foley, M. A., Suengas, A. G., & Raye, C L. (1988).
Phenomenal characteristics of memories for perceived and imag-
ined autobiographical events. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
General, 7/7,371-376.
Johnson, M. K., & Hirst, W(1991). Processing subsystems of memory.
In R. G. Lister & H. J. Weingartner (Eds.), Perspectives on cognitive
neitroscience (pp. 197-217). New York: Oxford University Press.
Johnson, M. K., & Hirst, W (in press). MEM: Memory subsystems as
processes. In A. Collins, M. Conway, S. Gathercole, & P. Morris
(Eds.), Theories of memory. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Johnson, M. K., Hirst, W, Phelps, E. A., Multhaup, K. S., & Volpe, B.
(1992). Source monitoring and amnesia. Manuscript in preparation.
Johnson, M. K., Kahan, T. L., & Raye, C. L. (1984). Dreams and reality
monitoring. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 113, 329-
344.
Johnson, M. K., Kim, J. K., & Risse, G. (1985). Do alcoholic Korsa-
koff's syndrome patients acquire affective reactions? Journal of Ex-
perimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 11,22-36.
Johnson, M. K., Kounios, J., & Reeder, J. A. (1992, November). Time
course studies of reality monitoring and recognition. Paper presented
at the 33rd annual meeting of the Psychonomic Society, St. Louis,
MO.
Johnson, M. K., & Multhaup, K. S. (1992). Emotion and MEM. In S.-A.
Christiansen (Ed.), The handbook of emotion and memory: Current
research and theory (pp. 33-66). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Johnson, M. K., & Raye, C. L. (1981). Reality monitoring. Psychologi-
cal Review, 88, 67-85.
Johnson, M. K., Raye, C. L., Foley, H. J., & Foley, M. A. (1981). Cogni-
tive operations and decision bias in reality monitoring. American
Journal of Psychology, 94, 37-64.
Johnson, M. K., Raye, C. L., Foley, M. A., & Kim, J. K. (1982). Pictures
and images: Spatial and temporal information compared. Bulletin of
the Psychonomic Society, 19, 23-26.
Johnson, M. K., Raye, C. L., Wang, A. Y, & Taylor, T. H. (1979). Fact
and fantasy: The roles of accuracy and variability in confusing imagi-

SOURCE MONITORING 25
nations with perceptual experiences. Journal of Experimental Psy-
chology: Human Learning and Memory, 5, 229-240.
Johnson, M. K., & Sherman, S. J. (1990). Constructing and recon-
structing the past and the future in the present. In E. T. Higgins, &
R. M. Sorrentino (Eds.), Handbook of motivation and cognition:
Foundations of social behavior (pp. 482-526). New York: Guilford
Press.
Kahan, T. L., & Johnson, M. K. (1990). Memory for seen and imagined
rotations of alphanumeric characters. Journal of Mental Imagery, 14,
119-130.
Kahan, T. L., & Johnson, M. K. (1992). Self effects in memory for
person information. Social Cognition, 10(1), 30-50.
Kapur, N., & Coughlan, A. K. (1980). Confabulation and frontal lobe
dysfunction. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry, 43,
461-463.
Kausler, D. H., Lichty, W, & Freund, J. S. (1985). Adult age differences
in recognition memory and frequency judgments for planned versus
performed activities. Developmental Psychology, 21, 647-654.
Kausler, D. H., & Puckett, J. M. (1980). Adult age differences in recog-
nition memory for a nonsemantic attribute. Experimental Aging Re-
search, 6, 349-355.
Kausler, D. H., & Puckett, J. M. (1981). Adult age differences in mem-
ory for sex of voice. Journal of Gerontology, 36, 44-50.
Kelley, C. M., & Jacoby, L. L. (1990). The construction of subjective
experience: Memory attributions. Mind and Language, 5, 49-68.
Kelley, C. M., & Jacoby, L. L. (1993). Past experience spoils judgments
of problem difficulty: Analytic vs. nonanalytic bases for judgments.
Manuscript in preparation.
Kelley, C. M., Jacoby, L. L., & Hollingshead, A. (1989). Direct versus
indirect tests of memory for source: Judgments of modality. Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 15,
1101-1108.
Kelley, C. M., & Lindsay, D. S. (1993). Remembering mistaken for
knowing: Ease of retrieval as a basis for confidence in answers to
general knowledge questions. Journal of Memory and Language, 32,
1-24.
Kihlstrom, J. F. (1980). Posthypnotic amnesia for recently learned ma-
terial: Interactions with "episodic" and "semantic" memory. Cogni-
tive Psychology, 12, 227-251.
Kirsner, K. (1974). Modality differences in recognition memory for
words and their attributes. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 102,
579-584.
Kirsner, K., & Smith, M. C. (1974). Modality effects in word identifica-
tion. Memory & Cognition, 2, 637-640.
Kolers, P. A. (1976). Reading a year later. Journal of Experimental Psy-
chology: Human Learning and Memory, 2, 554-565.
Kolers, P. A., & Roediger, H. L., Ill (1984). Procedures of mind. Journal
of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 23, 425-449.
Kopelman, M. D. (1989). Remote and autobiographical memory, tem-
poral context memory and frontal atrophy in Korsakoff and Alz-
heimer patients. Neuropsychologia, 27, 437-460.
Kubovy, M. (1977). Response availability and the apparent spontaneity
of numerical choices. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human
Perception and Performance, 3, 359-364.
Kunst-Wilson, W R., & Zajonc, R. B. (1980). Affective discrimination
of stimuli that cannot be recognized. Science, 207, 557-558.
Kunzendorf, R. G. (1985-1986). Hypnotic hallucinations as "unmoni-
tored" images: An empirical study. Imagination, Cognition and Per-
sonality, 5, 255-270.
Light, L. L., & Singh, A. (1987). Implicit and explicit memory in young
and older adults. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning,
Memory, and Cognition, 13, 531-541.
Light, L. L., & Zelinski, E. M. (1983). Memory for spatial information
in young and old adults. Developmental Psychology, 19, 901-906.Lindsay, D. S. (1990). Misleading suggestions can impair eyewitnesses'
ability to remember event details. Journal of Experimental Psychol-
ogy: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 16, 1077-1083.
Lindsay, D. S. (in press). Memory source monitoring and eyewitness
testimony. In D. F. Ross, J. D. Read, & M. P. Toglia (Eds.), Adult
eyewitness testimony: Current trends and developments.
Lindsay, D. S., & Johnson, M. K. (1987). Reality monitoring and sug-
gestibility: Children's ability to discriminate among memories from
different sources. In S. J. Ceci, M. P. Toglia, & D. F. Ross (Eds.),
Children's eyewitness memory (pp. 92-121). New York: Springer-Ver-
lag.
Lindsay, D. S., & Johnson, M. K. (1989). The eyewitness suggestibility
effect and memory for source. Memory & Cognition, 17, 349-358.
Lindsay, D. S., & Johnson, M. K. (1991). Recognition memory and
source monitoring. Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society, 29,203-205.
Lindsay, D. S., Johnson, M. K., & Kwon, P. (1991). Developmental
changes in memory source monitoring. Journal of Experimental
Child Psychology, 52, 297-318.
Loftus, E. F. (1979a). Eyewitness testimony. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Loftus, E. F. (1979b). Reactions to blatantly contradictory information.
Memory & Cognition, 7, 368-374.
Loftus, E. E, Donders, K., Hoffman, H. G., & Schooler, J. W (1989).
Creating new memories that are quickly accessed and confidently
held. Memory & Cognition, 17, 607-616.
Mandler, G. (1980). Recognizing: The judgment of previous occur-
rence. Psychological Review, 87, 252-271.
Mandler, G. (1991). Your face looks familiar but 1 can't remember your
name: A review of dual process theory. In W E. Hockley & S. Lewan-
dowsky (Eds.), Relating theory and data: Essays on human memory in
honor of Bennet B. Murdoch (pp. 207-225). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Mandler, G., Nakamura, Y, & Van Zandt, B. J. S. (1987). Nonspecific
effects of exposure on stimuli that cannot be recognized. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 13,
646-648.
Markham, R. (1991). Development of reality monitoring for per-
formed and imagined actions. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 72,1347-
1354.
Masson, M. E. J. (1989). Fluent reprocessing as an implicit expression
of memory for experience. In S. Lewandowsky, J. C. Dunn, & K.
Kirsner (Eds.), Implicit memory: Theoretical issues (pp. 123-138).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Mayes, A. R. (1988). Human organic memory disorders. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
Mayes, A. R. (1992). What are the functional deficits that underlie
amnesia? In L. R. Squire & N. Butters (Eds.), Neuropsychology of
memory (2nd ed., pp. 23-35). New York: Guilford Press.
Mayes, A. R., Meudell, P. R., & MacDonald, C. (1991). Disproportion-
ate intentional spatial-memory impairments in amnesia. Neuropsy-
chologia, 29, 771-784.
Mayes, A. R., Meudell, P. R.,& Pickering, A. (1985). Is organic amnesia
caused by a selective deficit in remembering contextual informa-
tion? Cortex, 21, 167-202.
McCloskey, M., & Zaragoza, M. (1985). Postevent information and
memory: Reply to Loftus, Schooler, and Wagenaar. Journal of Exper-
imental Psychology: General, 114, 381-387.
Mclntyre, J. S., & Craik, F. I. M. (1987). Age differences in memory for
item and source information. Canadian Journal of Psychology, 41,
175-192.
Menzel,E.W,& Johnson, M. K. (1976). Communication and cognitive
organization in humans and other animals. In S. R. Harnad, H. D.
Steklis, & J. Lancaster (Eds.), Annals of the New York Academy of
Sciences: Vol. 280. Origins and evolution of language and speech (pp.
131-142). New York: New York Academy of Sciences.

26 M. JOHNSON, S. HASHTROUDI, AND S. LINDSAY
Meudell, P. R., Mayes, A. R., Ostergaard, A., & Pickering, A. (1985).
Recency and frequency judgements in alcoholic amnesics and nor-
mal people with poor memory. Cortex, 21, 487-511.
Miller, G. A., Galanter, E., & Pribram, K. H. (1960). Plans and the
structure of behavior. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Milner, B. (1970). Memory and the medial temporal regions of the
brain. In K. H. Pribram & D. E. Broadbent (Eds.), Biology of memory
(pp. 29-50). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Milner, B. (1971). Interhemispheric differences in the localization of
psychological processes in man. British Medical Bulletin, 27, 272-
277.
Milner, B., Petrides, M., & Smith, M. L. (1985). Frontal lobes and the
temporal organization of memory. Human Neurobiology, 4, 137-
142.
Mishkin, M. A. (1982). A memory system in the monkey. Philosophical
Transaction of the Royal Society of London, 298B, 85-95.
Mitchell, D. B., Hunt, R. R., & Schmitt, F. A. (1986). The generation
effect and reality monitoring: Evidence from dementia and normal
aging. Journal of Gerontology, 41, 79-84.
Moscovitch, M. (1989). Confabulation and the frontal systems: Strate-
gic versus associative retrieval in neuropsychological theories of
memory. In H. L. Roediger III & F. I. M. Craik (Eds.), Varieties of
memory and consciousness: Essays in honour of Endel Tulving (pp.
133-160). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Neely, J. H., & Payne, D. G. (1983). A direct comparison of recognition
failure rates for recallable names in episodic and semantic memory
tests. Memory & Cognition, 11, 161-171.
Norman, D. A., & Shallice, T. (1986). Attention to action: Willed and
automatic control of behavior. In R. J. Davidson, G. E. Schwartz, &
D. Shapiro (Eds.), Consciousness and self-regulation (Vol. 4, pp.
1-18). New York: Plenum Press.
Oltmanns, T. F., & Maher, B. A. (Eds.). (1988). Delusional beliefs. New
York: Wiley.
Olton, D. S. (1989). Inferring psychological dissociations from experi-
mental dissociations: The temporal context of episodic memory. In
H. L. Roediger III & F. I. M. Craik (Eds.), Varieties of memory and
consciousness: Essays in honour of Endel Tulving (pp. 161-177).
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Park, D. C, Puglisi, J. X, & Lutz, R. (1982). Spatial memory in older
adults: Effects of \nten\\or\n\ity.JournalofGerontology, 37, 330-335.
Perky, C. W (1910). An experimental study of imagination. American
Journal of Psychology, 21, 422-452.
Perlmutter, M., Metzger, R., Nezworski, X, & Miller, K. (1981). Spatial
and temporal memory in 20 and 60 year olds. Journal ofGerontology,
36. 59-65.
Pickering, A., Mayes, A. R., & Fairbairn, A. F. (1989). Amnesia and
memory for modality information. Neuropsychologia, 27, 1249-
1259.
Posner, M. I., & Snyder, C. R. R. (1975). Attention and cognitive con-
trol. In R. L. Solso (Ed.), Information processing and cognition: The
Loyola symposium (pp. 55-85). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Potts, G. R., & Peterson, S. B. (1985). Incorporation versus compart-
mentalization in memory for discourse. Journal of Memory and Lan-
guage, 24, 107-118.
Potts, G. R., St. John, M. F, & Kirson, D. (1989). Incorporating new
information into existing world knowledge. Cognitive Psychology,
21, 303-333.
Pratkanis, A. R., Greenwald, A. G., Leippe, M. R., & Baumgardner,
M. H. (1988). In search of reliable persuasion effects: III. The sleeper
effect is dead. Long live the sleeper effect. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 54, 203-218.
Rabinowitz, J. C. (1989). Judgments of origin and generation effects:
Comparisons between young and elderly adults. Psychology and Ag-
ing, 4, 259-268.Rappold, V A., & Hashtroudi, S. (1991). Does organization improve
priming? Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition, 17, 103-114.
Raye, C. L. (1976). Recognition: Frequency or organization? American
Journal of Psychology, 89, 645-658.
Raye, C. L., & Johnson, M. K. (1980). Reality monitoring vs. discrimi-
nating between external sources of memories. Bulletin of the Psy-
chonomic Society, 15, 405-408.
Raye, C. L., Johnson, M. K., & Taylor, X H. (1980). Is there something
special about memory for internally generated information? Mem-
ory & Cognition, 8, 141-148.
Reed, A. V (1973). Speed-accuracy trade-off in recognition memory.
Science, 181, 574-576.
Richardson-Klavehn, A., & Bjork, R. A. (1988). Measures of memory.
Annual Review of Psychology, 39, 475-543.
Roediger, H. L., Ill, & Blaxton, T. A. (1987a). Effects of varying modal-
ity, surface features, and retention interval on priming in word-frag-
ment completion. Memory & Cognition, 15, 379-388.
Roediger, H. L., Ill, & Blaxton, T. A. (1987b). Retrieval modes produce
dissociations in memory for surface information. In D. S. Gorfein &
R. R. Hoffman (Eds.), Memory and learning: The Ebbinghaus centen-
nial conference (pp. 349-379). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Roediger, H. L., Ill, Weldon, M. S., &ChaIlis, B. H. (1989). Explaining
dissociations between implicit and explicit measures of retention: A
processing account. In H. L. Roediger III & F. I. M. Craik (Eds.),
Varieties of memory and consciousness: Essays in honour of Endel
Tulving (pp. 3-41). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Ross, D. F, Read, J. D, & Toglia, M. P. (Eds.), (in press). Adult eyewit-
ness testimony: Current trends and developments.
Ross, M. (1989). Relation of implicit theories to the construction of
personal histories. Psychological Review, 96, 341-357.
Rothkopf, E. Z. (1971). Incidental memory for location of information
in text. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 10, 608-613.
Rovee-Collier, C, & Hayne, H. (1987). Reactivation of infant memory:
Implications for cognitive development. In H. W Reese (Ed.), Ad-
vances in child development andbehavior (Vol. 20, pp. 185-238). San
Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Rubin, D. C. (Ed.). (1986). Autobiographical memory. New York: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Sagar, H. J., Cohen, N. J., Sullivan, E. V, Corkin, S., & Growdon, J. H.
(1988). Remote memory function in Alzheimer's disease and Par-
kinson's disease. Brain, III, 185-206.
Sagar, H. J., Downes, J., & Mayes, A. (1991, July). Dissociations among
processes of temporal order judgment. Paper presented at the Interna-
tional Conference on Memory, Lancaster University, Lancaster,
U.K.
Sagar, H. J., Gabrieli, J. D. E., Sullivan, E. V, & Corkin, S. (1990).
Recency and frequency discrimination in the amnesic patient H.M.
Brain, 113, 581-602.
Sagar, H. J., Sullivan, E. V, Gabrieli, J. D. E., Corkin, S., & Growdon,
J. H. (1988). Xemporal ordering and short-term memory deficits in
Parkinson's disease. Brain, 111, 525-539,
Schacter, D. L. (1987a). Implicit memory: History and current status.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cogni-
tion, 13, 501-518.
Schacter, D. L. (1987b). Memory, amnesia, and frontal lobe dysfunc-
tion. Psychobiology, 15. 21-36.
Schacter, D. L., Harbluk, J. L., & McLachlan, D. R. (1984). Retrieval
without recollection: An experimental analysis of source amnesia.
Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 23, 593-611.
Schacter, D. L., Kaszniak, A. W, Kihlstrom, J. F, & Valdiserri, M.
(1991). The relation between source memory and aging. Psychology
and Aging, 6. 559-568.
Schacter, D. L., & Tulving, E. (1982). Memory, amnesia, and the epi-

SOURCE MONITORING 27
sodic/semantic distinction. In R. L. Isaacson & N. E. Spear (Eds.),
The expression of knowledge (pp. 33-65). New York: Plenum Press.
Schooler, J. W, & Engstler-Schooler, T. Y. (1990). Verbal overshadowing
of visual memories: Some things are better left unsaid. Cognitive
Psychology, 22,36-71.
Schooler, J. W, Gerhard, D., & Loftus, E. F. (1986). Qualities of the
unreal. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and
Cognition, 12, 171-181.
Seamon, J. G, Brody, N., & Kauff, D. M. (1983). Affective discrimina-
tion of stimuli that are not recognized: Effects of shadowing, mask-
ing, and cerebral laterality. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Hu-
man Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 9, 544-555.
Segal, S. J. (1970). Imaging and reality: Can they be distinguished? In
W Keup (Ed.), Origin and mechanisms of hallucinations (pp. 103-
113). New York: Plenum Press.
Shiffrin, R. M., & Schneider, W (1977). Controlled and automatic hu-
man information processing: II. Perceptual learning, automatic at-
tending, and a general theory. Psychological Review, 84, 127-190.
Shimamura, A. P. (1986). Priming effects in amnesia: Evidence for a
dissociable memory function. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psy-
chology, 38A, 619-644.
Shimamura, A. P. (1989). Disorders of memory: The cognitive science
perspective. In F. Boiler & J. Grafman (Eds.), Handbook ofneuropsy-
chology (Vol. 3, pp. 35-73). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Shimamura, A. P., Janowsky, J. S., & Squire, L. R. (1990). Memory for
the temporal order of events in patients with frontal lobe lesions and
amnesic patients. Neuropsychologia, 28, 803-813.
Shimamura, A. P., Janowsky, J. S., & Squire, L. R. (1991). What is the
role of frontal lobe damage in memory disorder? In H. S. Levin,
H. M. Eisenberg, & A. L. Benton (Eds.), Frontal lobe function and
injury (pp. 173-195). New York: Oxford University Press.
Shimamura, A. P., Jernigan, T. L., & Squire, L. R. (1988). KorsakofTs
syndrome: Radiological (CT) findings and neuropsychological cor-
relates. Journal of Neuroscience, 8, 4400-4410.
Shimamura, A. P., & Squire, L. R. (1987). A neuropsychological study
of fact memory and source amnesia. Journal of Experimental Psy-
chology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 13, 464-473.
Shimamura, A. P., & Squire, L. R. (1991). The relationship between fact
and source memory: Findings from amnesic patients and normal
subjects. Psychobiology, 19,1-10.
Shoqeirat, M. A., & Mayes, A. R. (1991). Disproportionate incidental
spatial-memory and recall deficits in amnesia. Neuropsychologia,
29, 749-769.
Slusher, M. P., & Anderson, C. A. (1987). When reality monitoring
fails: The role of imagination in stereotype maintenance. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 52, 653-662.
Smith, S. M., Glenberg, A., & Bjork, R. A. (1978). Environmental con-
text and human memory. Memory & Cognition, 6, 342-353.
Smith, M. C, & Milner, B. (1984). Differential effects of frontal-lobe
lesions on cognitive estimation and spatial memory. Neuropsycholo-
gia, 22, 697-705.
Smith, M. C., & Milner, B. (1989). Right hippocampal impairment in
the recall of spatial location: Encoding deficit or rapid forgetting?
Neuropsychologia, 27, 71-81.
Spear, N. E., & Mueller, C. W (1984). Consolidation as a function of
retrieval. In H. Weingartner& E. S. Parker (Eds.), Memory consolida-
tion: Psychobiology of cognition (pp. 111-147). Hillsdale, NJ: Erl-
baum.
Squire, L. R. (1982). Comparisons between forms of amnesia: Some
deficits are unique to KorsakofTs syndrome. Journal of Experimen-
tal Psychology: Human Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 8, 560-
571.Squire, L. R. (1987). Memory and brain. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Squire, L. R., Amaral, D. G., & Press, G. A. (1990). Magnetic resonance
imaging of the hippocampal formation and mammillary nuclei dis-
tinguish medial temporal lobe and diencephalic amnesia. Journal of
Neuroscience, 10, 3106-3117.
Squire, L. R., Nadel, L., & Slater, P. C. (1981). Anterograde amnesia and
memory for temporal order. Neuropsychologia, 19,141-145.
Stern, L. D. (1981). A review of theories of human amnesia. Memory &
Cognition, 9, 247-262.
Stuss, D. T, Alexander, M. P., Lieberman, A., & Levine, H. (1978). An
extraordinary form of confabulation. Neurology, 28, 1166-1172.
Stuss, D. T, & Benson, D. F. (1986). The frontal lobes. New York: Raven
Press.
Suengas, A. G., & Johnson, M. K. (1988). Qualitative effects of rehear-
sal on memories for perceived and imagined complex events. Jour-
nal of Experimental Psychology: General, 117, 377-389.
Talland, G. A. (1961). Confabulation in the Wernicke-Korsakoff syn-
drome. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 132, 361 -381.
Toth, J. P., & Hunt, R. R. (1990). Effect of generation on a word-identi-
fication task. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Mem-
ory, and Cognition, 16, 993-1003.
Tousignant, J. P., Hall, D., & Loftus, E. F. (1986). Discrepancy detection
and vulnerability to misleading postevent information. Memory &
Cognition, 14, 329-338.
Tulving, E. (1962). Subjective organization in free recall of "unrelated"
words. Psychological Review, 69, 344-354.
Tulving, E. (1983). Elements of episodic memory. Oxford, England:
Clarendon Press.
Tulving, E., & Schacter, D. L. (1990). Priming and human memory
systems. Science, 247, 301-306.
Tversky, B., & Tuchin, M. (1989). A reconciliation of the evidence on
eyewitness testimony: Comments on McCluskey and Zaragoza.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 118, 86-91.
Tzeng, O. J. L., Lee, A. T, & Wetzel, C. D. (1979). Temporal coding in
verbal information processing. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Learning and Memory, 5, 52-64.
Underwood, B. J. (1965). False recognition produced by implicit verbal
responses. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 70, 122-129.
Underwood, B. J., & Malmi, R. A. (1978). An evaluation of measures
used in studying temporal codes for words within a list. Journal of
Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 17, 279-293.
Voss, J. E, Vesonder, G. T, Post, T. A., & Ney, L. G. (1987). Was the item
recalled and if so by whom? Journal of Memory and Language, 26,
466-479.
Warrington, E. K., & Weiskrantz, L. (1968). New method of testing
long term retention with special references to amnesic patients. Na-
ture, 277,972-974.
Warrington, E. K., & Weiskrantz, L. (1970). Amnesic syndrome: Con-
solidation or retrieval? Nature, 228, 628-630.
Weiskrantz, L. (1986). Blindsight. Oxford, England: Clarendon Press.
Wells, G. L., & Loftus, E. F (Eds.). (1984). Eyewitness testimony: Psycho-
logical perspectives. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University
Press.
Whitlock, F. A. (1981). Some observations on the meaning of confabu-
lation. British Journal of Medicine Psychology, 54, 213-218.
Whitty, C. W M., & Lewin, W (1957). Vivid day-dreaming: An unusual
form of confusion following anterior cingulectomy. Brain, 80,72-76.
Whitty, C. W M., & Lewin, W (1960). A Korsakoff syndrome in the
post-cingulectomy confusional state. Brain, 83, 648-653.
Wickelgren, W A. (1977). Speed-accuracy tradeoff and information
processing dynamics. Ada Psychologica, 41, 67-85.

28 M. JOHNSON, S. HASHTROUDI, AND S. LINDSAY
Winograd, E. (1968). List differentiation, recall, and category similar-
ity. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 78, 510-515.
Woodruff, D. S. (1982). Advances in the psychophysiology of aging. In
F. I. M. Craik & S. Trehub (Eds.), Aging and cognitive processes (pp.
29-53). New York: Plenum Press.
Yantis, S., & Johnson, D. N. (1990). Mechanisms of attentional priority.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Pefor-
mance, 16, 812-825.
Zajonc, R. B. (1980). Feeling and thinking: Preferences need no infer-
ences. American Psychologist, 35, 151-175.
Zaragoza, M. S. (1991, June). Sourcemisattributions in eyewitness mem-
ory. Paper presented at the 3rd Annual Convention of the American
Psychological Society, Washington, DC.
Zaragoza, M. S., & Koshmider, J. W, III. (1989). Misled subjects may
know more than their performance implies. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 15, 246-255.
Zaragoza, M. S., & Lane, S. (1991, November). The role of attentionalresources in suggestibility and source monitoring. Paper presented at
the 32nd annual meeting of the Psychonomics Society, San Fran-
cisco.
Zaragoza, M. S., & Moore, K.. (1990, November). Sourcemisattribution
in eyewitness memory. Paper presented at the 31st annual meeting of
the Psychonomics Society, New Orleans, LA.
Zaragoza, M. S., & Muench, J. (1989, November). Source confusion
following exposure to misleading postevent information. Paper pre-
sented at the 30th annual meeting of the Psychonomics Society, At-
lanta, GA.
Zola-Morgan, S. M., & Squire, L. R. (1990). The primate hippocampal
formation: Evidence for a time-limited role in memory storage.
Science, 250, 288-290.
Received October 25,1991
Revision received October 1,1992
Accepted October 1,1992 •
AMERICAN PSYCHOLOGICAL ASSOCIATION
SUBSCRIPTION CLAIMS INFORMATION Today's Date:_
We provide this form to assist members, institutions, and nonmember individuals with any subscription problems. With the
appropriate information we can begin a resolution. If you use the services of an agent, please do NOT duplicate claims through
them and directly to us. PLEASE PRINT CLEARLY AND IN INK IF POSSIBLE.
PRINT FULL NAME OR KEY NAME OF INSTITUTION MEMBER ORCUSTOMER NUMBER (MAYBEFOUND ON ANYPAST ISSUE LABEL)
DATE YOUR ORDER WAS MAILED (OR PHONED)
.PREPAID _CHECK CHARGE
CHECK/CARD CLEARED DATE:_
CITY STATBCOUNTRY ZJP
YOUR NAME AND PHONE NUMBER
TITLE(If possible, send a copy, front and back, of your cancelled check to help us in our research
of your claim.)
ISSUES: MISSING DAMAGED
VOLUME OR YEAR NUMBER OR MONTH
Thank you. Once a claim is received and resolved, delivery of replacement issues routinely lakes 4-6 weeks.
—————— (TO BE FILLED OUT BY APA STAFF) ——-——
DATE RECEIVED:.
ACTION TAKEN: _
STAFF NAME:DATE OF ACTION: _
INV. NO. & DATE:
LABEL NO. & DATE:
Send this form to APA Subscription Claims, 750 First Street, NE, Washington, DC 20002-4242
PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE. A PHOTOCOPY MAY BE USED.