i 
NEURODIVERSITY AND EPISTEMIC JUSTICE: 
A THERAPEUTIC CONSILIENCE 
 
 
A DOCTORAL DISSERTATION SUBMITTED TO 
THE FACULTY OF ADLER UNIVERSITY, CHICAGO 
DEPARTMENT OF COUNSELING AND INTEGRATED PROGRAMS 
 
 
IN PARTIAL FULFILLMENT OF THE REQUIREMENTS FOR 
THE DEGREE OF 
DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY IN COUNSELOR EDUCATION AND SUPERVISION 
 
 
BY 
MORGAN A. KINNEY 
 
 
 
CHICAGO, ILLINOIS 
SEPTEMBER, 2023

ii 
NEURODIVERSITY AND EPISTEMIC JUSTICE: 
A THERAPEUTIC CONSILIENCE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copyright ©2023 
 
Morgan Andrew Kinney 
 
All rights reserved

iii 
Neurodiversity and Epistemic Injustice  
 
A Doctoral Dissertation 
 
Submitted to the Faculty of Adler University, Chicago Campus 
Department of Counseling and Integrated Programs 
 
In Partial Fulfillment of the Requirements for 
The Degree of 
Doctor of Philosophy in Counselor Education and Supervision 
Morgan Andrew Kinney 
 
 Approved by Dissertation Research Committee: 
 
  Tsui-Yee Chow, PhD    
Adler University, Chicago                           09/23 
  Dissertation Committee Chair              Affiliation  Date 
  Jennifer Bonino, PhD  Adler University, Chicago   09/23 
  Dissertation Committee Member              Affiliation  Date 
  Wendy Paszkiewicz, PsyD  Adler University, Chicago   09/23 
  Dissertation Committee Member              Affiliation  Date

iv 
Abstract 
Traditional models of psychopathology medicalize divergence from a narrow norm of 
well-being, while the neurodiversity movement advocates for recognizing 
neurocognitive diversity akin to other diﬀerences of culture, gender or sexuality. 
Medicalization can be an epistemic injustice when it obfuscates a marginalized groups’ 
unique strengths, ways of knowing, and paths to social success, damaging social 
credibility and depriving that community of adaptive self-understanding. The current 
study explored the subjective impact of a corrective training model based on an 
integrative “consilience” of four scientiﬁc meta-theories - gene-culture co-evolution, 
personality research, life history research and moral psychology. The model espoused 
that “normal neurodiversity” is present in most social animals: temperaments act as 
“social niche specializations” and create embodied traits that suit a subset of roles and 
environments. This creates a productive frame for neurodiversity as adaptive strengths 
connected to psychosocial tradeoffs and implicates a non-pathological view of distress: 
the need to align to a sustainable social niche as a source of mental resources and buﬀer 
against harmful psychosocial injuries. Directive content analysis was used to assess 
changes in beliefs and attitudes among participants using surveys given before and after 
the workshop. Nine participants completed the pre-workshop questionnaire and ﬁve 
completed the post-workshop questionnaire, with a demonstrated direction of change 
toward integrative, contextual, and functional views of neurodiversity, and generally 
favorable attitudes toward the workshop overall.

v 
Acknowledgements 
To Dr. Tsui-Yee Chow, who helped me get this across the ﬁnish line, I am grateful 
to have had your incisive guidance - from the beginning of my time at Adler, I’ve gained 
something from our every interaction. To Dr. John Beckenbach, who helped me launch 
this dissertation - without your generosity of spirit and vision, I couldn’t have found what 
I was trying to say. Thank you for having room in your story to help me share mine. To 
the rest of my committee - thank you for oﬀering your time, patience and experience. To 
Meghan Rivard, thanks for the continual help in running the study - you, more than 
most, really made this happen. 
To Dr. Fran Giordano, whose generous mentorship, collaboration and support has 
made these last few years possible. You have so much to give, and you took a risk giving 
some to me. I am eternally grateful for your helping me launch this chapter of my 
professional life. 
To my friend Ace Russell, who started his professional journey with me: we did a 
lot of healing together, and I couldn’t have done mine without you. I always value 
collaborating with you because the work feels urgent, and the job feels like a calling 
again. You remind me that this all began with a sense of mission. 
 To my clients: I am honored to consider you fellow travelers, and have been 
privileged to keep your company. You’ve made me who I am, and I carry your gifts with me 
wherever I go. Thank you for sharing with me, for letting me be a part of your journey, 
and for doing the work of giving pain meaning. You’ve helped me too, and through me, 
continue to help each other and your communities. I will keep paying it forward.

vi 
Dedication 
To my wife: You are my fork in the road, and I’m so glad to have taken you. Thank you for 
letting me take all these visions along with us, and for being the only road in the valley 
that led somewhere beautiful. It will always be for you. 
 
To my kids: Someday I hope you are as proud of me as I am of you. You are too young to 
know how much you mean to me, but someday I hope you ﬁnd this like a little 
breadcrumb trail to my heart. 
 
To my mother & sister: Every day I get one step further, I think “we did it.” You will always 
be my “we.” With love there shouldn’t need to be thanks, but this time there is. 
 
To my brother & my father: The people who don’t make it are the winds at our backs. 
You are my hurricane. 
 
For Whom The Bell Tolls  by John Donne 
No man is an island, / Entire of itself. / Each is a piece of the continent, / A part of the 
main. / If a clod be washed away by the sea, / Europe is the less. / As well as if a 
promontory were. / As well as if a manor of thine own / Or of thine friend's were. / Each 
man's death diminishes me, / For I am involved in mankind. / Therefore, send not to 
know / For whom the bell tolls, / It tolls for thee.

vii 
Table of Contents 
Section                                                                                                                                         Page 
List of Tables………………………………………………………………………………………………………….            viii 
List of Figures………………………………………………………………………………………………………...             ix 
Chapter I: Introduction…………………………………………………………………………………………..              1 
Chapter II: Review of the Literature………………………………………………………………………..            23 
Chapter III: Methodology……………………………………………………………………………………….          387 
Chapter IV: Results…………………………………………………………………………………………………          416 
Chapter V: Discussion…………………………………………………………………………………………….          463 
References…………………………………………………………………………………………………………….          549 
Appendices……………………………………………………………………………………………………………          640

viii 
List of Tables 
Tables                                                                                                                                          Page 
1. Personality traits and their cybernetic functions………………………..…………..          627 
2. Psychological routes to conservatism and liberalism………………………..….…           628 
3. ADHD & ASD as functionally opposing poles in the cognitive niches……...           629 
4. Age, Gender, Ethnicity & Neurodiversity status: Respondents who completed pre- 
and post-workshop questionnaire………………………………………..…………..…....           630 
5. Age, Gender, Ethnicity & Neurodiversity status: Respondents who completed the 
pre-workshop questionnaire only………………………………………………..………....           631 
6. Degree, Profession, Years of Experience and Theoretical Orientation: 
Respondents who completed pre- and post-workshop questionnaire..…           632 
7. Degree, Profession, Years of Experience and Theoretical Orientation: 
Respondents who completed the pre-workshop questionnaire only…....           633

ix 
List of Figures 
Figures                                                                                                                                       Pages 
1. Plotting meta-traits as opposing poles………………………………………………......          634 
2. Plotting life history strategies as a quadrant model…………………….……..…..          635 
3. Autism burnout model………………………………….……………………………………..…          636 
4. Visualizing complimentary cognition as a social change process……….…...          637 
5. Plotting the neurodiversity consilience as a quadrant model………….……...          638 
6. Revising the role of genes: life strategies & biosocial niches…………….…....          639

1 
CHAPTER I: OVERVIEW 
Introduction: Neurodiversity and Epistemic Ambiguity 
The neurodiversity concept was originated by Judith Singer (2017) in 1997 to 
speculate that a natural neurological diversity among humans might maintain a rich and 
healthy social ecosystem in an analogous way to the role of biodiversity in maintaining 
optimal planetary health (Blume, 1999; Doyle, 2020). The construct has been used to 
push back on the “abnormal psychology” perspective on diagnoses such as autism 
spectrum disorder (ASD) or attention-deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) as outlined 
by the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM 5-TR), seeing them not as diseases to be 
cured, but as emergent neurological proﬁles with valid ways of being and knowing in the 
world to be valued, included and respected (Armstrong, 2010; Doyle, 2020; Priscott & 
Allen, 2021; J. Singer, 2017). There are a variety of perspectives on the relationship of 
these diagnoses to the neurodiversity concept: some characterize neurodiversity as part 
of the normal distribution of human traits that can lead to unique proﬁles of struggle 
either in the extreme or under duress (Oller, 2019); others emphasize the mental health 
challenges of neurodiversity as coexisting among underexplored strengths and 
contributions (Armstrong, 2010); still others emphasize the more heightened proﬁle of 
trade-oﬀs between cognitive strengths and vulnerabilities as forms of cognitive 
specialization (Doyle, 2020). Currently the term is epistemically ambiguous, 
predominantly deﬁned by a resistance to the traditional medical framing of mental 
health psychopathology. ASD and ADHD are frequently centered in such conversations, 
but the list can range from learning disorders such as dyslexia or dyspraxia, to mental

2 
health disorders such as mood and psychotic disorders, and generally emphasizes 
inclusivity in a nebulous taxonomy that can vary by source. Each conception shares a 
resistance to the deﬁcit-based understanding of neurodiverse people as problems to be 
solved, and there is typically broad agreement that the problem is not reductive to 
individuals, but the absence of an accommodating society (i.e., the social model of 
disability; Armstrong, 2010; Chapman & Carel, 2021; Meadows, 2020; J. Singer, 2017; 
2021). 
However, while the individual frame is often etiologically resisted among 
neurodiversity advocates, few express skepticism that it is the best way to understand 
neurodiversity, with little discussion given to exploring what neurodiversity is outside of 
its association with pathological diagnoses, and a seeming widespread assumption that 
they are in fact one in the same even among advocates. For instance, autism, or 
autistics, are assumed to be the meaningful unit of understanding that “corner” of 
neurodiversity, and not some underlying diﬀerences of sub-clinical temperament, 
personality or neurological traits that are widely distributed and functional, of which 
autism or autistics would only be considered within as an emergent clinical 
manifestation of a deeper, normative logic. In fact, this framing is exactly what may 
characterize the conceptual topography of neurodiversity (Del Giudice, 2018; Oller, 
2019). Some actively resist further eﬀorts at scientiﬁc understanding for fear it would 
serve to reify social hierarchies and social Darwinist assumptions of intrinsic inequities 
(Chapman, 2021b; 2021c; Stenning & Rosqvist, 2021). Yet beyond the binary framing of 
individual problems versus social problems lies another issue: the lack of epistemic

3 
clarity around neurodiversity helps to maintain the crude pathological paradigms which 
perpetuate confusion between society and the neurodiverse. In other words, as 
Chapman and Carel (2021) pointed out, it is not the autism that causes pain or suﬀering, 
but how people think of autism that shapes a marginalizing, silencing and high-barrier 
environment for autistics; as well as how this “overproliferation of neurotypical 
signposts” (p. 14) inﬂuence how autistics think of themselves. This position considers the 
lack of well-framed information as preventing neuromajorities from understanding how 
they should relate to, and position themselves, regarding the neurominorities. It also 
considers how neurominorities should position themselves psychosocially in 
epistemically “hostile” environments, as both dimensions lead to disempowering social 
dynamics among the neurodiverse that might help provide the context for why 
neurodiversity might be associated with widespread mental health problems. 
Epistemic Injustice 
Miranda Fricker (2007) introduced the term epistemic injustice to address a 
unique form of disempowerment to epistemic agents in their capacity as “knower” [of 
the world] and [as someone who is] “known.” That is, marginalized communities may 
face two kinds of injustice. Testimonial injustice is where certain identities are silenced 
by working from a credibility deﬁcit that makes their knowledge, motives and authority 
suspect. Hermeneutical injustice is where the ability to be known and understood is 
constrained by the lack of hermeneutic (interpretive) understanding of a minoritized 
experience both by the minoritized group and the majority. The latter form of injustice 
works in part by creating a lack of resistance to oppression because words to describe

4 
the injustice do not exist and when they come into existence, they are not shared 
reference points by those in the majority (Kidd et al., 2017); for instance, imagine trying 
to describe racism or sexism in the 19th century. 
Epistemic Injustice and Mental Health 
The mental health ﬁeld has seen a variety of its labels act as epistemic injustices, 
from diagnoses of homosexuality, transgender or hysteria. With regard to hysteria, 
which was thought to be synonymous with female sexuality while being treated like a 
disease (Maines, 2001), feminist scholars now consider the condition to be both a 
reaction to, and reﬂection of, the oppressive social roles and station of women in the 
nineteenth century (Devereux, 2014; Gilman et al., 1993). In each example, the 
marginalized community is actively misunderstood and silenced by the pathological 
label: there is an inability by the marginalized group to shape the language to be true to 
their own experience (hermeneutical injustice) which leaves members unable to justify 
their suﬀering and distress to themselves and others; the imposition of a pathological 
understanding of this distress by the majority community is met without resistance by 
those who cannot articulate it to themselves, and the testimony of the marginalized 
group is discredited as impaired and suspect (testimonial injustice). Both hermeneutical 
and testimonial injustice can work together to perpetuate the dynamic, particularly as 
imposed knowledge is inherited by a disempowered minority as truthful and comes to 
reinforce the marginalized groups’ own questionable credibility and low station to 
themselves. Elsewhere, this dynamic has been called internalized oppression, a key 
factor in what makes oppressive systems work, which is inclusive of a variety of

5 
expressions such as internalized racism , internalized homophobia , and internalized 
sexism (David & Derthick, 2013). Thus, Fricker (2007) characterized multiple barriers in 
the dynamic of epistemic justice that a marginalized person or group must face to rise 
above its self-reinforcing nature: a) the inability to shape language in hermeneutical 
injustice creates a systematic barrier to self-understanding and self-knowledge by the 
minority community, and b) self-knowledge cannot spread when all members of the 
marginalized group suﬀer from poor testimonial credibility. When we add the dynamic 
of internalized oppression - that a dominant group can impose negative beliefs about a 
minoritized group that are adopted, internalized and accepted by the marginalized 
group (Rosenwasser, 2002) - then overcoming these dynamics involves at least three 
overwhelming eﬀorts: recognizing the dynamic, ﬁghting for others in the minority to 
hear and believe narratives of mistreatment, and then persisting until both the minority 
and majority to reevaluate their mutually-reinforcing beliefs despite strong investment 
in the existing social order. 
Mental health ﬁelds may unwittingly have a history of policing such barriers 
among marginalized groups of class, gender, sexuality, race, and now, neurodiversity, 
having been noted by sociologists that medicalization inherently carries these social 
control features, i.e. policing deviations from cultural norms (Conrad, 1992; Correia, 
2017). For instance, when social issues are reframed as individual problems, individuals 
become scapegoats for larger issues (David & Derthick, 2013; Ratts, 2009). By example, 
structural inconsistency describes the expectation of people in lower classes to pursue 
certain goals and interests by oﬃcially designated means, without providing the political

6 
and economic opportunities and resources to attain them (Mirowski & Ross, 1983); the 
result is systematic demotivation among lower classes that may see those individuals 
treated as depressed instead of (or perhaps, phenotypically identical to) their having a 
demoralizing awareness of the barriers implicit in their circumstance (see also: 
depressive realism ; Alloy & Abramson, 1988; Hanna et al., 2000). Said diﬀerently, people 
can “stop making sense” within a cultural frame when the dominant social narrative 
creates expectations that cannot be fulﬁlled by a particular subgroup, yet the reasons for 
failing to meet those expectations are also unjustiﬁable from within the narrative; some 
alternative and more stigmatizing explanation is usually oﬀered instead - moral defects, 
social judgments, inferiority narratives, and so forth - which is internalized and accepted 
by all. 
Scholars have found that the bioreductive assumptions of the medical model of 
psychopathology not only promotes such stigma among suﬀerers and neutral third 
parties (Lebowitz & Appelbaum, 2019; Rüsch et al., 2010a), it does so among mental 
health professionals as well (Larkings & Brown, 2018). These assumptions remain 
present in the current psychiatric consensus. For instance, the stress-diathesis model of 
mental illness assumes an environmental stressor serves to activate an intrinsic 
vulnerability, where the searching for the roots of these intrinsic vulnerabilities 
underpins the hunt for “pathology genes” in the psychiatric literature (Belsky et al., 
2009). In the evolutionary literature, carrying pathology genes would invoke social 
Darwinist schemas that hold defective alleles to be intrinsically maladaptive, with an 
implication of relative evolutionary inferiority of such carriers in the face of those with

7 
greater genetic ﬁtness (Albee, 2005; Keller, 2005; Stenning & Rosqvist, 2021). 
However, putting resistance to such ideas aside, even within these respective 
ﬁelds, there are other viable interpretations for the evidence along each link in the 
chain, including the role of the plastic brain (MacDuﬃe & Strauman, 2017a; 2017b), the 
role of plasticity genes and various forms of trade-oﬀs and mismatches (Belsky et al., 
2009; Del Giudice, 2018; Dobbs, 2012), and the role of evolution in creating universal 
vulnerability of mental health issues among social animals based on context and 
development, particularly as they face social and positional threats (Gilbert, 1989; 
1992a; 1992b; 2019; Johnstone & Boyle, 2018). 
A similar problem faces some evidence-based practices (EBPs) that are 
congruent with the medical model in the modality’s use of “speciﬁc ingredients” 
thought to target speciﬁc deﬁcits in the diagnosis. Cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT), 
for instance, has been singled out for the presumption that mental health suﬀering is 
predominantly a function of the intrinsic faultiness of a client’s thinking about their 
psychosocial problems. This sets up CBT to be a particularly egregious oﬀender of 
epistemic injustice, as discrediting the client’s testimony and pathologizing their way of 
knowing in advance is a core assumption of the therapy (Ratnayake, 2022). Ratnayake 
went on to suggest that the social science literature casts doubt on the theorized causal 
mechanism of CBT and may actually suggest the opposite to be true: well-adjusted 
people do not regulate their well-being through well-honed reason and rationale, but 
through a “delusional” positivity bias that is central to normal mental health functioning 
and motivation. Paul Gilbert (2009), creator of compassion-focused therapy (CFT) and

8 
author on several seminal texts on CBT, agrees with the failure of CBT to align with 
social science ﬁndings particularly with respect to social variables regarding adversity 
and resilience, eﬀectively taking clients out of the context of their life. In general, an 
accumulation of shows that contrary to the reputation of CBT as the default gold star 
evidence-based practice, Shedler (2018) suggested a systemic research bias toward 
CBT’s claims to eﬃcacy over the past years; there is evidence of a poor grounding with 
primary social science (Gilbert, 2009; Ratnayake, 2022); and there is a likely a small role 
(7%) of so-called “speciﬁc ingredients” entirely (Wampold & Imel, 2015). 
Irrespective of the medical model and EBPs speciﬁcally, an epistemic justice (EJ) 
frame may be of general signiﬁcance to therapy. Mental pain is inherently diﬃcult to 
articulate, understand and causally-attribute, nor is it intuitively clear what a social 
threat is or why they may prove unsustainable to mental well-being (Johnstone & Boyle, 
2018). A person or group that is discredited as a knower, or has no publicly-accessible 
narrative with which to articulate their position, is vulnerable to disempowerment, 
marginalization and helplessness as they can easily be targeted for their seemingly 
irrational behavior such as avoiding abstract social threats or idiosyncratic attempts to 
cope, which might creep across various roles, contexts and intersectional identities 
(Johnstone & Boyle, 2018; D. Rose, 2023). 
For instance, the Power-Threat-Meaning Framework (PTMF; Johnstone & Boyle, 
2018) oﬀers a counter-narrative to the medical model including 12 ways in which the 
negative use of power and social threats can be obscured in their etiological role in 
mental health disorders, creating pernicious eﬀects that ‘take place outside the realm of

9 
socially validated reality’ and become ‘unspeakable’ (Herman, 1992, p. 8) even to the 
suﬀerer. According to the PTMF, it is possible to understand the etiology of mental and 
emotional distress, yet complex, making suﬀering “intelligible.” Alternatively, being 
diagnosed with “mental illness” typically functions in the opposite way, with the “illness” 
construct acting as an intermediate construct to explain why suﬀering and coping 
responses do not make sense. This perpetuates testimonial injustice through the implicit 
invalidation of pain, and hermeneutical injustice by creating a public framework that 
assumes mental suﬀering is unintelligible to the self and others. “Epistemic violence” 
occurs when a disempowering discourse is imposed on a subordinate, silenced group, 
thus facilitating further and more overt forms of violence or mistreatment (Spivak, 
1988); “epistemic inequality” can result when people lose faith in the knowledge and 
credibility of suﬀerers relative to others by virtue of the narratives that arise from their 
suﬀering (Sanati & Kyratsous, 2015). The dynamic operates at multiple scales - personal, 
familial, institutional and societal (Johnstone & Boyle, 2018) - such that the ‘whole 
engine of collective social meaning’ can eﬀectively silence vulnerable people (Fricker, 
2007, p. 99), in this case, by virtue of experiencing complex social and emotional pain. 
It can be up to therapists, then, to stand with individuals against the collective 
weight of shared meaning-making. It is the position of this dissertation that there is 
therapeutic value in making mental suﬀering less opaque both clinically, and as a 
broader production to the discourse, including the role of neurodiversity in more 
complex clinical presentations. It follows that mental health frameworks that can help to 
make social, mental and emotional pain more intelligible can take away the epistemic

10 
power gradient that stigma operates on for providers, suﬀerers and third parties, 
empowering individuals in bottom-up, and top-down, ways. 
Neurodiversity and Mental Health 
Neurodiversity presents a compelling example of epistemic injustice for many of 
the same reasons found in broader conversations about mental illness. Neurodiversity is 
typically understood as a partly taxonomic, partly spectrum-based, collection of mental 
health disabilities as deﬁned by the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual, 5th edition (DSM-
V). Neurodiversity advocates often seek to be as inclusive as possible, including a wide 
deﬁnition of neurodiversity to occasionally include anyone who is currently experiencing 
a DSM-V disorder (D. Price, 2022), yet the most common associations with the term are 
diagnoses like ASD and ADHD, which are thought to be lifelong neurodevelopmental 
disorders. Traditionally, this has led to a “pathological” lens where the disorders are 
framed as deﬁcits to be cured, and considered separate and distinct from the suﬀerer. 
In recent years, a core goal of the advocacy movement has been to push back on 
implications like these and see these diagnoses as inseparable parts of the person 
themselves (Sinclair, 1993). Groups that represent the medicalized position - for 
instance, Autism Speaks and the Applied Behavioral Analyst treatment of autism - have 
become increasingly reviled by the community (D. Price, 2022). The purely deﬁcit-based 
view has also rejected, with many pointing out that the DSM is a problematic document, 
with a historical lack of rigor, transparency, representation and conﬂicts of interest 
(Bonino, 2018; Davies, 2017; Fischer, 2012; Fitzgerald, 2020; Kawa & Giordano, 2012; 
Khoury et al., 2014), while also being used to police evolving social conceptions of

11 
“normativity” through diagnoses like hysteria and homosexuality, the latter only 
recently being expunged in the late twentieth century. Chapman and Carel (2021) 
showed how this sets up Autism’s Catch-22 , where it is a premise of receiving mental 
health care that assumptions of autism-as-a-disease prevent clients who see autism-as-
identity (capable of living “the good life”) from receiving support for the adversity of an 
unaccommodating social milieu as they pursue a valid path to well-being. 
Neurodiverse diagnoses are still seen as exotic, controversial, othering disorders, 
typically viewed from a deﬁcit-lens that reduces social credibility and are positioned 
poorly to mount eﬀective self-advocacy or embrace self-conﬁdence (Chapman & Carel, 
2021; Fitzgerald, 2020). That may be in part because “neurodiversity” as a construct is 
not designed to separate itself from the DSM-V constructs on which they are based, but 
to primarily serve political advocacy and identity purposes (Lewis, 2020; Meadows, 
2020; J. Singer, 2021). While some advocates have turned to evolutionary theory for an 
epistemic footing that can understand neurodiversity as life strategies suited for 
diﬀerent social niches (Del Giudice, 2018), or complementary cognitive specializations 
(Doyle, 2020; Taylor et al., 2022), many advocates resist such eﬀorts, believing 
neurodiversity should remain epistemically opaque for fear the “engine of scientiﬁc 
discovery” will reify social Darwinist assumptions of a natural social order as a power 
gradient of inferiority to superiority, or else be made to exclude those who can’t be 
made to formally ﬁt a narrow and precise deﬁnition (Chapman, 2021b; 2021c; 
Meadows, 2020; Stenning & Rosqvist, 2021). There are few pursuing the goal of 
reframing neurodiversity as an epistemically just framework from which positive self-

12 
knowledge and testimonial credibility follow from challenging the primacy of the 
disability lens. By contrasting this view with the more marginal, but less pathologized 
ideas of “normal neurodiversity” - where neurodiverse characteristics are better 
understood through the sub-clinical traits found in neurodiverse families in broad 
phenotypes across the population - we may ﬁnd the juxtaposition can illuminate a 
fundamental relationship between stigma and the disability assumption. 
Neurodiversity and Culture 
Neurodiversity may also face epistemically unjust frames from individualistic 
Western folk psychology that idealizes thinking about the self in ways that are static, self-
focused, socially decontextualized, and trait-based, as opposed to emphasizing 
contextual meaning, social harmony, group-identiﬁcation and social roles (Oyserman et 
al., 2002). Western stereotypes may idealize traits of advantaged groups as embodying 
virtues as individual traits such as intelligence, willpower, strength, sanity or normalcy. 
Ideologies like these typically serve systems justifying functions (Jost & Hunyady, 2002) , 
so that a system is thought to be natural and just, as those who are well-positioned are 
there because of their virtues, and those who are at the bottom of the social ladder or 
on the social fringe, are there because they failed in moral character. It is thought that 
even those most disempowered by such beliefs perpetuate “out-group favoritism,” 
preferring the traits of the more advantaged group and reinforcing aspects of the 
epistemic regime because it is “ideologically palliative” to believe in a meritocracy rather 
than face life facing one’s the prospect of daily oppression. Consequently, marginalized 
groups may come to participate in their own oppression and face a visceral form of

13 
epistemic injustice in the form of stereotype threats, where the specter of being judged 
based on idealized folk constructs can trigger hypervigilant survival responses for fear of 
being pushed to the social fringe when seen as failing to live up to social ideals (see also: 
social evaluative threat; Priscott & Allen, 2021). For all marginalized groups, but 
particularly neurodiverse presentations, it is perhaps the danger of being seen as the 
inverse of these constructs – sensitive, diﬀerent, cognitively impaired, crazy or weird, 
that poses signiﬁcant social threat. A study on human capital diversity in the workplace 
found that priming value-laden cognitive stereotypes about intelligence in a brochure 
about a ﬁctional job opportunity led to neurodiverse people reacting to stereotype 
threats in a pattern consistent with more visible minority groups (Priscott & Allen, 
2021). 
Social sciences including psychology, evolutionary biology, economics and more 
have a history of playing into these systems justifying cultural narratives and 
stereotypes (Oyserman et al., 2002; D. S. Wilson, 2002; 2019). For instance, evolutionary 
theory, psychology and economics were long saddled with core assumptions based on 
some version of rational actor theory and methodological individualism (D. S. Wilson, 
2002; 2019) that eﬀectively codiﬁed the cultural values of Western individualism as 
social science (Oyserman et al., 2002). In evolutionary theory, ideas that codiﬁed the 
primacy of strong, self-interested individuals were the basis for social Darwinism and 
eugenics to justify the political and social order based on genetic essentialism; in 
psychology, studies of intelligence were introduced by Frances Galton, who was also the 
American originator of the eugenics movement, also tied to genetic essentialism

14 
(Chapman, 2021b; 2021c; Keller, 2005; D. S. Wilson, 2002). Studies exploring the social-
cognitive motivations of those endorsing genetic essentialist beliefs ﬁnd increased 
ingroup bias and social prejudice particularly in those prone to such outlooks, linking a 
similar motivated reasoning to the quest of social sciences to explain events through 
internal variables of biology and physiology (Keller, 2005). It is worth considering that 
modern day social sciences may serve similar systems justifying functions deep in their 
bedrock assumptions, and that a consilience approach - emphasizing interdisciplinary 
agreement - may help separate such artifacts to arrive at intelligible ways of 
understanding normal neurodiversity and what is truly “normal,” to avoid the inﬂuence 
of institutionalized superiority narratives. 
Statement of the Problem 
Understanding and “making sense” of neurodiversity occupies a unique 
challenge, not the least of which are ethical and moral quandaries (Bervoets & Hens, 
2020; Chapman, 2021a; 2021b; 2021c; Meadows, 2020; Stenning & Rosqvist, 2021), all 
of which problematizes the basic nature of shared knowledge as reference points for 
understanding the distorted social experience of a minoritized group. First, unlike some 
marginalized groups, neurodiversity may resist understanding from a subjective vantage 
point alone as the “logic” of the experience may be evolutionary and biopsychosocial in 
nature. Promising evidence suggests social animal personalities indeed evolved to 
occupy diﬀerent social niches (Bergmüller & Taborsky, 2010), and that the broader 
complementarity of diﬀerent neurocognitive strategies may embody biopsychosocial 
trade-oﬀs in order to drive cultural evolution in human complex adaptive systems

15 
(Haidt, 2013; P. J. Taylor et al., 2021). Where mental frames like these may give 
intellectual context to the strengths and challenges of neurodiversity, current paradigms 
may currently obscure this intelligibility. Such paradigms may not only constrain full 
understanding by being reductive and narrow, they may also be stigmatizing and 
systems justifying, based on narrow cultural conceptions of normalcy (Fitzgerald, 2020) 
and requiring a challenge to legacy paradigms to surmount them. 
A potential solution to both may lay in consilience (E. O. Wilson, 1998), a 
scientiﬁc method of converging on strong conclusions from interdisciplinary agreement, 
where assumptions that fail to live up to multidisciplinary scrutiny are seen as inherently 
problematic. This provides a rigorous way to transcend ways of knowing that rest on 
singular approaches, cultural biases and narrow assumptions, while gaining all the 
beneﬁts of more integrative, dynamic, contextual frameworks. Paradigms that make 
mental suﬀering and neurodiversity more intelligible and nuanced are inherently more 
just from an epistemic injustice perspective, and may be beneﬁcial for both clinical 
application and advancing the social discourse more broadly. A method that brings 
multiple perspectives to the table may also bring multiple stakeholders and agendas to 
the table, all of whom beneﬁt when science, self-knowledge and advocacy are brought 
into dialog. 
However, an epistemically just and intelligible framework on mental health and 
neurodiversity cannot be appreciated without being laid out to experience the palliative 
eﬀect of this alignment ﬁrsthand. Moreover, consilience has not been fully explored as a 
research method and would likely require further applications to demonstrate any

16 
potential useful and resonant information in order to prove its pragmatic value in 
counseling science and practice. Until that time, it is diﬃcult to consider how diagnoses 
may be disentangled from the stigma that emerges from the very paradigm and 
assumptions with which they are framed and communicated. 
Purpose of the Study 
While neurodiversity and epistemic injustice are increasingly entering the 
literature, neurodiversity theory has not been formalized for use in a therapeutic 
modality (Chapman & Botha, 2023). The purpose of this study is to explore the 
subjective impact of a training model of neurodiversity on mental health practitioners as 
delivered by a professional workshop consisting of 10 hours of video lecture content 
and three hours of virtual meeting to discuss and synthesize. The model presented was 
derived from a consilience methodology (E. O. Wilson, 1998) and addressed the 
perceived stigma related to the medical model’s presumption of a deﬁcit-based identity 
linked to DSM-V diagnoses. By reframing how mental health challenges are linked to 
sub-clinical traits distributed in families deﬁned by functional social strategies for living 
life, the meaning of neurodiversity can be shaped by a rich understanding of strengths, 
potentials, niches of optimal functioning and resilience, as well as the obvious 
challenges. The goal is to deploy multiple professional, social and practical beneﬁts in 
the workshop that emerge from the consilience approach including tangible tools and 
useful information. Consequently, the study aims to explore whether this utility, in 
combination with more epistemically empowering frameworks and the alignment of 
stakeholder agendas, translates subjectively into resonance with the material as

17 
qualitatively captured through changes in beliefs and attitudes. 
Research Question 
What are the impacts of a neurodiversity workshop on mental health 
practitioners’ beliefs on and understanding of epistemic justice, social animal 
perspectives, normal neurodiversity, and consilience? 
Research Approach 
Qualitative research is best used for systematic study of social phenomena in 
natural settings, particularly if a researcher is interested not just in testing reality, but 
testing people’s views on reality (Teherani et al., 2015). Content analysis is a form of 
qualitative research best employed to study social behavior, views and messages 
without inﬂuencing them by analyzing the content of media forms such as newspapers, 
books, speeches and television broadcasts (Fraenkel & Wallen, 2006). Directive content 
analysis does so from a theory-driven approach, allowing inquiry to follow from a 
speciﬁc theory or viewpoint. In this study, participants took a workshop on 
neurodiversity, and were administered a questionnaire before and after the workshop. 
The questionnaire had seven open-ended questions on their beliefs and attitudes about 
the medical model and neurodiversity, as well as expectations/reactions to the 
workshop. Answers were coded with regard to the nature of their beliefs and attitudes 
coming into the workshop and the direction of any change therein following the 
workshop, and interpreted according to a) framework for evaluating workshop best 
practices, b) neurodiversity-informed questionnaires, c) epistemic injustice and d) a 
neurodiversity consilience, and e) a social animal theory of mental health sustainability.

18 
Participants were purposively sampled from a national population of mental health 
clinicians across professions; from a pool of 31 initial participants, nine eventually 
completed the pre-workshop survey, and five completed the post-workshop survey. 
Data was de-identiﬁed with the help of a research assistant and stored on a secure 
computer, where it was coded with the help of NVivo qualitative research software. 
Signiﬁcance of the Study 
A thesis of this dissertation is that epistemic injustice may be a core dynamic to 
mental health suﬀering. Epistemic violence and inequality result from collective 
meaning-making that silences vulnerable people and marginalized experiences, creating 
the conditions for real mistreatment and mental suﬀering. This works in part by 
obscuring authentic and empowering self-knowledge about unique strengths, values, 
contributions and strategies that emerge in a niche of optimal functioning. Given that 
such logic is highly opaque to vulnerable and isolated individuals, it is up to people who 
are better positioned to assess and promote its veracity. 
Embedded in the thesis are two theories, a theory of neurodiversity, and a 
theory of mental health intelligibility, the latter of which is based on a social animal 
perspective on mental sustainability, resilience and vulnerability. Both theories intersect 
to suggest novel and intelligible paths to sustainable well-being, lifestyles and 
worldviews that may be epistemically just to diverse stakeholders. However, to the 
extent that this proposition warrants inquiry, it is obscured behind deﬁcit-based models 
that lead to worse outcomes for people. Adherence to pathologizing paradigms is a 
precondition of current mental health training and treatment, yet data suggests that

19 
there are harmful consequences to believing that mental suﬀering is a static trait, one 
characterized by a presumption of intrinsic ﬂaws, and which promotes passivity in the 
face of suﬀering (see: autobiological information ; MacDuﬃe & Strauman, 2017a; 
2017b). Challenging such paradigms may be as important as it is daunting, so this study 
seeks to juxtapose models in terms of their accuracy, utility and subjective 
empowerment, with an intuitive metric of impact: demonstration of changes to beliefs 
and attitudes - subjective resonance - as reported by practitioners in the ﬁeld. 
This study also seeks to promote the logic of consilience - strong conclusions 
from converging interdisciplinary facts - as a general tool of evolving paradigms to be 
more congruent with epistemic justice. Integrative, contextual, biopsychosocial and 
evolutionary paradigms are already understood to be proverbial “grail” in mental health 
(Gilbert, 2019), and consilience gives us rigorous criteria for evaluating them. The useful 
yet nuanced understanding that results can help make the biopsychosocial experiences 
of diverse stakeholders more intelligible, while applying epistemic pressure on 
paradigms that are overly siloed, which can contribute to over-reliance on more systems 
justifying cultural assumptions (in this case, those of highly individualistic, WEIRD 
cultures). Consequently, consilience may be of general interest as a strategic and wise 
approach for generating complex, integrative and just social science praxis and practice 
(Biglan et al., 2020).  
Consequent to these propositions, this study’s signiﬁcance lay in assessing 
whether there is a viable path forward for constructive reframing of both neurodiversity 
and general mental health intelligibility (using a social animal perspective; SAP). To the

20 
extent that these perspectives are arrived at through a consilience approach to apply 
rigor to such goals, there may be signiﬁcance in using consilience as a tool to promote 
epistemic justice at the institutional-level by facilitating model-level change. In both 
cases, the goal is to systematically empower marginalized groups and create more 
productive relationships by reducing power gradients in our ways of knowing. 
Statement of Limitations 
The limitations of this study come from using a qualitative design beﬁtting the 
exploratory nature of the study as the study is not designed to produce results that can 
be widely generalized to other scenarios or populations. Qualitative methods are 
concerned with credibility and trustworthiness, such as requiring researcher self-
awareness of their biases as they might inﬂuence research design and interpretation, 
and the use of multiple triangulation techniques to ensure that the conclusions are 
comprehensive and informed by multiple converging perspectives. Qualitative 
limitations may come in limits to producing trustworthiness and credibility, such as the 
need to use NVivo coding software to make iterative coding passes, rather than using a 
second coder who may produce more constructive discourse throughout the coding 
process. Using theory salient to the material being presented to direct the questions and 
interpretations may also run the risk of creating a systematic bias in how the material is 
interpreted. Finally, small sample sizes and participant attrition may inhibit the richness 
of the thematic saturation and constrain the full range of potential themes that may 
have emerged with a larger data set. 
Deﬁnition of Terms

21 
For the purpose of this study, the following terms are deﬁned: 
1. Neurodiversity ― an evolving, and sometimes controversial construct having to do 
with reconceptualizing mental disorders presumed to be neurological in origin as a 
form of natural forms of human diversity (Armstrong, 2010); a natural human 
diversity is based in diﬀerences among brains and brain functioning which might 
characterize anything from varying styles of thought and behavior, ways of being, 
and emerging subcultures. 
2. Normal neurodiversity ― an approach to neurodiversity that begins by understanding 
the sub-clinical patterns of temperament and personality found in the families of 
neurodiverse people (Oller, 2019); patterns that arise from the relationship between 
cognitive trade-oﬀs, temperament and personality foundations, adaptive life history 
strategies, and complementary social niche specializations, to contextualize 
neurodiverse diagnoses within the natural social evolutionary “logic” of normal 
neurocognitive diﬀerences.  
3. Epistemic injustice ― Unfair treatment that that emerges from issues of knowledge, 
understanding, and participation in communicative practices or structures in 
meaning-making or knowledge producing practices that exclude, silence, 
misinterpret, misrepresent, distrust, disbelief, discredit and otherwise justify a 
person or group’s marginalized position so as to reinforce it (Kidd et al., 2017). 
a. Testimonial injustice ― unfairness related to trusting someone’s word due to 
identities they possess, such as sexuality, gender, ethnicity and more (Fricker, 2007). 
b. Hermeneutical injustice ― injustice related to how people’s lives are interpreted, by

22 
themselves or others, because they have historically been excluded from the 
sociocultural processes of shaping the language, beliefs, stories and ideas that might 
bear on their unique experience (Fricker, 2007). 
4. [Bio]medical model [of psychopathology and mental health practice] ― The 
assumption that psychopathology is the result of biological factors such as genetics, 
neurotransmitters, and organic dysfunctions of the brain as a causal attribution of 
mental health disorders, and an organizing principle for the communication, 
understanding and treatment of mental health issues in psychiatry and related ﬁelds. 
5. Consilience ― an academic principle that evidence from multiple independent and 
unrelated sources, disciplines or ways of knowing may “converge” on strong 
conclusions that are less compelling taken singularly; a “jumping together” of facts 
and fact-based theory taken across disciplines to create a common explanatory 
groundwork (E. O. Wilson, 1998).  
6. Stigma ― A mark of disgrace associated with a particular circumstance, quality, or 
person; in mental health, the negative attitudes and beliefs regarding those with 
mental health disorders which can be a source of discrimination or in internalized 
shame.

23 
CHAPTER II: LITERATURE REVIEW 
Part I: Epistemic Justice, the Medical Model and Current Ways of Knowing 
Epistemic Injustice 
Miranda Fricker (2007) introduced the term epistemic injustice to address a 
unique form of disempowerment to epistemic agents in their capacity as “knower” [of 
the world] and [as someone who is] “known.” That is, marginalized people and 
communities may face two subtypes of epistemic injustice. Testimonial injustice is 
where certain identities are silenced by working from a credibility deﬁcit that makes 
their knowledge, motives and authority suspect. Hermeneutical injustice is where the 
ability to be known and understood is constrained by the lack of hermeneutic 
(interpretive) understanding of a minoritized experience both by the minoritized group 
and the majority. The latter creates a lack of resistance to oppression because words to 
describe the injustice do not exist and when they come into existence, they are not 
shared reference points by those in the majority and may even be constrained within the 
marginalized group. 
In lieu of meaningful self-knowledge or self-story, both forms of epistemic 
injustice lead to epistemic violence, whereby a discourse is imposed on a subordinated, 
silenced group, which may facilitate more overt forms of violence or oppression 
(Johnstone & Boyle, 2018; Spivak, 1988). Epistemic inequality is where one’s knowledge 
of one’s experience is discredited or dismissed by an agent or agents who presume 
themselves to be “epistemically superior,” who then recharacterize the “epistemically 
inferior” to themselves in a paternalistic and/or stigmatizing way without being

24 
consulted on their experience (Johnstone & Boyle, 2018). This may lead to “the whole 
engine of collective meaning” eﬀectively silencing them (Fricker, 2007, p. 99; Johnstone 
& Boyle, 2018). 
As an example, from the feminist perspective, the psychiatric diagnosis of 
“hysteria” was applied exclusively to women for behavior that may have been a reaction 
to the oppressive social roles and power dynamics applied to women in the 19th century 
(Devereux, 2014; Gilman et al., 1993). From an epistemic justice standpoint, the concept 
of “hysteria” would occupy a speciﬁc place in the oppression itself. The label both 
circumvents the need for a psychiatrist of the time to empathically understand the 
patient, a form of hermeneutical injustice, while also contributing to a stereotype of 
women as an “unreliable narrators,” a testimonial injustice. As a self-reinforcing system 
of suppression to women of the era, the result may have been etiological to the kind of 
mental breakdown that would lead to a hysteria diagnosis. 
Epistemic injustice sees the imposition of discrediting and disempowering 
stereotypes as “knowledge” imposed on a minority by a majority (Chapman & Carel, 
2021; Kidd et al., 2017; Stenning & Rosqvist, 2021), which in turn creates multiple 
barriers to overcoming one’s epistemic and social position when one cannot identify, 
much less protest, such conditions (Fricker, 2007). An obvious barrier to understanding 
the problem is a lack of language or shared understanding of the problem, but more 
insidious is the nature of epistemic violence to distort and displace such understanding 
with an imposed, stigmatizing alternative explanation. The hysteria construct would be 
internalized as derailing self-knowledge to actively misframe and pathologize one’s own

25 
experience to oneself, adding subjective, emotional and ideological barriers to a more 
critical consciousness (see: internalized oppression, internalized sexism ). What’s more, 
even were one to surmount these ﬁrst two barriers, oppressive majorities do not readily 
change social orders presumed to be virtuous, and a marginalized group that develops 
and spreads resistance concepts only wins the opportunity to begin a protracted ﬁght to 
change such a system (for instance, after the rise of second-wave feminism; Devereux, 
2014). 
Taken together, epistemic injustice emerges as a complex, multidimensional 
power gradient that rests in part on the role of imposed language, constructs and 
interpretive meaning, which is sometimes called internalized oppression (see also: 
internalized racism, internalized sexism, internalized homophobia ; David & Derthick, 
2013). Epistemic injustice (see also: epistemic oppression ) not only perpetuates unfair 
dynamics down power gradients, it creates knowledge that enforces this dynamic both 
among the more empowered and disempowered actors, while displacing more salient 
and useful self-knowledge that would help reduce the power gradient for the 
marginalized individual; for instance, concepts like sexual harassment and 
microaggressions have utility in part by empowering self-protection, self-care and self-
advocacy. 
Epistemic Justice and Neurodiversity 
As an example of how this may apply to neurodiversity, Chapman and Carel 
(2021) applied this to ASD by suggesting the medical model confers a double-bind to 
those with ASD. A precondition of mental health support is acceptance that an ASD

26 
disorder implies that the disorder itself is the natural target of treatment, leading 
aspects of one’s character to be reframed as pathological symptoms ﬂagged for clinical 
change. This assumption is incompatible with seeing autism as a valid, under-supported 
identity and way of being with a unique vision of “the good life,” who needs therapy for 
the adversity faced in a hostile world. Neurodiverse clients must instead accept their 
personhood essentialized back to them as a disorder, which is an ineﬀective basis for 
one to build conﬁdence or ambition, much less self-advocacy; at worst, a neurodiverse 
person is taught to distrust their strengths, judgments and values as manifestations of 
an illness-corrupted self-foundation. 
The frame also presumes a separation of the disease from the self. This stands in 
contrast to early self-advocate Jim Sinclair’s proclamation from “Do Not Mourn For Us” 
(1993) that: 
Autism isn't something a person has, or a "shell" that a person is trapped inside. 
There's no normal child hidden behind the autism. Autism is a way of being. It is 
pervasive; it colors every experience, every sensation, perception, thought, 
emotion, and encounter, every aspect of existence. It is not possible to separate 
the autism from the person—and if it were possible, the person you'd have left 
would not be the same person you started with. (p. 1) 
By contrast, we might frame an alternative lens as “normal neurodiversity;” the 
subclinical clustering of personality traits, motivations, strengths, challenges, values and 
life history strategies as multiple “broad phenotypes” of normal human variation as a 
species-typical norm (Ekblad, 2012; Oller, 2019). This may serve as a natural context for

27 
diagnosis-based neurodiversity, complete with understanding strengths and challenges 
conﬁgured into neurocognitive social niche strategies that can be niche-congruent for 
optimal well-being, or disabling in hostile or incompatible cultures, environments and 
epistemic frameworks (Del Giudice, 2018; DeYoung, 2015; Haidt, 2013; Oller, 2019). 
Neurodiversity tolerance and frequency might vary by cultural strategy (see: gene-
culture coevolutionary research ), and local clustering would vary across subcultures, 
institutions, careers, families and so on. Opportunities for niche-congruence might vary 
according to neurotype rarity or marginalization, with oppressive contexts potentially 
more frequent and intense in those environments with less neurotype diversity. A 
neurotype that is marginalized or undersupported may manifest unique forms of distress 
and dysfunction that is not understood relative to their own neurotype baseline, but as 
evaluated through the norms and culture of the dominant neurotypes as a failure of an 
idealized and righteous homogeneity. Distributed social pressures, punishments and 
injuries can lead to various forms of suﬀering including the emergence of “masking” 
necessary to cope and suppress such pain; when the dominant culture then deprives 
this pain of meaning by presuming it to be absent, pathological or inherently invalid, 
there is a second level of epistemic injustice. 
For neurodiversity writ large, the danger of epistemic injustice cast by 
inappropriately applied diagnosis and treatment includes: 
a) degrading the credibility of diverse neurotypes to prevent legitimizing their 
community, self-knowledge, identity, contribution, niches, and support needs by 
obfuscating their status as valid and equitable social agents, both to themselves and

28 
others; 
b)   imposing stereotyped knowledge with disempowering and distorting 
self-understanding as self-knowledge to the minoritized community, obscuring their own 
needs, goals, strengths, and values (see: internal oppression ) while displacing more 
useful and adaptive self-knowledge; 
c) the risk of codifying normal human role diversity as a pathological divergence 
from a single, narrow, outdated, reductive, and static vision of normalcy to see 
neurotypes as a natural hierarchy rather than a natural diversity; the former of which 
may create a toxic environment of neurotype competition, marginalization, othering and 
domination; the latter of which may lead to mutually-enriching, complementary 
contributions to the cultural “commons” when empowering multiple niches in parallel 
(H. Taylor et al., 2022). 
Mental Health and Epistemic Injustice: The DSM and Evidence-Based Practice 
The mental health ﬁeld is coordinated through a taxonomy of 
psychopathological constructs codiﬁed in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual in its ﬁfth 
edition (DSM-5-TR), which forms the basis for diagnosis and treatment across mental 
health specialties. The root of this nosology began in medicine, with the “medical 
model” begun in the 18th century by William Cullen on the premise of clear and distinct 
diagnoses, support from physical ﬁndings and experimental data, and responsive to 
speciﬁc treatments (Shorter, 2015). A similar system was proposed to be adopted by 
psychiatry in the United States by Robins and Guze (1970), at the same time as large 
discrepancies between European and American diagnosticians were discovered, with

29 
American clinicians being far more likely to diagnosis heterogeneous presentations as 
schizophrenia (Suris et al., 2016). Since the 1960’s, pharmacological breakthroughs 
increasingly suggested the brain to be involved as a physical substrate of the mind, 
leading to a burgeoning biological perspective in psychiatry (Shorter, 2015), an idea in 
mental health with roots in Europe from physicians like Kraepelin and Alzheimer as early 
as the late 19th century. As the production of the DSM-III approached, papers began to 
be published, like one from Klein and Davis in 1969, talking of “discrete etiologies” for 
“speciﬁc diseases” that could be captured by “categorizations [with] explicit validity” 
(Shorter, 2015). Eﬀorts to capitalize on these developments culminated in earnest with 
the DSM-III (1980) when task force chair Robert Spitzer went rogue to build a ground-up 
reconstruction of the DSM despite the APA’s guidance to seek “a few minor tucks” 
(Shorter, 2015). Ultimately, the then chief executive of the APA called the outcome a 
“victory of science over ideology” (Kawa & Giordano, 2012), as Spitzer’s task force 
reacted away from the broad idiosyncrasy of psychoanalysis that was seen as struggling 
to justify treatment approaches (Suris et al., 2016), and moved instead to a neo-
Kraepelin diagnostic system: a consensus- and criterion-based system of diagnosis with 
validated constructs an none of the descriptive characterization which had been the 
hallmark of the previous nosology (Shorter, 2015). What had begun as the “St. Louis 
approach” by Eli Robins & Samuel Guze, came to be known as the “medical model” of 
psychiatry (Suris et al., 2016), or “biomedical model of illness” (Rocca & Anjum, 2020).

30 
 
Elsewhere, historians have framed this transition against the backdrop of an 
existential ﬁght for psychiatry’s place in Western culture. Surís et al. (2016) framed the 
position of psychiatry going into the DSM-III as having “little public respect,” with a lack 
of rigorous inquiry, no formal justiﬁcations for treatment selection, and excessive 
healthcare expenditures made worse by providers such as social workers oﬀering far 
cheaper, more psychodynamic alternatives to psychiatric care (Davies, 2017; Kawa & 
Giordano, 2012). In contrast, a move toward a categorical, atheoretical classiﬁcation 
system favorable to inter-rater reliability was in part a reputational, as well as economic, 
boon. Following the move toward the DSM-III, pharmacological research exploded 
thanks to drugs that could gain FDA approval now that they could be researched for 
eﬃcacy as treatments for speciﬁc disease constructs; the NIMH budget to research such 
drugs increased by 84% on the back of government funding accordingly to $484 million 
annually (Kawa & Giordano, 2012). Analysis of the percentage of DSM-5-TR task force 
members who had ties to the psychopharmacology industry found 69% could be 
connected, up 21% from the 57% of DSM-IV task force members with such ties 
(Cosgrove & Krimsky, 2012). Insurance also quickly aligned with this new, clear system 
as the default basis for their reimbursement schedule (Kawa & Giordano, 2012). 
Economic and medical alignment aided in cultural legitimacy, making the DSM project 
“an evolving document that is shaped by science, economics and politics” (Kiehl, 2017) 
to which Fitzgerald (2020) concluded, “no wonder neurodiverse people do not trust it.” 
The DSMs III through 5-TR have been wracked by critical histories across the

31 
literature of multiples social sciences including psychiatry (Fitzgerald, 2020; Ghaemi, 
2018), psychology (Kawa & Giordano, 2012; Khoury et al., 2014; Suris et al., 2016) 
counseling (Bonino & Hanna, 2018; Eriksen & Kress, 2006), social work (Wakeﬁeld, 
2016), sociology (P. Conrad, 1992; Correia, 2017), anthropology (Davies, 2017), ethics 
(Pickersgill, 2014), philosophy of science (Rocca & Anjum, 2020) for a partial list. Protest 
also comes from unlikely places, including prominent ﬁgures in national mental health 
administration – two former NIMH directors, Steven Hyman (Fitzgerald, 2020; Scull, 
2015) and Thomas Insel (Fitzgerald, 2020; Pickersgill, 2014; Scull, 2015) – and two 
former chairs of the DSM task force itself: Robert Spitzer (Greenberg, 2013) and Allen 
Frances (Greenberg, 2013; Pickersgill, 2014). Here we will explore four main avenues of 
criticism of the medical model (MM) found in the DSM: MM as a driver of stigma; MM 
as impaired practice; MM as impaired theory; and MM as having social costs. 
Stigma and the Medical Model 
The medical model has been associated with stigma, which can be framed herein 
as a form of epistemic injustice, not just among patients, but providers as well (Keller, 
2005; Larkings & Brown, 2018; Lebowitz & Appelbaum, 2019; MacDuﬃe & Strauman, 
2017a; Rüsch et al. 2010a). Khoury et al. (2014) pointed to the three forms of stigma as 
public stigma , self-stigma , and label avoidance : public stigma is the projection of 
negative stereotypes that lead to ill-treatment by large social groups; self-stigma is 
internalizing public views to downgrade self-perceptions, self-eﬃcacy and self-
conﬁdence; and label avoidance reduces help-seeking to skirt the negative impact of 
stigma. They highlight that these forms of stigma can have a “devastating” impact, with a

32 
potential for negative self-fulﬁlling prophecies such as reduced ambitions and self-
expectations, as well as altered treatment by others. MacDuﬃe and Strauman (2017a; 
2017b) frame a similar problem with the concept of autobiological information, which 
problematizes the way in which biological information is incorporated into one’s self-
concept to produce either productive or counterproductive eﬀects on treatment and 
recovery. They ﬁnd that the current medical model often leads to worse prognosis when 
framing mental suﬀering with biological aspects as necessarily intrinsic, stable and 
uncontrollable (as opposed to extrinsic, unstable and controllable), despite the fact that 
none of those things may be true. 
The reason stigma may ﬂow from the medical model may lie in the underlying 
philosophical implications in the way the information is framed for thinking about the 
self and others. Biogenetic essentialism arises when genetic frames for mental illness 
lead to reduced blame for suﬀerers, but in correlational studies, also led to increased 
aversion to suﬀerers, as well as perceptions of dangerousness and pessimism about 
prognostic outcomes (Fitzgerald, 2020; Loughman & Haslam, 2018); in experimental 
studies, not even the reduced blame was observed (Fitzgerald, 2020). A study by Rüsch 
et al. (2010a) found that biogenetic essentialism can experimentally induce avoidance of 
serious mental illness suﬀerers or incite strong fear and self-guilt when these 
assumptions are primed among suﬀerers themselves. A meta-analysis by Larkings and 
Brown (2018) found that among 10 studies on biogenetic causal beliefs related to 
mental illness, a majority found increased stigma or negative attitudes were a 
consequence. Biogenetic essentialism is linked to “essentialist intuitions” known to be

33 
associated with prejudice and stereotypes (Fitzgerald, 2020; Lebowitz & Applebaum, 
2018; Rüsch et al., 2010a); incidentally, perceived anticipation of judgment based on 
stereotypes are known to be linked to neurodiversity threat responses (Priscott & Allen, 
2021). Historically, biogenetic essentialism has played a strong role in “social 
Darwinism,” a belief where the social world is seen as a “ruthlessly competitive jungle” 
where “the strong win and the weak lose,” typically owed to intrinsic factors. This 
becomes the basis for discriminating practices towards speciﬁc social groups and a 
justiﬁcation of a status quo favoring social inequalities (Radkiewicz & Skarżyńska, 2021). 
Fitzgerald (2020) argued that psychiatry ﬁndings, by being framed “immutable” and 
“static” qualities, despite no intrinsic need for being conceived of as such, become 
connoted and communicated about as a form of “neuroessentialism.” This static or 
essentialist quality of psychiatric diagnosis was certainly not an intended quality, as 
Kawa and Giordano (2012) highlighted a disclaimer that accompanied the DSM-III: 
Some individuals may interpret [the move to the medical model from 
psychodynamic diagnosis] as a return to a Kraepelinian way of thinking, which 
views mental disorders as ﬁxed disease entities... Actually, this was not the 
intent of the APA Committee on Nomenclature and Statistics.  
Nevertheless, by framing mental suﬀering through biological substrates as 
necessarily an implication about one’s genetic integrity, it may incite dread about one’s 
social standing in some existential social order, or fears such judgments could be 
directed at them, as a vulnerability of social positioning and attendant social threats. 
Another issue with problematizing individual well-being, despite the seeming

34 
intuitiveness of the approach, is that problematizing individual well-being makes the 
individual the problem (Ratts, 2009). An individual problem-solving approach may 
intervene at the locus of greatest impact, but it also auto-implies some causal 
responsibility owed to the individual as an artifact of framing, even when this may not 
be fair or accurate. Ratts (2009) highlighted how individualistic frames in mental health 
may paradoxically scapegoat individuals for the adversity they face, while also obscuring 
a potential etiological role for social determinants of mental illness , i.e. inadequate 
social supports, oppressive cultural systems or unsustainable stress and deprivation. 
Intriguingly, the medical model as a misframing of mental health issues is related to an 
insight that emerged in the development of second-order cybernetics as a branch of 
systems theory: that when framing a given problem, the problem-solvers are not neutral 
observers outside of a problem ﬁeld, but become joined with it; depending on the 
wisdom of the approach, the framing of the problem itself can either ameliorate or 
perpetuate the problem at a diﬀerent “level.” This view of the medical model would see 
it as an intuitive approach plagued by unanticipated externalities that compound the 
problems being solved. A similar framework for seeing mental health problems 
themselves - as problems maintained by intuitive, yet misframed mental and behavioral 
solutions at another level - has already been broached with the theory of Second Order 
Change (Fraser & Solovey, 2007). 
The medical model as “misframed” problem-solving may be important in another 
way. Khoury et al. (2014) talked about the DSM as a “mindless” text, in contrast to 
“mindfulness,” as two distinct cognitive styles. Speciﬁcally, mindlessness creates a

35 
reliance on prior categories in a rigid, automatic, uncritical way, creating cognitive 
commitments to viewing the environment in narrow, static, unchanging ways. 
Mindfulness would be the opposite, committing to reconstructing one’s cognitive 
hierarchies to see the environment ﬂexibly and anew, including paying attention to 
novel aspects of the environment by seeking multiple perspectives. Mindlessness is 
particularly a problem when institutionalized, as it creates blindness to novel 
presentations, subtle diﬀerences, changes over time, inconsistencies with categories, 
contextual nuance, and biopsychosocial complexity. Importantly, these may lead to 
fundamental attribution errors by systematically viewing deviance from unrealistic 
categorical ideals as reﬂective of stable, trait-based, internal characteristics of 
pathological deviance rather than, say, contextual factors that force a disabling scenario 
on an adapting person. 
Khoury et al. (2014) elaborated on supporting experimental ﬁndings and 
implications, but here we would focus on the DSM as not only consistent with such a 
“mindless” cognitive style, but encouraging of it, in ways that depart incompatibly with 
counseling values (Bonino & Hanna, 2018; Eriksen & Kress, 2006). Important for the 
supporting neurodiverse clients, for instance, are values such as self-acceptance, the 
potential for growth and change, the value of unconditional positive regard, 
authenticity, realism about one’s situation, among others, as key factors in the 
therapeutic journey to positive self-acceptance and identity integration and adaptation 
(D. Price, 2022). Yet these are incompatible with the framing of neurodiversity as a 
stable, narrow, categorical disease to be treated, and the result is that the subtext of the

36 
“mindless” framing is in competition with the therapy from the outset. For instance, 
neurodiverse clients must come to see their neurodiversity as something indivisible to 
accept, not something to be cured; they must see their neurodiversity as a source of 
identity, community and strengths, not a reductive deﬁcit tied that is connoted in a 
label; they must see their neurodiversity as a source of acceptance, accommodation and 
self-grace, not as ABA therapy might proscribe, something to punish with the 
withdrawal of all social engagement at the slightest neurodiverse behavior, the very 
deﬁnition of conditional social support. Self-stigma arises from internalizing public 
stigma, and public stigma ﬂows from the mindless attitudes toward neurodiversity on 
display with the DSM. 
Problems of Practice and the Medical Model 
A number of problems with the medical model result from unexpected 
externalities of the system as conceived, including the way the system leads to 
ineﬃciencies and challenges as a guide for clinical practice. Suris et al. (2016) wrote:  
With subsequent revisions of the [DSM], however, increasing dissatisfaction with 
the validity of the criteria has become apparent, with complaints that the criteria 
do not suﬃciently diﬀerentiate disorders leading to high rates of diagnostic 
comorbidity, diagnosis lacks speciﬁcity for selection of treatment, genetics fail to 
distinguish psychiatric disorders, and many observed syndromes do not ﬁt any 
diagnostic deﬁnition.  
Added to this list might be problems with diagnostic inﬂation (Bonino & Hanna, 2018), 
and treatment polypharmacy.

37 
The problem of construct validity ﬂows outward to every use of the DSM 
because it challenges the very nature of the constructs themselves as being “real 
disorders” with “clear bright lines” delineating them from other diagnoses. Currently, 
one rightfully extrapolates such conclusions from the DSM - an authoritative, trans-
institutional, “scientiﬁc” text - where by implication, such constructs are assumed to 
correspond to distinct etiological pathways, psychological variables, biological 
substrates and/or genetic contributions. It follows that such assumptions naturally ﬂow 
into treatment approaches - “real” disorders deserve eﬀective treatments - EBPs - to 
target the speciﬁc nature of the disorder through the “speciﬁc ingredients” of the 
treatment shaped to the disorder itself (Wampold & Imel, 2015). 
However, from the outset, the people closest to these problems have doubted 
these very qualities about diagnostic constructs. Thomas Insel, former director of the 
NIMH at the time they pulled out of using the DSM-5 to guide research just weeks after 
it was released (Ghaemi, 2018), was quoted as saying: “[psychiatrists] actually believe 
[that their diagnoses] are real, but there’s no reality. These are just constructs” 
(Greenberg, 2013). Elsewhere he commented that the DSM exhibits “a lack of validity … 
as long as the research community takes this to be a bible, we will never make progress. 
People think that everything has to match DSM criteria, but you know …biology never 
read the book” (Fitzgerald, 2020; Scull, 2015). Construct validity in the DSM has a history 
of being notoriously varied and suspect, with everything from PTSD, bipolar disorder 
and ADHD subtypes found lacking to name a few (Khoury et al., 2014). It is no wonder, 
when the process of creating such constructs sometimes involved “major eﬀorts…to

38 
exclude any signs and symptoms with poor interrater reliability,” i.e. ignoring anything 
that was diﬃcult to agree on, which might promote a superﬁcial understanding of 
mental health issues, and not “important” or even “foundational” signs and symptoms 
that might be key to understanding how the disorders actually worked or were 
experienced subjectively (Joober & Tabbane, 2019). 
The issue of construct validity becomes an underlying problem in every way the 
book is used. The problem of diagnostic comorbidity was highlighted by former NIMH 
director Steven Hyman, when he said, “many people who got one diagnosis got ﬁve 
diagnoses, but they didn’t have ﬁve diseases – they have one underlying condition,” 
with problems of this scale leading Hyman to call the DSM a “total scientiﬁc nightmare” 
and “wrong in the way its authors could never have imagined” (Fitzgerald, 2020; Scull, 
2015). Diagnostic comorbidity itself becomes complicated given the history of the DSM 
as prone to diagnostic inﬂation , which sees the library of diagnoses grow year over year: 
from 106 (DSM I) to 182 (DSM-II), to 265 (DSM-III), 297 (DSM-IV), and 298 (DSM-V; Suris 
et al., 2016). Combined with diagnostic comorbidity, the risk is the “pathologization of 
everyday life” (Greenberg, 2013; Kudlow, 2013). Half of people are expected to have a 
DSM disorder at some point in their lives (Bonino, 2018), and normal periods of 
adversity or struggle - anxiety, low mood, lack of conﬁdence or marginalizing diﬀerences 
of eccentricity - are vanishing; clinical indicators of pathology for developmental 
challenges are becoming normalized, with strong health insurance and 
psychopharmacological incentives. Note the synergistic problem that begins to emerge: 
a symptom-driven approaches increasingly take suﬀering out of its socio-developmental

39 
context and situates suﬀering in the context of stable pathological constructs; there are 
a ballooning number of such constructs applicable to all facets of life; and they are 
assumed to be discrete pathologies with orthogonal etiologies attributable to stable, 
individual diﬀerences. The result is that relatively normal, healthy, functioning people 
can quickly appear dysfunctional or medically complex on paper in such a system, and 
are increasingly managed as such (Rocca & Anjum, 2020). 
If there is doubt that such small assumptive diﬀerences add up to seeing people 
through a medicalized lens rather than a “common-sense” biopsychosocial one, note 
the phenomenon of polypharmacy where “polypharmacy often becomes a cycle of 
treating one condition [with psychoactive drug treatments], experiencing side eﬀects, 
and treating the side eﬀects, until the patient and the clinician cannot remember where 
the cycle began” (Kukreja et al., 2013). Adverse drug reactions are common in 
polypharmacy, found 2-3x higher prevalence than monotherapy, despite no beneﬁts 
over monotherapy (Stassen et al., 2022). Given that the chemical imbalance theory of 
mental health has been signiﬁcantly rebuﬀed (Moncrieﬀ et al., 2022), and a more 
moderate position might hold the brain as a substrate of experience and not necessarily 
the primary cause of distress (Hari, 2018; Johnstone & Boyle, 2018), polypharmacy 
might be seen as a strong version of the hypothesis that diagnostic constructs are “real.” 
Stacking powerful drugs ad inﬁnitum when the role of biology is poorly understood, 
relies entirely on faith that decontextualized “symptoms” or multiple comorbidities 
diagnosed based on checklists, point to real and discrete brain pathways that are 
individually impaired and won’t produce additive disruptions to global functioning

40 
instead; this despite psychiatrists themselves believing that multiple comorbid diagnoses 
may in fact be an artifact of framing alone, and reﬂect neural processes that share 
underlying brain substrates (Fitzgerald, 2020; Scull, 2015). 
However, problems of over-prescribing psychopharmacological interventions 
aside, the majority of mental health providers are engaged in diagnosis and psychosocial 
treatment - do DSM practice issues tangibly aﬀect them? A study by Wakeﬁeld (2016) 
reviewed the potential for “false positive problems” where the lack of clear and bright 
boundaries between normal and pathological behavior left clinical ambiguity about what 
constituted pathology and treatment, and found that nearly every major category of the 
DSM - 17 in total - was plagued by them. To name just a few examples, some 71% of 
DSM-IV’s Bipolar I disorders are assessed to have been produced by false positives 
because the “irritability” symptom helped satisfy the requisite number of criteria, 
despite most irritability stemming from “a contextual cause of normal irritability;” 
Bipolar II disorders can necessitate mood stabilizers if a person is assessed as having had 
two days of elevated mood and two symptoms, so “someone could qualify for 
hypomania simply by experiencing the joy of emerging from depression into normal 
mood;” and the elimination of the bereavement exemption in the DSM 5 for major 
depressive disorder “meant that bereaved individuals manifesting ﬁve general-distress 
depressive symptoms for two weeks after a loss are classiﬁable as having MDD,” 
pathologizing normal human experience and making over half the population eligible for 
a diagnosis at some point in life. Neurodiverse disorders are likewise aﬀected, with 
ADHD seen as having a “massive” unaddressed false positive problem and

41 
overmedication, while ASD was controversial by removing support for “less stigmatized” 
diagnoses, while requiring a higher burden for diagnosis than PDD, which may exclude 
people from diagnosis for mild expressions. Allen Frances (2012) was right: “Many 
millions of people with normal grief, gluttony, distractibility, worries, reactions to stress, 
the temper tantrums of childhood, the forgetting of old age, and ‘behavioral addictions’ 
will soon be mislabeled as psychiatrically sick.” 
Problems of Theory in the Medical Model 
The DSM has been criticized for having a variety of theoretical vulnerabilities. 
Theory problems may be said to begin with the drafting process of the DSM: the process 
is decidedly unscientiﬁc and can be seen more as a defacto “authority” model: a 
deliberative consensus-building process among experts (Krueger et al., 2018), which has 
a historical record of avoiding responsiveness to critics amidst controversies (Greenberg, 
2013; Wakeﬁeld, 2016), and historically lacking in cultural or professional representation 
across iterations with task forces composed of homogeneous groups of white, male 
psychiatrists (Bonino, 2018; Davies, 2017). However, one might assume that such 
political projects still reference a scientiﬁc or theoretical process to guide their eﬀorts, 
but this is also false (Davies, 2017). There really is no theory at all (DeYoung & Krueger, 
2023), and in fact, the DSM has long fashioned this as a feature, not a bug, by 
positioning itself as atheoretical so as to be a neutral system of description that can be 
ﬂexible, useful and evolve its constructs (Davies, 2017; Kawa & Giordano, 2012; Suris et 
al., 2016), despite inevitably sliding toward use in a static, reductive and immutable way, 
and controversially so (Fitzgerald, 2020; Hari, 2018).

42 
A foundational criticism is the ability to distinguish between what is normal and 
what is not. Oller (2019) pointed to an arbitrary distinction between the “symptoms” 
expressed by a given psychiatric subject, and the same or similar behavior expressed in 
proband families at subclinical levels. Wakeﬁeld (2016) problematized the issue as the 
“normal/disorder threshold,” where the DSM-5 has been commonly seen as taking a 
step back in its ability to demarcate the boundary between psychopathology and normal 
adverse reactions, and all versions of the DSM have been plagued by “false positive 
problems.” DeYoung and Krueger (2023) developed the position as inherently doomed 
because the enterprise rests on faulty assumptions: the very idea of “abnormal 
psychology” is used ubiquitously as a synonym for psychopathology, but statistical 
deviation from the norm only means unusual, and no one would sweep giftedness, 
talent and other rare ability as implicit in such a deﬁnition. In the course of positing their 
own theory of psychopathology (see: cybernetic psychopathology discussed later), 
DeYoung and Krueger (2023) problematized a statistically-based approach to normality 
as theoretically untenable. 
First, they look at the best current theories of psychopathology and ﬁnd them 
wanting. The most talked about is Wakeﬁeld’s (1992) harmful dysfunction , which 
attempted a pragmatic middle-ground in establishing sociocultural guidelines for what 
violates social norms (sidestepping problems of veracity), and posited a breakdown of 
internal mechanisms that were biologically evolved for a speciﬁc adaptive purpose. 
Notwithstanding the high bar of verifying the relationship between socio-cultural 
judgments, biopsychological mechanisms and ﬁtness levels (or other valid challenges to

43 
the theory), the problem with this theory is that it and others like it have had no 
inﬂuence on DSM development, use, or guiding theory, making them parallel eﬀorts. 
As the DSM uses its own framing of psychopathology, that leaves three 
constructs - statistical deviance, psychological distress, and impairment - whereby the 
evidence is clear that the three cannot, and do not attempt to, resolve the 
normal/disorder threshold. Impairment can be both normal and common, for instance, 
in bereavement or trauma; subjective distress is likewise a functional response to 
common adversity; and most importantly, deviation from the norm does not help 
resolve either with respect to each other: “one reason that deviation from the norm 
fails as a criterion for psychopathology is that, in virtually every psychological 
dimension, variation is the norm and healthy people with extreme levels can be found” 
(DeYoung & Krueger, 2023). In fact, even the use of the word “symptom” is tautological - 
while it is often used to demarcate normal from abnormal levels on dimensional 
measures in psychopathology instruments, no studies have shown compelling reasons 
as to when a symptom becomes a symptom, what makes it so, or why it is seen as 
breaking from normal behavior; the word “symptoms” seems to insist upon its own 
adoption as language as a facet of convention (DeYoung & Krueger, 2023; Oller, 2019). 
The authors illustrated both the problem of statistics and symptomatology by 
heightening the issue: hallucinations and delusions are seen as classic examples of 
extreme mental health “symptoms,” and yet they break down under scrutiny. 
Hallucinations can be common in extreme grief, for instance, and delusions are common 
among adherents of many religious sects; the authors use the example of a study of

44 
clairvoyant psychics who heard daily auditory commands from other realms, who had 
thriving businesses, robust social networks, and people who negotiated their diﬀerences 
with respectful disagreement about the nature of their beliefs. To their point, the 
Hearing Voices Network puts the number of people who hear voices worldwide 
between 3 and 10%, most without distress. We can add another problem to this list - it is 
an assumption that there is a single species-typical norm of functioning, as 
neurodiversity suggests diverse life history strategies may exhibit diﬀerent patterns of 
normative and abnormal behavior tied to their respective adaptive strategies in the 
social milieu (Del Giudice, 2018), a dynamic common in other social animals as a 
species-typical norm (Bergmüller & Taborsky, 2010). 
The stance that the theory behind the DSM is suspect is not fringe. The NIMH 
famously broke with convention and ended using the DSM to guide mental health 
research just weeks after the release of the DSM-5, switching instead to the Research 
Domain Criteria approach, or RDoC (Ghaemi, 2018). While much of the challenges to the 
DSM herein are levied against the “abnormal psychology” assumptions as statistical 
deviation, it is also worth noting that the biomedical assumptions that mental health 
disorders can be causally reduced to physiology, neurology and genetics, has also been 
questioned. A recent meta-analysis by Moncrieﬀ et al. (2022) casted doubt on the 
serotonin theory of depression, a long history of debunking the fragile chemical 
imbalance theory of mental health (Bonino & Hanna, 2018). The chemical imbalance 
hypothesis has always had a dubious epistemic status as a deduction from observing 
that psychoactive drugs seemed to aﬀect mood, leading to psychiatry’s core metaphor

45 
being one of assumed dogma. This is despite more modern conceptions of the 
embodied brain as a substrate of all experience, correlated with external events in good 
times and in bad (Hari, 2018; Johnstone & Boyle, 2018), which could go toward 
explaining these same ﬁndings without the attendant biological reductionism, instead 
seeing the brain involved in a multi-level interacting hierarchy of experience (Oller, 
2019). Regardless, given the challenges to the theory of biomedicine and abnormal 
psychology, it may be no wonder that the DSM lacks construct validity, a reﬂection of its 
atheoretical stance developed less around theory, and more around pragmatic 
considerations of boosting consensus, ameliorating reputational woes, and facilitating 
economic and political agendas (Davies, 2017; Fitzgerald, 2020; Kawa & Giordano, 
2014). 
Finally, more evidence comes from recent alternatives to the current diagnostic 
system. For instance, a consortium of over 70 researchers have collaborated in the 
production of the Hierarchical Taxonomy of Psychopathology (HiTOP; Krueger et al., 
2018) which assumes that there are problems with the current “authoritative” system. 
They point out that, despite emphasis here that much of the eﬀorts of moving to the 
neo-Kraepelin model was to boost reliability, the DSM 5 was known to have signiﬁcant 
reliability problems in major categories like major depression and anxiety, and pushed 
them through on the weight of authority. The authors’ primary criticism is that while 
there is taxometric evidence, comparing this evidence directly to “model-based” 
evidence which posits psychopathology as more dimensional than discrete sees the 
dimensional approach having the preponderance of evidence. Importantly, here we

46 
have another challenge to the “clear, bright lines” of diagnosis wherein the very 
heuristics for thinking about mental illness are seen as suspect and empirically 
unsupported. Similarly, DeYoung and Krueger’s (2023) cybernetic psychopathology, 
posited:  
In our theory of psychopathology, to be considered, mentally ill people must be 
persistently unable to move toward their important life goals, due to failure to 
generate eﬀective new goals, interpretations, or strategies when existing ones 
prove unsuccessful. This theory invalidates the typical assumptions that 
psychopathology is necessarily a function of having unusual characteristics and 
that mental illness is really disease of the brain. (p. 228) 
This theory oﬀers something novel in mental health research, a holistic model of normal 
human functioning as a socio-cybernetic organism that is functionally optimized at all 
levels in pursuit of social goals, and psychopathology is therefore characterized by self-
organizing biopsychosocial barriers to this core functioning across subdomains. Another 
important theoretical challenge comes from the British Psychological Society’s PTMF 
(Johnstone & Boyle, 2018). Here the authors do a good job of challenging the deeper 
philosophical traditions of Western culture and their role in biomedical thinking: 
Abandoning what the authors have called the ‘DSM mindset’ is not easy, since it 
is deeply embedded in fundamental Western philosophical assumptions 
including, but not limited to, the separation of mind from body, thought from 
feeling, the individual from the social group, and human beings from the natural 
world; the privileging of ‘rationality’ over emotion; and a belief in objectivity, or

47 
the possibility of partialling out values, ethics and power interests from theory 
and practice in human systems. These inﬂuential but not universal worldviews 
underpin what can broadly be described as positivism, which tends to promote a 
view of human beings as objects acted on by causal forces rather than agents 
who have reasons for their actions. Although this paradigm has led to major 
advances in medicine, science and technology, it is not well suited to 
understanding human emotional distress and troubled or troubling behaviour. 
(p. 5) 
In each of these cases, of which there are others unmentioned, the alternative 
theories are uniquely constructive in their criticism by juxtaposing the biomedical 
approach with a productive alternative. It is worth noting that each will also be 
compatible with the evidence that will be put forward here - the dimensional approach 
is compatible with Oller’s (2019) observation of neurodiversity traits as continuous with 
subclinical traits in proband families, while the socio-cybernetic approach is core to the 
model of normal human functioning, and the power-threat-meaning approach is built on 
important evolutionary approaches made by Paul Gilbert’s work on social threats; each 
is also quite compatible with existing biological evidence, while providing important 
interpretive context. 
Problems of Social Costs and the Medical Model 
In summary, Khoury et al. (2014) found that under scrutiny, the DSM holds up 
signiﬁcantly to questions of reliability, but fails similar assessments of “validity, utility, or 
ethics,” so “these ﬁndings cannot justify the overuse of DSM in mental health neither

48 
the power nor authority assigned to the DSM categories besides being only of ﬁnancial 
and sociopolitical reasons.” An important follow-up question might be, to what extent 
does the execution of such ﬁnancial and sociopolitical goals lead to social harms? The 
DSM has been criticized for having a number of unanticipated externalities that might 
qualify: DSM’s role in stigma would be relevant here (Larkings & Brown, 2018; Lebowitz 
& Appelbaum, 2019; MacDuﬃe & Strauman, 2017a; 2017b), but also the medicalization 
of normality (Frances, 2014; Greenberg, 2013; Pickersgill, 2014), the paciﬁcation of help-
seekers (MacDuﬃe & Strauman; 2017a; 2017b; Rocca & Anjum, 2020) and a history of 
the DSM in pathologizing marginalized communities such as women (hysteria), LGBTQI+ 
(homosexuality and transgendered) and arguably, neurodiverse communities (Fitzgerald, 
2020; D. Price, 2022). 
The medicalization of normality sees all mental, emotional, social and behavioral 
life become scrutinized for function or dysfunction in a way that makes it inherently 
“suspect” (N. Rose, 2007). Allen Frances, chief architect of the DSM-IV and outspoken 
critic of the DSM-5, wrote in a BMJ editorial that the ﬁrst draft of the ﬁfth edition, with 
its inclusion of a slew of new mental disorders, would ‘expand the territory of mental 
disorder and thin the ranks of the normal’ (Frances, 2010; Pickersgill, 2014). Criticisms 
about expanding medicalization go back at least as far as 1922, when proposed changes 
to the nomenclature of the time led prominent psychiatrists to worry about tacit 
implications that “the whole world is, or has been, insane” (Greenberg, 2013). 
Indeed, the consequences of being mislabeled as “insane” may be quite severe. 
Blurry boundaries between normal and pathological behavior have resulted in a

49 
majority of people counting for a pathology diagnosis at some point in their life, wherein 
quintessential human reactions to something like grief can be labeled as “symptoms” by 
taking them out of their normal context (Wakeﬁeld, 2016). Conceptual problems with 
diagnosis may lead people to be inappropriately pulled deep into the system riding such 
conceptual cracks, where it can be diﬃcult to outlive stigmatizing labels given based on 
checklists, and where reductive, limited and static schemas for behavior can lead the loss 
of autonomy based on evaluations subjectively guided by a ﬂawed framework, or 
powerful drug therapies. Such psychoactive treatments may be more ethically complex 
than some realize, with critics suggesting the industry has downplayed 
psychopharmacology’s harms over the years, and overplayed the beneﬁts, i.e. the 
systematic minimizing of suicides from drug treatment, and the glossing over evidence 
that antidepressants as only slightly better than placebo (Gøtzsche et al., 2015). This is 
in addition to the aforementioned issues with widespread polypharmacy, with known 
harms and questionable justiﬁcation (Stassen et al., 2022). 
Rocca and Anjum (2020) talked about the costs of medicalization from 
objectifying the patient, which “reduces them to a passive target of therapy, rather than 
as an active (and the most crucial) actor in healing.” MacDuﬃe and Strauman (2017a; 
2017b) have attempted to capture something similar in their operationalization of 
autobiological information, which suggests the medical model frames biological 
information in ways that lead to worse outcomes when biological information is 
misattributed to causes that are internal and stable (genetic) and therefore 
uncontrollable , while good evidence suggests biology is regularly attributable to normal

50 
brain states subject to environmental ﬂux ( external and unstable) which are therefore 
controllable . This attributional diﬀerence is immense because it feeds back into one’s 
sense of control, and optimism or pessimism, about their prognosis, which improves or 
worsens actual outcomes as a result. 
Much of this extends to the pathologizing of neurodiverse communities and 
social harms done downstream as a result. As Fitzgerald (2020) noted,  
neurodiversity is challenging medical myths in psychiatry. There are problems 
with the concepts of abnormality in psychiatric diagnoses and the concepts of 
abnormality [can change or disappear] in the DSM, for example homosexuality. 
The concept of normal is not uncontroversial in psychiatry.  
A good example of the consequences of this are the Autistic “catch-22” from 
Chapman and Carel (2021): 
If a person who identiﬁes as autistic and who fulﬁls the diagnostic criteria is living 
a good life, they are denied recognition of their autism. If they are not currently 
living a good life, they are recognized as autistic, and their low quality of life is 
presumed to be caused by autism even if they declare otherwise. Interlocking 
epistemic injustices mean that autistic accounts are taken to mean either that 
the person is not happy or that they are not autistic. On the former 
interpretation, ‘I am autistic and I am ﬂourishing’ is not intelligible; it’s not 
possible to be both. On the latter interpretation, if that person is happy and 
articulating clearly their happiness, then the eloquence and rich use of language 
and their happiness mean that the speaker is not ‘really autistic.’ (p. 16)

51 
In other cases, the problem of seeing a person whose distress is “caused” by 
autism, may lead to legitimate grievances of mistreatment when the “speciﬁc 
ingredients” of a psychosocial treatment is presumed to target the “symptoms” of 
neurodiversity. For instance, the application of Applied Behavioral Analysis (ABA) 
therapy has been implicated in producing PTSD among former autistic clients, 
implicated in making autistic clients more pliable to manipulation and abuse, and 
generally considered dehumanizing by those in the community by training costly 
masking behavior and punishing attempts to de-mask thought to be of more genuine 
therapeutic value (D. Price, 2022). 
In summary, Rocca and Anjum (2020) put it thusly: 
Modern medicine...is faced with a contradiction by which scientiﬁc advances and 
medical technology oﬀer the best opportunities ever, but at the same time an 
increasing number of patients are over-medicalised, over-diagnosed, become 
chronically ill, do not ﬁnd a place in the health system, or feel that they are not 
met as whole persons in the healthcare system. The biomedical model seems to 
have played a central role in this development. (p. 79) 
Evidence-based Practice and the Medical Model 
It may be worth highlighting other downstream eﬀects of the medical model, for 
instance, in promoting treatments that conform to biomedical assumptions, which may 
help elevate those approaches inappropriately to a privileged status. The medical model 
assumes, if not always intentionally, that individual deﬁcits are psychologically causal to 
mental suﬀering (Fitzgerald, 2020). This leads to Evidence-Based Practices (EBPs) such as

52 
CBT to be regularly singled out for a reputation of unusual eﬃcacy through its “speciﬁc-
ingredients” approach of targeting speciﬁc deﬁcits - i.e. faulty cognition - rather than 
some more general or relational mechanism of change, though this may be 
unwarranted (Wampold & Imel, 2015). 
Evidence-Based Practices (EBPs) or Evidence-Based Treatments (EBTs) have 
come under ﬁre for telling stories that are limited in their understanding of human 
nature (Gilbert, 2009; Ratnayake, 2022), which may prove problematic from an 
epistemic justice standpoint (Ratnayake, 2022), and contribute to less eﬃcacy among 
neurodiverse people (D. Price, 2022). CBT, often considered a gold standard among 
therapies, makes the assumption that “faulty” or “unhelpful” reasoning is the causal 
agent of suﬀering, a belief at the heart of epistemic injustice. However, this story may be 
limited and evidence does not support the underlying theory of human nature 
presumed by such a theory (Ratnayake, 2022). For instance, human beings are not 
predominantly rational creatures nor does rationality play a prominent role in well-
being, as normal and healthy cognition is constituted by reliance on strange beliefs, 
social intuitions, useful ﬁctions, stereotypes, biases and cultural myth-making (Haidt, 
2013; Henrich, 2016; Ratnayake, 2022; D. S. Wilson, 2002). Prominent scholars regularly 
adopt the opposite stance, that high degrees of analytic rationalism would likely have 
been maladaptive during most of human prehistory as it might deconstruct one’s 
relationship to “useful ﬁctions” which help to orient people toward collaborative goals, 
cooperative problem-solving, and in maintaining the social order (Henrich, 2016). 
Secondly, when CBT assessments of distorted cognitions deploy measurement

53 
inventories, they are often capturing feeling statements, risk-management statements 
and probabilistic statements that rely on incomplete information, rather than distorted 
cognitions per se (Ratnayake, 2022). Finally, positive mental health may itself be a 
product of poor reasoning. Positive mindsets are often characterized by an optimism 
bias that borders on delusion and yields an “illusion of control,” while depressive realism 
shows that high degrees of realistic assessments of one’s level of control, performance 
and responsiveness to feedback are associated with higher rates of depression 
(McGuire-Snieckus, 2014; Ratnayake, 2022). Depressive realism has also been linked to 
perspicacity, the ability to accurately assess one’s degree of entrapment and 
powerlessness in oppressive systems (Hanna et al., 2000). Ratnayake’s (2022) criticisms 
were made by taking it for granted that CBT does in fact work as well as has been 
claimed, yet others cast doubt on this point as well. In “Where is the Evidence for 
Evidence-Based Treatment,” Shedler (2018) gathered evidence that systematic 
researcher biases have overreported the eﬃcacy of CBT, cherry-picked data, removed 
outliers and ignored counter-evidence over many years. A similar thesis was presented 
by Wampold and Imel (2015), who also highlighted meta-analyses that limited the role 
of any therapy’s “speciﬁc ingredients” to 7% of outcomes, while highlighting relational 
factors (Wampold & Imel, 2015). 
Any therapy that assumes a decontextualized narrator is eﬀectively assumed to 
be unreliable should be seen as problematic from an epistemic injustice standpoint. This 
may be particularly true when applied to therapy for neurodiverse clients, who are 
deﬁned by atypical ways of knowing and hidden minoritized dynamics. CBT may not be

54 
appropriate for neurodiverse clients (D. Price, 2022), as it tends to pathologize fears of 
social threats as irrational, and attribute any attendant depression or anxiety to such 
cognitions. By contrast, other research shows that these concerns are very much valid, 
and etiological to depression and anxiety (D. Price, 2022). For instance, neurodiverse 
people in organizational settings show similar vigilance in their threat response proﬁles 
as other minoritized groups by hyper-responding to stereotype threats - the anticipated 
negative consequences of being stereotyped in ways that degrade social status in both 
perception and reaction to that perception (Priscott & Allen, 2021). This suggests hidden 
minority dynamics of navigating perceived threat in the social world as a factor shaping 
emotion and cognition. A community-researcher generated model for social burnout in 
the ASD community echoes such ﬁndings: a high level of life stressors 
(masking/enforced conformity, social expectations, life transitions and disability 
management) plus barriers to support (gaslighting/dismissing one’s needs, poor 
boundaries and self-advocacy, lack of time for self-care, lack of external resources and 
supports) predictably leads to expectations that outweigh abilities and energy, and thus, 
burnout (Raymaker et al., 2020). 
Social dynamics operate through a variety of real, embodied, and non-conscious 
pathways in neurodiverse people. CBT may be uniquely vulnerable to committing 
epistemic injustice by having core assumptions that doubt peoples’ relationship to their 
lived social experience when ﬁxating on decontextualized fallacies (catastrophizing, 
over-generalizing, black and white thinking) as mechanistic to dysfunction and assuming 
the client’s way of knowing to be the attributional source of dysfunction, core features

55 
of epistemic injustice. 
Cultural Individualism and the Medical Model 
It is worth noting that much of the DSM-5-TR and EBPs may take their power 
from the cultural congruence with the foundations of Western individualistic philosophy 
and social thinking (Johnstone & Boyle, 2018). To recall an earlier quote: 
Abandoning what the authors have called the ‘DSM mindset’ is not easy, since it 
is deeply embedded in fundamental Western philosophical assumptions 
including, but not limited to, the separation of mind from body, thought from 
feeling, the individual from the social group, and human beings from the natural 
world; the privileging of ‘rationality’ over emotion; and a belief in objectivity, or 
the possibility of partialling out values, ethics and power interests from theory 
and practice in human systems. These inﬂuential but not universal worldviews 
underpin what can broadly be described as positivism, which tends to promote a 
view of human beings as objects acted on by causal forces rather than agents 
who have reasons for their actions. Although this paradigm has led to major 
advances in medicine, science and technology, it is not well suited to 
understanding human emotional distress and troubled or troubling behaviour. 
(p. 5) 
An inﬂuential meta-analysis by Oyserman et al. (2002) found that much of these 
properties of Western philosophy and social science may be baked in through cultural 
individualism. Cultural individualism assumes a “stable causal attribution” to the 
individual, and consequently, individualistic cultural psychology carries with it several

56 
(non-universal) assumptions about human nature that: a) creating a positive sense of 
self is assumed to be a universal basic drive; b) feeling good about the self, one’s 
accomplishments and various idiosyncratic opinions and attitudes are valued; c) the self 
is constructed through abstract, decontextualized traits, rather than immediate, 
contextual social responses; d) open emotional expression and attaining personal goals 
and ambitions are sources of well-being and life satisfaction; e) causal inference, 
judgment, and reasoning are oriented to the decontextualized individual; and f) social 
relationships are peripheralized and transactional because they are key to achieving 
social status, but are costly to maintain. The eﬀect writ large is that “individualism 
promotes a decontextualized, as opposed to a situation-speciﬁc, reasoning style, one 
that assumes social information is not bound to social context” (Oyserman et al., 2002). 
In this context, the biomedical model and the DSM merely echo a familiar vision of the 
Western individual back to themselves, down to an understanding of people in terms of 
decontextualized, stable, reductive individuals and psychopathology constructs that 
become enduring labels worn akin to abstract traits. 
Our current limitations to understanding neurodiversity may include a role for 
Western cultural individualism as a problematic meta-frame for psychopathology in 
producing our biomedical thinking, including a variety of ways we may be constrained in 
thinking of people and problems through stable, reductive traits. 
First, we can see in the critique by MacDuﬃe and Strauman (2017a; 2017b) that 
the framing of the DSM’s problematic ways of talking about mental health - that 
prognoses feel uncontrollable when problems are framed as derived from intrinsic &

57 
stable factors - may stem from Western individualism itself, as these are features of 
individualistic thinking about people in general, including the self. 
Second, even in therapies far from the inﬂuence of the medical model, 
individualistic frames are commonly expressed as assumptions about what is 
therapeutic, including the need to express one’s feelings as a goal, or the importance of 
self-love, self-acceptance, and self-esteem as basic outcomes of therapy. Here too the 
decontextualized self is assumed to generate its own love, esteem and acceptance as 
basic traits of well-being, where the only justiﬁcation for not feeling that way is 
pathology. This is despite a number of ﬁndings that self-orientations like self-love or 
self-esteem are properties of internalized social feedback (see: sociometer & 
hierometer ; Leary, 2004; Leary & Baumeister, 2000; Leary & Downs, 1995; Mahadevan 
et al., 2016). These empty individualistic constructs may misframe well-being when they 
obscure the self-in-relationship (Hari, 2018), or the relational agent (Heylighen, 2023), 
which are critical to well-being. An individualistic self-focus may become problematic 
(Hari, 2018) when it: a) adds a layer of pain to suﬀering clients when they are made to 
feel that they have failed to care, love or respect themselves, b) leads to therapeutic 
platitudes that displace more substantive therapeutic goals, and c) obscures real 
pathways to well-being that are found in a variety of normal human relationships with 
the social environment. 
Finally, Western individualistic folk psychology may also ﬁt with, and reinforce, a 
capitalistic economic system that beneﬁts from the competitive drive to “keep up with 
the Joneses” to fuel materialism as an engine of demand (Hari, 2018). When this

58 
becomes conﬂated with materialism as a pathway to life satisfaction and well-being, it 
leads to “junk values” that misdirect people away from more meaningful paths to life 
satisfaction. 
Culture adds a layer of misframing to how we understand well-being and 
psychopathology, and may explain why abundant social science information is 
systematically overlooked regarding neurodiversity and social well-being. That is, given 
the critiques of the medical model, cultural congruence may justify the models power 
and inﬂuence by conforming to widespread social assumptions and expectations as 
“commonsensical,” or even ideal, and not an abundance of strong data. Similar criticisms 
have been made of the West’s turn to hyper-individualism in the 1970’s as spearheading 
the academic dominance of methodological individualism and rational choice theory in 
evolutionary, psychological and economic thought (D. S. Wilson, 2002; 2008). These 
paradigms were contradicted by signiﬁcant ﬁndings in the social sciences but were 
compatible with strong individualism, and so rode this cultural congruence to further 
and further levels of analytical reductionism down to the level of the gene rather than 
to more complex biopsychosocial explanatory models of people in context (see: the role 
of selﬁsh gene theory ). 
Systems Justiﬁcation and Epistemic Injustice 
Systems justiﬁcation theory suggests that people are motivated to justify the 
prevailing social order even when it relegates them to a sublimate status. This is done by 
reinforcing the current epistemic regime, including endorsing narratives and stereotypes 
that ﬁnd the disadvantaged group morally deﬁcient by trait - i.e. incompetent,

59 
unintelligent, lazy - while idealizing more advantaged groups (i.e., out-group favoritism ). 
This resembles the insights of epistemic injustice, but adds a motivation in the 
“palliative function of ideology” (Jost & Hunyady, 2002), wherein it is more preferable to 
see a social order as natural and just than to carry the weight of a life under an 
illegitimate, oppressive system, which produces anxiety, uncertainty, anger, dissonance, 
helplessness, alienation, powerlessness and discomfort. Evidence validates this theory 
by establishing the mental health consequences among those who cannot maintain such 
an illusion. For instance, Mirowsky and Ross (1983) found that mental health 
“symptoms” such as paranoia and helplessness were reliably correlated with awareness 
of one’s powerless circumstances among disempowered Mexican women on the Texas 
border. Hanna et al. (2000) found perspicacity - the realistic assessment of one’s 
oppressed social– position - fostered helplessness, hopelessness, and powerlessness by 
way of depressive realism, an etiological pathway to depression and anxiety that occurs 
when one has a demotivating awareness of their own entrapping circumstances. It is 
worth noting that this is the antithesis to CBT’s proposed mechanism of mental distress 
(Ratnayake, 2022); groups that cannot maintain the delusional optimism of a positivity 
bias, perhaps because they face too much discrimination or mistreatment (or because 
they are dispositionally prone to analytical thinking as with some neurodiverse groups), 
may struggle with overwhelming emotions upon losing the bias and enter depressive 
realism simply through awareness of their own entrapment, disempowerment and 
alienation (Hanna et al., 2000; Mirowski & Ross, 1983). 
It is worth adding this layer to the epistemic justice issues faced by the

60 
neurodiverse, who may be motivated to believe negative stereotypes about their own 
experience, a useful reminder that self-applying negative frames does not equate to 
such frames being problem-free. Challenges for the neurodiverse are commonly 
expressed as negative impacts on  their social marginalization and economic functioning - 
issues with motivation, role fulﬁllment, lack of self-regulation, staying on task, 
idiosyncratic styles of thought, conforming to social and occupational expectations, and 
so on - and neurodiverse people are often judged as failing in terms of perceived 
socioeconomic inadequacy, including by themselves in the form of self-stigma, self-
judgment and self-criticism. Systems justiﬁcation suggests that socio-political and 
economic orders take on a moral valence by being seen as “meritocracies;” those at the 
top are presumed to be more virtuous and those on the bottom are less so, and 
deﬁciencies in economic participation are taken as implicit referendums on moral 
character and worth, leading to shame and stigma. For instance, in a study exploring the 
link between stigma and individual meritocratic views as tied to an ethos of individual 
responsibility, there was a consistent association between stigma and attitudes about 
individuals “getting what they deserve,” i.e. the Protestant ethic. Mental illness was not 
spared from this calculus: self-stigma plagued those with schizophrenia, schizoaﬀective 
disorder and aﬀective disorders, and came from the public at large (Rüsch et al., 2010b). 
If even those who identify as neurodiverse do not ﬁnd a disability diagnosis can 
ameliorate meritocratic stigma completely, the problem is likely worse among those 
who lack a diagnosis altogether and may default to explaining their life’s struggles 
through self-stigmatizing narratives. For instance, Devon Price (2022) made the case

61 
that there is a large “unmasked” contingent of neurodiverse people who are 
undiagnosed, atypically presenting, or subclinical in their traits, and successful masking 
may also mean defaulting to self-stigmatizing narratives. Epistemic injustice holds that 
such people will begin by being disempowered by such narratives, and that it takes 
surmounting multiple barriers to challenge the epistemic dynamics to the point of 
pushing back on ideas like “laziness,” which may primarily exist to shame and blame 
disempowered people for the demotivating economic barriers they face (Price, 2021). 
Instead, such people are more likely to believe their fears of being “lazy,” “stupid,” 
“weird” or “crazy,” particularly as they buy into such notions when subconsciously 
seeking to align with the culture as part of eﬀorts to mask (D. Price, 2022). 
In short, systems justiﬁcation motives add a range of implications to the problem 
of epistemic injustice. First, it may make disempowered people more likely to endorse 
unfair stereotypes that marginalizes and exclude them and promotes a narrow and 
unrealistic ideal of normalcy and economic success, including stereotypes in the form of 
authoritative social science ﬁndings. Second, it suggests that problematic theories of 
neurodiversity, counseling or pathology may not derive their cultural power through 
scientiﬁc rigor, but because they reinforce the existing narrative social order; institutions 
that rely on this power may be complicit in the oppression of an unjust status quo, and 
promote untruths when the purpose of some frames and stereotypes is designed to 
obscure more empowering truths. Third, neurodiverse people, like all marginalized 
groups, may be uniquely forced into a mental health Catch-22 in a diﬀerent way to the 
autistic Catch-22 (Chapman & Carel, 2021). They may be forced into a Matrix-like choice

62 
between a “blue pill” - accepting the epistemic violence and systems justifying 
ideologies that are “ideologically palliative,” but contribute to their epistemic 
oppression in the tradeoﬀ - or a “red pill” - perspicacity about their oppressive 
conditions, and through awareness, overwhelming negative mental and emotional 
consequences, including cynicism, pessimism, misanthropy, and depressive realism . At 
the broadest level, then, to problematize epistemic injustice and systems justiﬁcation as 
they contribute to disempowering narratives in mental health, we may need to return to 
Johnstone and Boyle’s (2018) critique of the foundations of Western thought, which has 
led to the: 
the separation of mind from body, thought from feeling, the individual from the 
social group, and human beings from the natural world; the privileging of 
‘rationality’ over emotion; and a belief in objectivity, or the possibility of 
partialling out values, ethics and power interests from theory and practice in 
human systems. (p. 5) 
As a system of psychological thinking, it is this framework for thinking about 
psychology in the West that allows stigma to take the form of enduring, stable, 
reductive traits of vice and deﬁciency, and it is the framework therefore, that begs for 
an alternative (see: PTMF). 
Systems Justiﬁcation and Neurodiversity 
Among the epistemic injustices facing the neurodiverse, many likely stem from 
social narratives and stereotypes intertwined with that serve a systems justiﬁcation 
purpose. Many are also maintained by the social and clinical sciences themselves. If

63 
these positions were correct but problematic, it would be ethically complex, but the 
good may outweigh the bad. Systems justiﬁcation is typically intrinsically factually 
incorrect, however, as it is based on ignorance of the experience of marginalized groups 
codiﬁed as negative stereotypes about them. 
For instance, the role of IQ tests as a measurement of intelligence originated 
with Francis Galton, who was also the father of the American eugenics movement and 
strongly inﬂuenced social Darwinist thinking, both of which are systems justifying 
ideologies (Chapman, 2021c; Dennis, 1995; Gillham, 2001). It may be no wonder, then, 
that neurodiverse people are threatened by neurodiverse conceptions of intelligence. 
Neurodiverse people are often more rational than neurotypical people (D. Price, 2022), 
but their atypical presentation and disability status leave them vulnerable to being 
treated as cognitively inferior; consequently, evidence shows that priming neurotypical 
judgments of about a neurodiverse person’s “intelligence” is shown to function as a 
stereotype threat , prompting hypervigilance and stress (Priscott & Allen, 2021). 
Normality is a social construct that likely serves a function of enforcing 
conformity, which is functional to the strategy of some cultures and neurotypes who 
rely heavily on adaptive social cohesion (Del Giudice, 2018; Haidt, 2013; Henrich, 2004; 
2016, Richerson et al., 2014). Such cohesion may be intentionally compromised in 
neurodiverse people as part of an evolutionary tradeoﬀ to instead embody the strategy 
of evolutionary search (H. Taylor et al., 2022). Here, neurodiverse people are higher 
instead on traits like openness to experience/intellect, creativity and critical thinking, 
which can promote idiosyncratic and even eccentric individuality that is naturally in

64 
friction with conservatism and collectivism. This promotes values toward social 
disruption and change as a complement to these dispositions, including the use of 
painful friction between the two groups as a driver of cultural evolution (Haidt, 2013), 
which may include judging and mistreating neurodiverse people as abnormal . 
Laziness may be equally directed at ADHD and ASD which share struggles with 
motivation as a form of neurodiverse inertia (D. Price, 2022), making them both more 
prone to social burnout when excessive burdens and lack of supports creates too much 
expectation and not enough energy to meet it (Raymaker et al., 2020). However, laziness 
may be a myth (D. Price, 2021), an over-attribution of systemic demotivating barriers to 
important goals framed as individual faults. The neurodiverse may appear “lazier”, but 
this typically hides diﬀerences rather than deﬁcits; those with ADHD may be more 
sensitive to ﬂow states , rather than motivationally impaired (Armstrong, 2010), and 
there is a question of whether executive dysfunction may similarly be framed as an 
adaptive diﬀerence of task-switching as a tradeoﬀ. 
The stress-diathesis model suggests mental distress is always framed as the 
interaction of environmental factors and innate vulnerability to mental health disorders, 
which means no mental health suﬀering can ever be truly justiﬁed. However, the theory 
of Orchids and Dandelions put forth by Dobbs (2012) presents a good way to reframe 
the current evidence. The study of pathology genes, which has always assumed that 
implicated gene alleles were inherently dysfunctional, may actually be better framed as 
sensitivity alleles; ﬁndings by researchers like Belsky et al. (2009) showed those with risk 
alleles only became pathological in some environments (and cultures; see: Chiao &

65 
Blizinsky, 2009), and overperformed in others. Neurodiverse people, who are more 
likely to feel intrinsically diﬀerent, socially marginalized, and devalued as “weird,” face 
increased risk of depression and anxiety connected to this social friction. Frames that 
promote evidence of mental health issues as genetic vulnerability may piggyback on this 
vulnerability as those who already feel like an outcast for reasons they cannot discern, 
ﬁnd institutional narratives happy to authoritatively conﬁrm the worst-case scenario, 
that the meaning of those diﬀerences are inextricably linked to their intrinsic genetic 
inferiority.  
Consilience Approaches 
In each of the above constructs, robust challenges can be mounted against ideas 
that depend on authoritative ignorance to justify the status quo; they are easily 
deconstructed by more knowledge. However, this may necessitate what sociologist 
Emile Durkheim called social facts (Haidt, 2013). Social facts are constructs that call 
attention to predictable social patterns and relationships that are as robust and 
consequential as the physical sciences, particularly for mental health and well-being, but 
may lack a natural interpretive framework in the Western paradigm. For our purposes, 
social facts may include epistemic injustice, social determinants of mental health, and 
power gradients, to name a few. Furthermore, it requires multiple strains of evidence to 
reveal more complex phenomena only illuminated at the intersection of multiple 
perspectives. 
Consilience (E. O. Wilson, 1998) is derived from Latin, and translates directly to 
“jumping together.” It refers to a scientiﬁc method of converging on strong conclusions

66 
from interdisciplinary agreement. In addition to providing more access to information, 
consilience may have multiple beneﬁts in, for instance, imparting rigor to the pursuit of 
more advanced, complex, and useful therapeutic models. This rigor would balance 
analytical reductionism with systematic holism at the level of knowledge itself; 
complexity might beneﬁt the goals of empathic understanding, which Haidt (2013) has 
argued has been missing from eﬀorts at pure systematization in academics. 
Several neurodiversity scholars have voiced support to walk back, or “unpick,” 
the biodiversity metaphor of neurodiversity because the “engine of scientiﬁc discovery” 
has reiﬁed social Darwinist hierarchies, pathologization and exploitation (Chapman, 
2021b; 2021c; Meadows, 2020; Stenning & Rosqvist, 2021). Yet eschewing science 
altogether may be problematic. Neurodiversity is fundamentally a biopsychosocial 
phenomenon that resists being understood through subjective phenomenology alone; 
neurodiversity is equally expressed at biological, psychological and social levels, through 
diverse presentations, and across various ecological contexts. This may be particularly 
important to grasping the evolutionary “logic” of neurodiversity, which shows when, 
why and how neurodiverse traits are adaptive, and when they are not, so we can 
imagine clients for what they could be and not just what they are not. Yet this approach 
would require the ability to create a complex interdisciplinary picture, which consilience 
can provide. 
Consilience may also have other positive externalities of bringing multiple 
stakeholders to the table, the intentional prioritizing of epistemic justice, and creating 
empowering self-knowledge across diverse people. It may also create the social power

67 
necessary to change minds at the scale of whole paradigms. Consilience values data and 
models that can agree in large meta-models to make sense of the most data across 
sciences; this puts pressure on siloed ﬁelds that cannot be synthesized or integrated. 
Siloed and reductive ﬁelds may have a disproportionate number of systems justiﬁers 
propped up by idiosyncratic ideologies that allow ignorance to ﬂourish in comparative 
simplicity. Alternatively, if large metamodels can bring more thinkers and researchers 
together across ﬁelds, this represents the opportunity for larger numbers of scientists to 
work together across their diﬀerences, a kind of cross-disciplinary validation of the 
meta-model as a consensus that spans ﬁelds, and social power that likewise scales to 
new heights. This might help throw weight behind large, complex and just metamodels 
to create more “surface area” for collaboration and innovation, and might ultimately 
lead to promoting the model that supported an expanding frontier in academics. This is 
a model of paradigmatic change, one that can push back on epistemic injustice and 
systems justiﬁcation when complex understanding is valued. This would only be a boon 
to the goal of therapists who need new integrative ways to understand complex, 
diverse, intersectional people in a modern world. The current grail of modern therapy 
research has been characterized as approaches that are integrative, evolutionary, 
contextual, and biopsychosocial (Gilbert, 2019); this is exactly the kind of promise 
consilience can make. 
Part II: On Framing Neurodiverse Social Animals 
A Summary of Existing Paradigmatic Problems 
A variety of problems with the current medical model were laid out as problems

68 
with the current system. Let us review several of them. 
The medical model may represent misframing the problem of mental illness by 
solving the problem “at the wrong level.” By reducing mental health issues to individual 
problems, stigma is created as an externality by implying causality at the individual level 
(Lebowitz & Appelbaum, 2020). A similar insight was used in forming the science of 
second-order cybernetics, which assumes that observers are not neutral observers, but 
part of the system they are observing (Heylighen & Joslyn, 2003). When problem-solvers 
deploy an intuitive framing of a given problem - for example, “I don’t like this behavior 
in my spouse, so I will ﬁght all signs of it” - they are more likely to maintain the problem 
at a higher level by creating a new problem instead - in this case, excessive conﬂict with 
the spouse, which may depletes positive relational inﬂuence as a motivator for behavior 
change - and this may only make the original problem worse (see: second order change ; 
Fraser & Solovey, 2007). Sometimes a less intuitive solution is needed, but harder to see. 
For the medical model’s part, framing individual problems has created unintended 
consequences by blaming individuals for their suﬀering, and also obscured social 
etiologies like unsustainable or oppressive social systems (Ratts, 2009). 
There is also the possibility that blaming the individual is not unintended at all. 
Systems justiﬁcation is the premise that blaming disadvantaged groups for their 
problems, or the problems of an entire system, has the beneﬁt of allowing advantaged 
groups to maintain the status quo that beneﬁts them. In this model, the medical model 
may be creating ﬁctions that are internalized for added self-stigma because this helps to 
maintain a problematic system -– as evident by creating inequalities that are based on

69 
false pretenses of an inherently just social order based on superiority and inferiority 
dynamics - which is then maintained in part by the systems justifying beliefs (Jost & 
Hunyady, 2002). This is similar to the implications of epistemic injustice and epistemic 
violence, but adds the layer that all actors are motivated to maintain such a system, 
even those abused by it, because it is preferable to the psychological implications of 
recognizing the system one is under is not benevolent, aligned with your best interests, 
and may be actively exploitative, all of which have implications that are psychologically 
untenable (see: perspicacity and depressive realism ; Hanna et al., 2000; Mirowski & 
Ross, 1983). 
Because the medical model is not science-based (Davies, 2017) and is explicitly 
atheoretical (Suris et al., 2016) with ﬂawed assumptions (DeYoung & Kruger, 2023), it 
derives its power from its political and economic utility (Fitzgerald, 2020) and its cultural 
congruence with Western individualism and philosophy (Johnstone & Boyle, 2018; 
Oyserman et al., 2002). This makes for the problem as built into Western culture’s 
tendency to reduce social information to stable, decontextualized, abstract traits 
(Oyserman et al., 2002), leading DSM diagnoses to be worn like enduring negative self-
concepts and preventing more dynamic models of the person in context (Johnstone & 
Boyle, 2018), as Western thinking leads to a 
the separation of mind from body, thought from feeling, the individual from the 
social group, and human beings from the natural world; the privileging of 
‘rationality’ over emotion; and a belief in objectivity, or the possibility of 
partialling out values, ethics and power interests from theory and practice in

70 
human systems. (Johnstone & Boyle, 2018, p. 5) 
The preeminence of the medical model has led to the overmedicalization and 
mental health and paciﬁcation of clients (Rocca & Anjum, 2020), the pathologization of 
everyday life (Frances, 2014; Greenberg, 2013; Khoury et al., 2014), social control as a 
policing of controversial norms (Conrad, 1992; Correia, 2017; Fitzgerald, 2020), frames 
on mental health that lead to perceived uncontrollability and pessimism about 
diagnostic prognoses (MacDuﬃe & Strauman, 2017a; 2017b); and the assumption of a 
single idealized standard as a species-typical norm, which is likely false (Oller, 2019). 
The Advantages of a Social Animal Perspective (SAP) 
A social animal perspective (SAP) may help redress these areas; let’s consider a 
non-exhaustive list of some beneﬁts. The SAP is science-based with robust integrative 
social theory built on multilevel selection theory (MLS; D. S. Wilson, 2002; 2008), which 
organizes relationships between biological, psychological and sociocultural levels of 
analysis with evolutionary thinking. MLS builds in rigor to a consilience approach by 
integrating four perspectives into understanding any biopsychosocial element from an 
evolutionary approach using Tinbergen’s (1963) four questions: what is the function, 
history, mechanism, and development of the element in question (Hayes et al., 2020)? 
Iterated out, this allows for complex understanding of a people and problems in context; 
it can incorporate a variety of tools to model social facts (Haidt, 2013); and it scales at 
multiple levels and embodies dynamic change and variation as norms. The scale of the 
SAP also allows the modeling of Western thought as part of the problem ﬁeld and this 
thinking can evolve in a process of cultural evolution; by implication, the framework

71 
understands its role in the problem ﬁeld and can use feedback to reﬁne it progressively. 
The SAP is richly contextual and systemic and would not obscure social etiologies 
as Ratts (2009) feared, in part by making the logic of mental distress more “intelligible.” 
For instance, Paul Gilbert’s work (1992a; 1992b; 1995; 2000a; 2001a; 2001b; 2004) uses 
an SAP and provides multiple evolutionary pathways for social injury including a role for 
“powerlessness” (Gilbert, 1989; 1992b) and social or structural determinants (2018; 
2019). The SAP would combat epistemic injustice and systems justiﬁcation, which 
beneﬁt from ignorance about marginalized experiences to create negative stereotypes 
that collapse in the light of information. Hari (2018) used the SAP to deconstruct systems 
justifying ideas and epistemic injustices derived from biomedical frames on mental 
health struggles. This is in part because the multidisciplinarity of the SAP can explicitly 
accommodate a scientiﬁc footing for social facts like power dynamics, allowing meta-
cognition about the role of power, threat and social context as social determinants of 
mental distress (Johnstone & Boyle, 2018). Likewise, it can help validate moves away 
from the “speciﬁc ingredients” of medicalized therapies and validate existing support for 
the more general social mechanisms of therapy promoted by common factors models 
and evidence-based relationships (Wampold & Imel, 2015). 
The SAP can problematize Johnstone and Boyle’s (2018) critique of Western 
thinking at the heart of the “DSM mindset,” by problematizing reductionism, 
decontextualization and fragmentation by explicitly integrating and organizing all 
science domains as a stated goal. By extension, the SAP may combat the “mindlessness” 
in the critique by Khoury et al. (2014), where decontextualization, reductionism and

72 
fragmentation lead to cognitive commitments that are rigid, uncritical, automatic, static, 
narrow and unchanging, a style of thinking that may systematically fail to see clients 
with grace, charitability, possibility, imagination or compassion. Indeed, as a therapeutic 
frame for complex empathic understanding, the SAP lives up to Gilbert’s (2019) 
assessment of the grails of therapy as “integrative, evolutionary, contextual and 
biopsychosocial.” The SAP can beneﬁt from a partnership from European systems 
thinking (Heylighen, 2000; 2005; 2023; Heylighen & Joslyn, 2003) and American 
evolutionary functionalism (Hayes et al., 2020; D. S. Wilson, 2002; 2008) as part of its 
holistic modeling and complexity science, where each oﬀers diﬀerent kinds of ﬂexible 
thinking about people and problems. 
Finally, multilevel evolutionary thinking can de-stigmatize and de-medicalize 
social life, allowing multiple norms of functioning in life, an assumption of multilevel 
variation and change, and a moral arc to ground issues of justice and morality (Del 
Giudice, 2018; Haidt, 2013; Hayes et al., 2021; D. S. Wilson, 2002; 2008). All mental 
health substrates - biology, psychology, and sociocultural experience - can be explained 
through interplay across levels of analysis, and resist reduction to any one level. Even 
dysfunction can be articulated in terms of evolutionary functions that conﬂict, make 
tradeoﬀs or encounter mismatches (Gilbert, 2019; Hayes et al., 2020). Multilevel views 
make complex, changing and varied behavior more intelligible, justiﬁable, and 
communicable, while narrow views may fall back on explanatory vacuums, moral 
judgments and deﬁcits to explain what cannot be explained, promoting stigma and 
undermining credibility. SAP-informed frameworks have already proven attractive for

73 
justifying alternative frameworks to existing approaches. Wampold and Imel (2015) 
used the SAP to push back on “speciﬁc ingredient” therapies in favor of common factors 
approaches, while Johnstone and Boyle (2018) drew on SAPs in eﬀorts to replace the 
medical model in Britain. The same can be said in neurodiversity, where a Diversity 
Model (DM) can be assembled from a variety of contributions (Del Giudice, 2018; Haidt, 
2013; Oller, 2019; H. Taylor et al., 2022) and may help validate research by the 
community such as the burnout model of autism (Raymaker et al., 2020). 
In short, if we are to understand neurodiversity as diﬀerences in human nature 
and ways of moving through the human condition, we need an equally complex 
language to negotiate, communicate, and justify our ways of being across these 
diﬀerences. A theory of neurodiversity may argue that the diﬀerences between 
neurotypes are normal and natural, but these diﬀerences will remain abstruse and 
opaque until the SAP can allow us suﬃcient language with which to bridge the divides in 
a bottom-up fashion. 
What are Social Animals? 
It is important to acknowledge that for many, evolution has become synonymous 
with the hyper-individualistic “selﬁsh gene” reductionism (D. S. Wilson, 2002; 2008) 
which may contribute to evolution being relatively ignored in social sciences today 
(Hayes et al., 2020), or even associated with social Darwinist logic (Dennis, 1995), and 
that some may ﬁnd the association with neurodiversity and mental health repugnant 
(Chapman, 2021b; 2021c). However, the extended evolutionary synthesis (EES; Laland et 
al., 2015) may reverse such associations suﬃciently as to make evolutionary theory

74 
uniquely important in legitimizing the kind of social facts that are key to combating 
epistemic injustice. 
The EES now says that human beings are not independent, solitary creatures 
locked in competitive zero-sum games where the strong reproduce, nor are they mere 
pawns in games where their genes play for survival (Hayes et al., 2020). Human beings 
are considered social animals , which aggregate in large groups deﬁned by complex 
cultures and rule-governed interactions. Relative to other animal species, humans do 
not dominate in strength, speed or physical prowess, but have a variety of phenotypic 
advantages - bipedalism, opposable thumbs, symbolic thought, social learning, cultural 
inheritance, imagination, tool use and speech - that allows for behavioral plasticity to 
pay oﬀ at the social level: humans can ﬂexibly organize, cooperate, divide labor and 
enjoy interacting with one another (Henrich, 2004; 2016; Richerson et al., 2014; Sinn & 
Hayes, 2017; D. S. Wilson, 2002; 2008; 2019; Wright, 1994; 2000; 2009). The word for 
this is prosocial, which supersedes cooperation or altruism, and includes any behavior 
that supports the welfare of others or the group as a whole, allowing the group to 
function as an adaptive unit (D. S. Wilson et al., 2023). 
Prosocial animals include social insects called “eusocial” or “ultrasocial,” which 
become so social as to become a kind of organism in its own right, a social 
superorganism . Humans have been considered a type of social superorganism (D. S. 
Wilson & Sober, 1989; 2002; 2008; Wright, 2000), and may have evolved a ﬂexibility 
with respect to their ability to move from states of semi-independence to strong 
interdependence under speciﬁc conditions, what Haidt (2013) called the hive switch.

75 
Neurodiversity may bear on the degree to which people naturally vary along this 
groupish tendency (Del Giudice, 2018; Haidt, 2013), and diﬀerent people may ﬁt better 
or worse among groups that express groupishness in diﬀerent ways, with mental health 
issues like depression and anxiety capturing the friction (Chiao & Blizinsky, 2009). 
There may be a natural tension between our positioning respective to our 
individual and social needs. At one level, humans must optimize individual social 
positioning selﬁshly to access resources and compete for mates (i.e., within-group 
selection), but at another, it is their prosocial ability to selﬂessly cohere that ensures 
adaptive success, with more harmonious groups outcompeting more splintered rival 
factions ( between-group selection ). This has been pithily stated as “Selﬁshness beats 
altruism within groups. Altruistic groups beat selﬁsh groups. Everything else is 
commentary” (D. S. Wilson & Wilson, 2007, p. 345). 
D. S. Wilson (2002) posited that a “black box” of evolved prosocial mechanisms 
must exist in the human mind to uniquely support our ability to suppress self-interest to 
the point where cultural evolution is the dominant evolutionary process in operation 
today, but suggested that while evolutionary psychology has made progress in this area, 
we don’t currently know what is “in the box.” The mental health literature may be 
uniquely suited to the nature of the question, showing us mental health suﬀering is the 
natural externality of evolutionary solutions to the problems of prosocial living, where 
suﬀering and vulnerability are a predictable “stick” to being disconnected or impugned 
with respect to prosocial engagement, and a sense of meaning and resilience is the 
carrot for optimizing prosocial engagement. In other words, we have evolved to ﬁnd

76 
prosociality meaningfully energizing and mentally sustaining, and evolved to ﬁnd its 
absence uniquely debilitating and unsustainable . Understanding how this works would 
be useful for our purposes, by rendering the opaque logic of mental health functioning 
as intelligible from an epistemic justice perspective. As the title of an evolutionary 
medicine book by Nesse (2020) put it, there are “Good Reasons for Bad Feelings” and 
understanding them can help us optimize our well-being accordingly. 
Relevant Evolutionary Concepts 
The extended evolutionary synthesis (Laland et al., 2015) is an acknowledgement 
that a variety of evidentiary gains in subdisciplines of the evolutionary research program 
(evo-devo, developmental plasticity, inclusive inheritance and niche construction) have 
produced a compelling enough reason to modify the original modern synthesis (MS) as 
an alternative conceptual framework. 
Much of this extended synthesis serves to widen the scope of our understanding 
of evolutionary processes – variation, selection and heritability – into new domains that 
fundamentally expand the dynamism and purposiveness of evolution. By appreciating 
that any substrate that can have the properties of variation, selection and heritability 
can function in a Darwinian fashion, a multitude of domains are seen as evolutionary 
processes and interact purposively and even directionally (Hayes et al., 2020; D. S. 
Wilson et al., 2023). 
This multidimensional approach to evolutionary processes (Hayes et al., 2020) 
includes known biological substrates such as genetics and epigenetics, but expands to 
include biopsychosocial substrates for social learning, symbolic thought, and

77 
sociocultural learning (Hayes et al., 2020; Jablonka & Lamb, 2014). A breakdown in basic 
assumptions about the direction and nature of evolution begins to emerge, as a quote 
from Hayes et al. (2020) makes clear: “it is now possible to think of physical organisms 
themselves as systems for turning environment and behavior into biology (Slavich & 
Cole, 2013),” where the primacy of biology as the sole unit of selection is lost and even 
subsumed relative to other units of selection that learn and adapt more quickly. We see 
a similar challenge to MS assumptions in the growing understanding of niche 
construction, where behavioral and psychological variables inﬂuence the environment 
itself by constructing niches that a species adapts to, where the niche then feeds back to 
further shape the phenotypic expression of the species in a bidirectional fashion. A view 
of evolution emerges that is multilevel, multi-timescale and bidirectional between 
organism and environment, where biology is no longer the linear determiner of 
evolution we once imagined, but a substrate among many. 
Evolution is not just multidimensional , but multilevel . It may appear chaotic to 
liberate diﬀerent “dimensions” of evolution, but the concept of being “multi-level” 
stabilizes these dimensions into broadly parallel, mutually-determining, experimental 
processes on diﬀerent evolutionary timescales. These timescales may be purposive and 
directional (Hayes et al., 2020) as illustrated by the concept of major transitions (METs). 
A MET is a process of increasing complexity where evolution adds to the multi-
tier hierarchy of life by moving from molecules to cells, cells to organisms, organisms to 
social superorganisms. Fundamentally, it involves changing how information is stored 
and transmitted across generations, and so the major transitions can be captured at a

78 
ﬁne grain in the transition from prokaryotes to eukaryotes, asexual cloning to sexual 
reproduction, protists to multicellular organisms, solitary organisms to eusocial insect 
colonies, and primates to human culture groups (Szathmáry & Smith, 1995). The 
dynamics of a major transition sees processes of natural selection producing a rise in 
complexiﬁcation when, after periods of variation and selection, invariably a) some group 
of smaller entities form a larger group, b) the group comes to function as a whole, 
including individual reproduction becoming impossible outside the larger entity, which 
reproduces as a whole, c) the group organizes, specializes and diﬀerentiates into 
organelles, tissues and castes, d) lower-levels of selection can undermine higher levels 
as in cancers, selﬁshness and coup d’etats, and e) a new form of information 
transmission evolves ala DNA, epigenesis and universal grammar. The evolution of 
neurodiversity may represent such a major transition (H. Taylor et al., 2022), as 
neurodiversity a) contributes to group resilience and plasticity by supporting human 
social groups to function as interdependent wholes that evolve through cultural 
evolution, b) cultural evolution sees groups transmitting information through cultural 
ideologies that capture group organization as a way of life, making it possible to frame 
the group as the locus of reproduction where neurodiverse subgroups (or neurotribes; 
Silberman, 2016) are “tissues” in the superorganism; c) may reﬂect human specialization 
and diﬀerentiation as biopsychosocial strategies optimized for “evolutionary 
exploitation” versus “evolutionary search;” d) this function may be subverted by lower 
levels of selection (Hayes et al., 2020; D. S. Wilson et al., 2023) when developmental 
conditions result in misanthropic loners, burnout or cults; and e) these may be stored

79 
and transmitted by genetic and epigenetic diﬀerences targeting a universal 
temperament or life history strategy system. 
Considering the evolution of humans, we can also frame METs as transitions of 
individuality (West et al., 2015). That is a multipart evolutionary process sees the 
following: individual organisms form limited communities, community cooperation 
expands, and then cooperative communities transform into an indivisible, 
interdependent whole as a new, higher-order individual. By example, individual 
primates originally formed communities built of limited cooperative capacity and 
potential, evolution expanded on that prosocial capacity in the evolution of humans, and 
we would now be somewhere in the process of transforming from a cooperative 
culture-group to a single, higher-order superorganism. This process helps to resolve the 
tension between selﬁsh and selﬂess behavior by assuming that prosocial behaviors can 
evolve when between-group selection outweighs within-group selection (Sober & 
Wilson, 1998; D. S. Wilson & Sober, 1994), i.e. intergroup competition becomes more 
salient than individual competition to individual ﬁtness. It also explains how individual 
human psychology is heavily overlaid with prosocial mechanisms like social emotions, 
moral intuitions, altruism and values, which further help the group function as an 
adaptive unit. This may frame how individual well-being can have group-level targets for 
well-being that do not reference the individual directly, i.e. niche-construction, where it 
is the ability to align individual prosocial needs and drives to a niche that channels and 
rewards that way of being, by conferring feedback of adaptive success that translate to 
feelings of life satisfaction, optimism, conﬁdence, connection and resilience.

80 
METs help to build an interdisciplinary scientiﬁc meta-narrative inclusive of all 
living and non-living systems as building up a multi-tier hierarchy of complexity over 
time (Hayes et al., 2020; Heylighen, 2000; 2023; Szathmáry & Smith, 1995; D. S. Wilson, 
2023; D. S. Wilson et al., 2023). From this dominant pattern, other major patterns can be 
discerned. For instance, each evolutionary leg is faster. Cosmic evolution has taken place 
over billions of years, biological evolution took hundreds of millions of years, 
sociocultural evolution has occurred over tens of thousands of years, technological 
evolution has taken thousands and behavioral evolution unfolds on the span of years or 
faster. Because of this, and given that any process of variation, selection and retention is 
Darwinian, it would be meaningful to compare the speed of biological evolution to 
behavioral evolution. In biological evolution, learning takes generations to emerge as 
organisms reproduce with tiny variations and must die in order to bear out subtle 
patterns of diﬀerential ﬁtness as evidence of accrued adaptive benefit, while behavioral 
evolution can occur on more immediate timescales, consciously or subconsciously, by 
selecting a desired outcome, varying possible mental or behavioral approaches to fulﬁll 
the goal, and retaining the most eﬀective. This example highlights the concept of 
evolvability as itself a target of selection, which is to say, evolution as a change process 
favors each new tier on the hierarchy of life to be more changeable as measures of 
robustness, redundancy, ﬂexibility and exploration (Kirschner & Gerhart, 1998), and is 
generally expressed as increasing behavioral phenotypic plasticity (ﬂexible responses to 
novel scenarios) that can accommodate more varied environments (i.e., a global niche 
for humans) and adapt over longer time-scales (i.e., goals on the scale of decades for

81 
humans). Evolvability may help explain the mental dimension of evolution itself, as 
mental anticipation and modeling increase the ability to control one’s environment 
across time and space (Heylighen, 2005). When humans evolved language and universal 
syntax, they unlocked the ability for shared representations of the world fueled by social 
learning and symbolic thought; this became a new inheritance system that could be 
selected upon by cultural evolution to evolve the complexity of interior models of the 
exterior world (i.e., worldviews), increasing goal-directed ﬂexibility, scope and 
farsightedness still further (D. S. Wilson et al., 2023). This may mean the evolution of 
consciousness has eﬀectively been “in the cards,” and our ability to model our own 
evolutionary change and direction may be an important next step (Heylighen, 2023; M. 
E. Price, 2023; Vidal, 2023; D. S. Wilson, 2023). 
These concepts have implications for psychological science (Hayes et al., 2020), 
for as the balance of forces between individual and group-selection shifts over 
evolutionary time, the group becomes a conscious target of selection. For instance, 
humans are most likely disproportionately subject to cultural evolution as their 
predominant selection process, and to the extent that biology still matters, it is only 
through a process of dual inheritance, where culture shapes genetic evolution and vice 
versa (Muthukrishna et al., 2018; Richerson & Boyd, 2008). Thus, humans concern 
themselves with the business of evolving culture and shaping the niches that will, in 
turn, co-regulate them. 
In this regard, neurodiversity may also vary as a function as a degree to which 
their evolved role diﬀerentiation is purposive. The concept that “purposeless” evolution

82 
can create “purposeful” organisms is not new, and is borne out by implication from 
evolvability as in asking the question of “whether the collection of species we have with 
us today is not only the product of the survival of the ﬁttest, but also that of the survival 
of the most evolvable?” (Wagner & Draghi, 2010, p. 381). Eﬀectively, if each sub-pattern 
of major transitions ﬁnds it predictable that some living system (such as eukaryotes or 
primates) will move from individual to community to individual as a rise in evolvability 
and complexiﬁcation, this can be considered a defacto purpose of evolution, even if no 
purposeful designer exists. This is the concept of teleonomy (Mayr, 1974), and scholars 
have even conceived of it as a moral and spiritual good, where the net outcome is to 
expand conscious anticipation of evolutionary challenges so as to avoid them, and create 
higher level evolutionary units where lower-level units experience a harmonious and 
meaningful interdependence experienced purposively (see: Pierre Teilhard de Chardin ; 
M. E. Price, 2023; Vidal, 2023; D. S. Wilson, 2023). A more cautious position might 
acknowledge a) the important challenges of co-evolving the evolutionary niches that 
regulate our collective well-being; b) negotiating neurodiverse tensions in navigating 
change versus stability with more intention and less friction; and c) modeling 
exponential evolutionary change as fraught with opportunities and threats to manage 
global conﬂict and catastrophe as a target of selection (D. S. Wilson et al., 2023). For 
neurodiversity, teleonomy may also be an important frame for understanding 
neurotypes as serving distinct functions in regulating the group, achieving subgoals of 
conservation and change in social life, and constructing co-regulating social niches in 
service of directional cultural evolution (Haidt, 2013).

83 
We will return to the question of neurodiverse well-being including key concepts 
of niche-construction, mismatch and trade-oﬀs, as well as social facts such as agonic or 
hedonic environments organized around power and threat or safety and cooperation. 
First, we will turn to neurodiversity in a consilience, SAP framework. 
Neurodiversity: A Primer 
The term neurodiversity was coined by sociologist Judith Singer as a way to 
reframe the brain as possessing an inherent diversity of cognitive organizations and 
functions as “a trait possessed by a group, not an individual” (Boswell, 2020). Singer’s 
neurodiversity drew on two predominant inﬂuences, the social model of disability, 
which advocated that the challenges of disability lay in the systemic barriers and 
exclusionary attitudes of an inhospitable society, and the biodiversity concept of the life 
sciences, which documented the necessity of a rich and diverse biome to maintain 
critical ecosystems for planetary health (Doyle, 2020). Like the social model of disability 
in Britain in the 1970’s, neurodiversity eschewed diagnoses like autism (since rebranded 
as ASD) and ADHD as diseases to be eradicated, and saw them as positive identities with 
unique contributions of thought and agency to be valued, included and respected 
(Armstrong, 2010; Doyle, 2020; Priscott & Allen, 2021; J. Singer, 2017). Importantly, the 
nature of these “strengths-based perspectives” can themselves be controversial (see: 
Meadows, 2020) and may even seem pollyannaish, in part because they are poorly 
understood and are often provided by eclectic studies that merely link a diagnosis to a 
valued trait like creativity, enthusiasm or intelligence in a clinical population (Armstrong, 
2010). However, this may be because such contributions are necessarily pre-

84 
paradigmatic because the neurodiverse concept is still premised on reframing existing 
pathological diagnoses as a starting point. There exists plausible evidence that 
neurodiversity is functionally and normally distributed as functional subclinical traits 
(i.e., not associated with pathology) in the population, meaning a) they are invisible to 
the pathology focus of mental health, and b) only become “on the radar” through their 
unique signatures of suﬀering and dysfunction (Del Giudice, 2018; Oller, 2019). 
Originally, neurodiversity was applied to Asperger’s syndrome (Ortega, 2009), 
since renamed to ASD, as Singer was “in the middle of three generations of women 
somewhere on the autism spectrum” (J. Singer, 2017). Singer diﬀerentiated between 
neurotypicals -– those who were considered a neuromajority with the cultural privilege 
of being deemed “normal” -– and the neurodivergent, which included a variety of 
neurominorities on one or more spectrums of neurodivergent thought, but are most 
prominently associated with medical diagnoses such as ASD and ADHD (Priscott & Allen, 
2021). Neurodiversity has since become a crowded umbrella term for competing 
taxonomies owing in part to the term being used to apply equally to those in the mental 
health, education and communication disability literature, and reﬂecting ambiguous 
inclusion criteria and epistemic status. Neurodiversity in education settings may include 
diagnoses such as dyslexia, dyscalculia, dyspraxia and ADHD (not a learning disability, 
but often diagnosed in educational settings), with some using neurodiversity as an 
umbrella for both the learning disability and giftedness communities as well; the two are 
thought to intersect by degrees, where some gifted students may have only subtle 
learning disabilities, some may have gifts outweighed by disabilities, and some go

85 
unidentiﬁed by the gifted community as most of their gifts go unrecognized as simple 
compensation for their disabilities (Dalton, 2013). The most deﬁnitive diagnoses, ADHD 
and ASD, are included with Tourette’s syndrome as communication disorders, but have 
signiﬁcant overlap with mental health diagnoses as deﬁned by the DSM-5-TR. This 
bridge sometimes extends the neurodiversity label to other DSM-5-TR diagnoses such as 
bipolar disorder, schizoaﬀective disorder, mood disorders and schizophrenia, with some 
arguments that these diagnoses may also have functional origins and potential 
strengths, given they have not been selected away by evolution (Armstrong, 2010; Del 
Giudice, 2018). Other constructs from the self-help and folk psychology world such as 
introverts, empaths and highly sensitive people (HSPs) could ﬁnd inclusion under the 
neurodiversity umbrella, even as they challenge existing empirical frameworks to 
provide categorization. 
As a big tent sociopolitical advocacy movement, it is no surprise that 
neurodiversity represents many things to many people (VanDaalen, 2021). 
Neurodiversity has been seen as a neutral diﬀerence, as in the quote: “There is no 
‘normal’ style of human brain or human mind, any more than there is one ‘normal’ race, 
ethnicity, gender, or culture” (Walker, 2012, p. 228). Some hold neurodiversity is a 
positive advantage: “Neurodiversity may be every bit as crucial for the human race as 
biodiversity is for life in general” (Blume, 1999). Some go so far as to claim it is a 
superpower (Thunberg, 2019). 
Advocacy may become controversial when they challenge the dominion of 
institutional and healthcare groups whose inﬂuence is mediated by framing neurodiverse

86 
issues through the deﬁcit models of disease. For instance, neurodiversity advocates 
came out against the popular organization “Autism Speaks” and led the group to 
remove its pursuit of a “cure” as a mission goal in 2016 (Lewis, 2020), and the success of 
neurodiversity advocates led the autism research luminary Simon Baron-Cohen to write 
an article “the concept of neurodiversity is dividing the autism community” (Baron-
Cohen, 2019). Yet a conversation about the relationship between disability and identity 
may be the movement's largest contribution to date, including how to reconcile the 
pathology perspective with credible identities. For example, the autism-as-an-identity 
and autism-as-disability camps represent a spectrum of positions including those who a) 
see autism as inherently disabling (Olsson, 2007), b) seek to diﬀerentiate between high 
and low functioning (Baron-Cohen, 2000), c) those who see any such diﬀerentiation as 
inherently discriminatory (Alvares et al., 2019), d) those who think the heterogeneity of 
autism presentation undermines the argument for neurodiversity (Hughes, 2020), e) 
those who see diﬀerence as compatible with disability (Bailin, 2019), and f) those who 
see neurodiversity in purely positive terms (Thunberg, 2019). As pointed out by Doyle 
(2020), these polarized and passionately held positions are to be expected and 
respected as layers of the intersectional identity challenge. Fulﬁlling the motto of the 
Autism Self Advocacy Network to say “nothing about us without us” is to grapple with 
the dissonance of what might be brought to the table. There may also be an issue of 
who gets centered in the neurodiversity conversation; this author found diﬃculty in 
ﬁnding neurodiversity assessments and theses that did not assume the autism 
community as the focus, followed by ADHD, creating a potentially problematic

87 
impression that one neurominority can stand in for the whole as a proxy for 
neurodiversity writ large (e.g., Ekblad, 2012; Robertson, 2009; VanDaalen, 2021). 
Neurodiversity empirical status: threats, opportunities and epistemic justice.  
One reason for the controversy surrounding neurodiversity is that it is currently 
a community stakeholder-driven, self-advocacy movement that is united by a critical 
discourse of the medical model’s empiricism, while not attempting to establish a 
separate empirical footing, grounding itself instead as a political and identity-based 
solution (Chapman, 2021a; 2021b; Chapman & Carel, 2021; Fitzgerald, 2020; Meadows, 
2020; Walker, 2012). Fitzgerald (2020) called neurodiversity an “attitude of mind to deal 
with stigma,” and highlighted problematic gaps in the social, political, and scientiﬁc 
framing of the psychiatric model that can be remediated by neurodiversity; however, he 
does not attempt to situate neurodiversity on a distinct epistemic footing. Stenning and 
Rosqvist (2021) would seek to “unpick” the biodiversity metaphor, as biodiversity was 
partially justiﬁed by the use of ﬁnding economic value in under-exploited ecological 
sectors, something that was seen to have eerie parallels when neurodiversity came to 
be used to ﬁnd ways of exploiting neurodiverse strengths in the business sector. They 
further seek to downplay the signiﬁcance of biological diﬀerences in the fear that doing 
so could reify social Darwinism, exclude those with unidentiﬁable neurodivergent 
diﬀerences, or reify a hierarchy of normality amid deﬁcit-based identity categories. 
Meadows (2020) decried that neurodiversity is becoming increasingly popular as a 
cosmetic upgrade to the pathology paradigm, a way to add strength-based language 
without challenging the nature of the underlying constructs of pathology, yet resists

88 
providing a counter-narrative per se. She classiﬁes attempts to “understand the 
neurodivergent brain” as regressive because it “puts individuals under a microscope” 
and implies a normative neurotypical brain, instead of embracing the “biological truism” 
that all people are neurodiverse at an individual level (Meadows, 2020; J. Singer, 2021). 
Chapman (2021a) countered that it may not be possible to fully reject the medical 
model’s “broken or sick brain” hypothesis as doing so would restrict access to sense-
making stories needed for people to assemble a pastiche of identities and self-stories. 
However, Chapman (2021b) also opposed epistemic frames like evolution that might 
oﬀer non-pathological justiﬁcation for neurodiversity as a) the act of justifying 
neurodiversity based on “strengths” rejects the values of inherent worth, and b) doing so 
may reify an underlying social Darwinist subtext that neurotypes are in competitive 
comparison with one another; he concludes that both positions hold a danger of 
reinforcing the current oppressive social and epistemic order. 
Chapman’s overarching vision might summarize much of the resistance to 
epistemic footings for neurodiversity. Chapman and Carel (2021) center epistemic 
justice (Fricker, 2007), where marginalization and oppression of minority groups is often 
based on their status as knowers and their ability to be known; i.e. the medical model 
nulliﬁes the assumption of credibility, forces individuals to be known only through 
negative stereotypes, and provides internally oppressive self-knowledge. Epistemic 
justice highlights a Catch-22 implicit in pathologization wherein a precondition for 
accepting mental health support for autism is to accept viewing the diagnosis as a 
disease pathology, which necessarily precludes the potential to embrace autism-as-a-

89 
viable-identity, where autism would be seen as an indivisible part of one’s experience 
that does not compromise their credibility or path to thriving. This Catch-22 is 
paraphrased by Bervoets and Hens (2020) as “I’d be disordered if I accept to being 
autistic, but if I’m in good mental health, I have to accept I’m not autistic.” The 
epistemic justice frame extends its criticism of the medical model to general suspicion of 
the entire scientiﬁc “engine of discovery” (Stenning & Rosqvist, 2021), as institutional 
knowledge production might inevitably reproduce more constraints on community-
generated identities and self-stories, creating more epistemic injustice from societal 
knowledge structures imposed upon, and precluding understanding of, the same people 
who are marginalized under the current ideological power gradients. One possible 
interpretation is that move represents a general disqualiﬁcation of institutional players 
in knowledge-production as a strategic move to reposition the individual as the primary 
narrator; and by extension, were this to lead to epistemic opaqueness, that wouldn’t 
necessarily be bad if it further disempowered institutions and empowered individuals. 
Epistemic Paths 
Not all are opposed to epistemic clarity, however. While Fitzgerald (2020) largely 
focused on criticism of his own ﬁeld of psychiatry as a specialist in adolescent autism, he 
oﬀered a heuristic for neurodiversity as statistical deviation of normally distributed 
traits. Ollers (2019) pointed out that a neurodiversity of distributed trait clusters is 
important to understanding the normal foundation of psychiatric disorders, as families 
that show subclinical traits related to certain psychiatric diagnoses may help explain 
why disorders themselves run in families. He criticized the recent concept of “symptom

90 
networks” of related mental/linguistic events (i.e., thoughts and emotions), which 
eschew understanding the functional biological context of these events, as not helping 
to understand why such disorders arise, persist or become heritable. The result is to 
isolate people with mental health diagnoses from their neurodiverse context by turning 
traits that may be heightened but subclinical in their families into “symptoms” only 
when exposed to clinical settings, arbitrarily dividing clients from “normal” mental 
health. 
Doyle (2020) added a line of functionalist evolutionary thought by making a case 
of neurodiversity as an evolution of specialist forms of thinking to balance out more 
generalist typologies, where neurodivergence accordingly oﬀers a “spiky” proﬁle of 
extreme peaks (strengths) and troughs (challenges) across cognitive skills such as verbal 
ability, working memory, visual skills and processing speed (reminiscent of the phrase, 
“genius isn’t general”). 
In contrast, Armstrong (2010) compiled a book-length synthesis on an eclectic 
neurodiverse taxonomy (organized based on reframes of a mix of learning disabilities 
and mental health diagnoses), which explored a variety of social science contributions 
from psychology to anthropology). Armstrong’s evidence was eclectic, citing a variety of 
ﬁndings and perspectives to characterize neurodiversity as unique ways of being suited 
to diﬀerent social niches, and irreducible to simple dysfunction. He incorporated 
research arguing that the positive attributes of neurodiversity emerged when people 
adapted to certain “social niches” were aligned with those strengths, supports and 
needs, while those who expressed the pathology variations were mismatched to their

91 
environment. 
David Dobbs (2012) charted evidence refuting the idea of “pathology genes” in 
psychiatry by arguing that the pathology gene focus precludes discovering the functional 
strengths of gene-carriers, which often increased in frequency over evolutionary time, 
contrary to what one might expect of vulnerability genes. In contrast, evidence 
suggested that some carriers were “orchids,” sensitive but capable of great talent, while 
a majority of people might be “dandelions,” hearty while trending toward the collective 
median. Dobbs highlighted examples of so-called mental health predispositions were in 
fact disposition for personality traits like restless creativity and novelty-seeking, which 
could lead to disorders, but only in toxic, unsupportive environments; in contrast, these 
gene-carriers over-performed in supportive and empowering environments (Belsky et 
al., 2009). A better name for these genes, then, would be plasticity genes, i.e. sensitive to 
both positive and negative change. 
Complementary Cognition 
Steven Silberman (2016), author of the book NeuroTribes, argued for conditions 
such as ADHD, autism and dyslexia as a natural diversity of human nature via cognitive 
variation, which in turn drives human cultural and technological evolution. Importantly, 
the theory of complementary cognition by H. Taylor et al. (2022) gave a full evolutionary 
treatment of how this might work despite not attempting to account for neurodiversity 
per se (though the authors are associated with a group of researchers that identify as 
dyslexic). Complementary cognition is built on resolving an information-processing 
optimization problem called the exploration-exploitation trade-oﬀ, where both

92 
exploration and exploitation are important, but neither can be optimized simultaneously 
due to functional constraints (Črepinšek et al., 2013). For instance, resource exploitation 
may use incomplete information to produce imperfect strategies to survive that are 
then streamlined for eﬃciency, but the time spent improving workﬂow can prevent 
investment in eﬀorts to discover better long-term information and strategies, which 
may be particularly important when environments change and old strategies break 
down. Alternatively, optimizing for exploration may lead to evolving survival strategies 
over time, but a lack of behavioral commitments can leave skills, ideas and expertise 
underdeveloped and fail to harness existing opportunities. The authors take it for 
granted that a range of complex adaptive systems have solved this divide by 
instantiating a division of labor, with some mechanisms oriented to exploitation and 
some to evolutionary search; for instance, biological evolution, they argue, has produced 
mechanisms that support genetic search, while in humans, the analog is cognitive 
search. Cognitive search only makes sense in light of cultural evolution, which guides the 
evolution of human complex adaptive systems as a group-level process, and uses 
symbolic thought and language as inheritance systems. Accordingly, neurocognitive 
specialists would increase group-level evolvability. While generalists would fail to 
optimize either exploitation or exploration, adding cognitive specialists to generalists 
would optimize for both, particularly as aggregating idiosyncratic search strategies could 
pool both risks and rewards, ensuring increased search capacity (again, at the group-
level) through the multiple approaches being used, and risk-mitigation by ensuring that 
one of the search approaches would work so exploratory eﬀorts would not be wasted,

93 
even as stakes were high under conditions of changing or varying environments. By 
adding specialists to generalists, then, both eﬃciency and capacity improve at the 
group-level, facilitating both the retention of existing survival strategies and adoption of 
new ones over time, the raw ingredients of directional cultural evolution. 
The model espoused by the authors may ﬁt with existing conceptions of 
neurodiversity in the following ways. One might expect changes to innate psychological 
systems (the domain of evolutionary psychology) that lead to idiosyncratic life 
strategies. A parsimonious mechanism could be possible through small tweaks to 
reward and threat processing systems leading to larger diﬀerences at the motivational 
level which in turn led to emergent diﬀerences at the life history level (Haidt, 2013). 
Speciﬁcally, this could result in diﬀerential engagement with information in ways that 
are not immediately captured as individual pay-oﬀs, but only at the group level over 
time, which provides a suﬃcient ﬁtness beneﬁt individually and collectively to be 
maintained in the population through balancing selection (Hunt & Jaeggi, 2022; J. 
Williams & Taylor, 2006). We might expect idiosyncratic interests to motivate 
engagement with symbolic thought in service of building idiosyncratic, complex, 
mereological models guided by individual curiosity and interest salience. That might lead 
to short-term ineﬃciencies with decision-making, attention, and behavior as trade-oﬀs, 
particularly as these would be disproportionately telegraphed as costly frictions that 
would inevitably occur within incompatible niches throughout development. 
Paradoxically, however, it is possible for this to pay oﬀ at the group-level if even a 
subset of specialists can combine their individual search strategies via information-

94 
sharing, as resources would be pooled and risks mitigated leading to some group-level 
successes in areas of exploration, experimentation and creativity. It also highlights the 
challenge of identifying the strengths and contributions of the strategy in question 
which only become apparent by tracking social outcomes that are contingent on a) 
ﬁnding niches-of-ﬁt, which vary on the luck of inherited social positions and identities, 
and b) the success of relevant group eﬀorts; neither of which are guaranteed, and are 
indeed probabilistic based on social circumstances. Framed by MLS, we could highlight a 
tension between group-level selection, which may reinforce these strategies over long 
time horizons, and individual selection, which may ﬁnd the value of the strategy highly 
contingent on local circumstances, creating a “high-risk, high-reward” evolutionary 
strategy maintained at the group-level. 
Thus, while a variety of evidence is provided by the authors that is beyond the 
scope of this dissertation, here only the implications are important: we would expect 
evolution would create innate diﬀerences in bottom-up mechanisms to a) create 
diﬀerent systems of motivation, attention and behavior that should favor intrinsic and 
idiosyncratic goals; b) such bottom-up mechanisms would only prime an increased 
probability of employing a particular life strategy, not necessarily guarantee its success, 
requiring robust and tailored social supports as a critical element in social coordination 
to achieve niche-of-ﬁt; c) socio-political friction between ways of being should be 
expected despite the meta-level complementarity of the approaches, as the strategies 
themselves are antagonistic at a process-level, and d) the success of these strategies in 
tandem are nothing short of crucial to the human project, which means the strategies

95 
themselves should not be targeted for eradication as some gene-therapeutic 
technologies have aspired, and this would be true even if we know that the strategies 
sometimes lead to outcomes that cause individual pain and suﬀering in a failure state. 
Indeed, much beneﬁt may someday be done by embracing the high-level frame of 
neurodiversity as serving an evolutionary purpose - where frictions are costly yet 
meaningful self-sacriﬁces that counter-balance the potential of unique and important 
gifts to the human project - if this leads to an empowering identity and frame to create 
resources during times of duress. Finally, being aware of such a purpose may be crucial 
to the ability to believe in individuals and hold for them their potential as a paradoxical 
solution to mental health problems - reinvestment of energy, resources and support, 
not facilitating social drop-out. 
All of the above epistemic paths represent positive eﬀorts, but few have borne 
them out to build alternative holistic ways of thinking about a “diversity model” 
including how mental health needs and challenges would be addressed. It is crucial to 
acknowledge the ethical terrain that is the focus of neurodiversity advocates - that using 
the scientiﬁc “engine of discovery” shouldn’t reinforce social Darwinist implications as 
forms of epistemic injustice or systems justiﬁcation; nor can it aﬀord to reinforce 
neurodiversity as a labor pool to exploit, or preemptively draw the boundaries of 
inclusion and exclusion too clearly (Chapman, 2021a; 2021b). Consequently, we must 
begin with the question - what evidence exists across social sciences that bears out 
neurodiversity as a form of diversity, and what would the implications be at a construct 
level, and for mental health and well-being?

96 
Social Animals Occupy Social Niches 
Social animals exhibit individual variation in strategies for navigating their social 
environments. Social animals typically seek certain social conditions, avoid others, and 
may be disposed to certain roles, with specialization going a layer deeper: consistent 
preferences and constraints for social behavior and social conditions (Montiglio et al., 
2013). The strategies that result such as aggressiveness or sociability are contextually-
sensitive, and may functionally subsume a range of traits such as activity, exploration or 
boldness. Fixing these preferences and constraints at a deeper temperamental or 
personality level prevents the costs of switching strategies and limits conﬂict to those 
within your social niche (Bergmüller & Taborsky, 2010; Montiglio et al., 2013). 
Social niche specialization includes a relationship at three levels – biological 
dispositions (temperament), characteristic social adaptations (personality) and social 
ecology (social factors). The key thesis of social niche specialization is that the range of 
social factors shape biology and personality, and include social conﬂict, strategy 
frequency, ecological forces and division of labor in more cooperative species 
(Bergmüller & Taborsky, 2010). These social dynamics act upon innate diﬀerences to 
predispose individuals toward certain strategies based on niche availability, and 
developmental plasticity further sub-specializes into roles that adopt personality traits 
into correlated “packages.” Said another way, a given animal may only have access to a 
subset of the behavioral repertoire of the species depending on the social niche 
(Montiglio et al., 2013). A key ﬁnding is that social conﬂict drives development of these 
integrated life history strategies at every level, with stress shaping personality through

97 
social experience, and biology through epigenetics as a life history “switch” (Del Giudice, 
2018). Avoiding the social stress of conﬂict works to minimize niche overlap, and 
behavioral consistency helps in this regard; this may help explain why even identical 
twins sometimes possess opposing traits (Bergmüller & Taborsky, 2010) and may be a 
factor in temperament and personality, and accordingly, the risk susceptibility to certain 
mental health disorders associated with life history strategies shaped by both genes and 
experience (Del Giudice, 2018). 
The overall social ecology is itself shaped by ecological forces which might 
produce more cooperative or antagonistic dynamics, frequency-dependent 
opportunities for parasite-host dynamics (free riders that exploit group strategies), 
frequency-dependent diﬀerences in responsiveness, have more or less temporal 
consistency across time, possess more or less environmental heterogeneity, carry 
diﬀerential risk-reward payoﬀs, varying food abundance, and so on (Bergmüller & 
Taborsky, 2010; Del Giudice, 2018; Wolf et al., 2008). Consequently, strategies can vary 
across each of these dimensions, with some broad phenotypic proﬁles being more likely 
to be “packaged” together to handle these diﬀerences using the same strategy - for 
instance, responsiveness, boldness, temporal inconsistency and environmental 
heterogeneity; i.e., a strategy that responds quickly and boldly to ﬂeeting opportunities. 
Furthermore, parsimonious mechanisms may make it possible to produce broad 
phenotypic strategies (which can then be further sub-specialized by experience and 
personality) with only small changes to important behavioral systems. For instance, 
diﬀerences in reward and/or threat sensitivity in the behavioral approach system (BAS)

98 
and behavioral inhibition systems (BIS) can shape behavioral loadings that shape 
diﬀerences in dominance/submissiveness, responsiveness or unresponsiveness, 
exploitation & exploration, and “fast” and “slow” strategies (Del Giudice, 2018; 
DeYoung, 2015; Wolf et al., 2008). To summarize, then, these adaptive diﬀerences only 
make sense as they relate to traits in the environments and niches themselves, and 
should be thought of as evolutionary trade-oﬀs, as optimizing for diﬀerent niches, roles 
and environments is to co-create challenges, vulnerabilities and liabilities in other 
environments, times or niches. These may be especially relevant to mental health as 
these traits are, by deﬁnition, optimizing strategies at a subconscious or preconscious 
level, and designed to shape behavior for automaticity. 
It has long been a puzzle why genes would predispose to pathology and not 
simply select themselves out of the gene pool (Belsky et al., 2009; Del Giudice, 2018; 
Dobbs, 2012). A social animal framework gives us a potential answer by implicating life 
history strategies as niche solutions. Here, selection operates on broad innate 
diﬀerences to prime diﬀerent ways of moving through a landscape of social conﬂict and 
social resources in diﬀerent adaptive ways. These adaptive strategies by deﬁnition 
include unique dispositions to mental health syndromes that emerge as a byproduct of 
permutations of trade-oﬀs, strategies and niches, and may include idiosyncratic 
biopsychosocial challenges, vulnerabilities, lose-lose scenarios, failure modes, 
imbalances and mismatches (Belsky et al., 2009; Del Giudice, 2018; Dobbs, 2012). We 
will cover these relevant evolutionary concepts next. 
Evolutionary Concepts and Language

99 
As covered above, evolutionary trade-oﬀs are cognitive, aﬀective and behavioral 
strengths that are optimized for speciﬁc niches, roles and environments, and they 
manifest predictable challenges, vulnerabilities and liabilities in other environments, 
times or niches. For instance, humans are good at long-distance running at the cost of 
foot and leg problems; anxiety is a trade-oﬀ that signals impending danger, at the costs 
of false alarms that can be distressing (Nesse, 2019). These may be especially relevant to 
neurodiverse mental health more broadly as these traits are, by deﬁnition, optimizing 
strategies at a subconscious or preconscious level, and designed to shape behavior for 
automaticity. For instance, with respect to neurodiversity, ADHD might be related to 
responsiveness, and ASD to unresponsiveness, both of which are viable strategies in 
speciﬁc environments, roles and niches. Hypothetically, alignment with a niche of ﬁt 
might make for a strategy that is experienced socially and by the self as strengths, 
particularly when receiving positive social feedback that confers value, inclusion and 
esteem, while social feedback out of an ideal niche would manifest punishment, friction, 
social injury and criticism. 
Evolutionary mismatches are when an organism’s adaptations to past 
environments are in conﬂict with current environments (Del Guidice, 2018; Gilbert, 
2019). It may include everything from: modern oﬃce environments being incompatible 
with physical activity, circadian rhythms being disrupted by modern screen time, 
loneliness as a response to industrial scheduling, social dysphorias from asynchronous 
social feedback due to texting as the primary means of communication, and so on. 
Mismatches were often framed as common because human’s environment of

100 
evolutionary adaptedness (EEA) is radically diﬀerent from today, which was taken to 
mean these feedback mechanisms are eﬀectively vestigial, and unfortunate meaningless 
noise in the modern world - i.e., one might frame the evolved stress response by saying 
“humans evolved their stress response to being chased by lions on the savannah, not as 
a realistic way to handle oﬃce stress.” However, it is worth noting that the EES and MLS 
see social evolution as directionally increasing evolvability over time, and many of these 
mechanisms are conserved for a reason; social stress is a valid form of social 
information about conditions that are socially unsustainable, potentially full of excess 
conﬂict, and implicate a need to change the social conditions, not scapegoat the 
individual evolved stress response. With regard to life history strategy, we would extend 
mismatch to life history strategy ﬁt, and suggest that social, political and economic 
environments that work for some people do not work for others, and this may be a 
source of everything from depression to anxiety, as well as expressing neurodiverse 
“liabilities” and deﬁcits disproportionately. 
The ﬁnal terms included are not speciﬁc jargon, but are placeholder constructs 
to get at the important space where life history strategies intersect with evolutionary 
social dynamics (Hunt & Jaeggi, 2022). Idiosyncratic biopsychosocial challenges 
anticipate the likelihood a given social strategy might face unique barriers, burdens, 
costs and conﬂicts that translate into unique embodied psychological loads. For instance, 
antagonistic strategies possess unique social challenges in the form of excess conﬂict, 
while exploratory and hyper-responding strategies may have to deal with more reactive 
instability, both of which have corresponding biopsychological load. Vulnerabilities

101 
would be the proclivity for these strategies to be vulnerable to externalities of these 
strategies; for instance, the incuriousness of exploitation strategies might create 
vulnerability to blind spots that prevent updating to new and better information; risk-
averse strategies might be vulnerable to loneliness where a lack of boldness may make 
for the inability to capitalize on social opportunities. Failure modes might be captured as 
a compounding deleterious feedback loop that sees a strategy break down and become 
unsustainable, likely with embodied consequences that inhibit re-energizing the 
strategy. Lose-lose situations make failure modes more likely as they contribute to 
certain negative feedback that fuels deleterious feedback loops. We will return further 
to the themes of evolutionary social dynamics in the subsequent section. 
Neurodiversity Consilience: Contributions from Personality Research 
In mental health, personality research is sometimes limited to career counseling 
to seek a career path with personal compatibility, or less rigorous applications of self-
discovery, such using the MBPI to grapple with aspects of social functioning like 
introversion and extraversion. These areas may partially map onto the terrain of 
neurodiversity. Of particular interest is how the reﬁnement of the Big Five personality 
theory is being used to create a functional hierarchy of personality traits that integrate 
with evolutionary theory (DeYoung, 2015; DeYoung et al., 2011), cybernetics (DeYoung, 
2015; DeYoung & Krueger, 2021), mental health (Del Giudice, 2018; DeYoung & Kreuger, 
2021) and social animal frames (Del Giudice, 2018), to allow us to use personality 
literature to our understanding of neurodiversity as systematic trait-level diﬀerences in 
embodied cognition.

102 
Personality research has coalesced in large part around integrative models like 
the Big Five, which has historically been studied through atheoretical lexical studies that 
performed factor analysis on adjective lists and personality questionnaires (DeYoung, 
2015). Personality traits themselves are characteristic patterns of motivation, cognition, 
emotion, and behavior that diﬀer between individuals, but which also represent global 
diﬀerences in mental, emotional and behavioral organization that diﬀer systematically 
between them. The Cybernetic Big Five Theory (CB5T; DeYoung, 2015) argues that these 
traits can be given theoretical rigor by being functionally framed as evolved cybernetic 
parameters for common motivational systems (also called diﬀerences in reaction norms; 
Del Giudice, 2018), with emergent diﬀerences of cognition, behavior and emotion at the 
personality level arising in conjunction with one another. Like a social animal approach, 
a cybernetic view seeks to model the dynamic, goal-directed relationships an organism 
has with its social environment (e.g., cybernetic steering and feedback loops) without 
reducing them to singular deterministic mechanisms or substrates (Heylighen & Joslyn, 
2003), creating a compatible synthesis between cybernetics and social animals. The 
CB5T, then, helps to frame a science of individual diﬀerences that a) supports the 
existence of natural embodied diﬀerences in ways of being, b) is non-pathological, 
illuminating a normal and functional diversity of such strategies, and c) frames how 
idiosyncratic mental health presentations may be the externalities of personality traits 
as evolved parameters on goal-directed agency (including the constraints, trade-oﬀs, 
mismatches, and extremes therein). This ability to pursue social goals has been framed 
as a human universal of normal functioning, while the inability to pursue them can serve

103 
as an irreducible theory of mental illness, called cybernetic dysfunction (see: next 
section; DeYoung & Krueger, 2021). Here we ﬁnd many of the same premises of social 
niche specialization - of embodied, preconscious, mental and behavioral dispositions - 
that are ﬂeshed out into a plausible hierarchy of cybernetic strategies, traits and 
mechanisms. The approach is a) consistent with our consilience, and b) helps us 
understand how personality traits as socio-cybernetic (e.g., cooperative and goal-
directed) mechanisms are related to mental well-being as trade-oﬀs, down to the level of 
parsimonious mechanisms for creating the individual changes. 
The use of cybernetics to frame personality theory is an attempt to create an 
“integrative theory of the whole person” that is also evolutionarily functional, 
contextual, and biopsychosocial, with novel contributions such as reconciling inter- and 
intra-personality dimensions and the adaptive functions of each dimension (DeYoung, 
2015). Like a social animal approach, cybernetics allows an organism to be “in relation” 
to its environment, by attaching to mentally (neurologically) represented outcomes 
across space and time, processing information as feedback from the environment, and 
“steering” behavior toward an anticipated outcome (DeYoung, 2015; Hawkins & 
Blakeslee, 2005; Heylighen, 2005); an evolutionary theory is cybernetic, just as 
cybernetics is evolutionary (see also: relational agency , DeYoung, 2015; Heylighen, 
2023). 
Big Five (B5) personality research is a credible contribution to a neurodiversity 
consilience. The B5 has a signiﬁcant history in the second half of the twentieth century 
and continues to organize much of personality research, with measures that are stable

104 
across development and reliable across culture and language; factor analysis has 
repeatedly shown the trait hierarchy to be robust (DeYoung, 2015). However, the labels 
used in its constructs have been ad hoc and borrowed, obscuring the potential functions 
and coherence of the traits (DeYoung, 2015; John et al., 2008). The CB5T, which converts 
the B5 into an evolutionary-cybernetic frame, provides a contribution of providing 
theoretical comprehension throughout the trait taxonomy, giving the Big Five' 
personality traits - extraversion, openness to experience/intellect, conscientiousness, 
agreeableness and neuroticism - theoretical grounding as variations in parameters for 
cybernetic goals (DeYoung, 2015), while broadly improving congruence with a social 
animal frame. 
Speciﬁcally, and as shown in Table 1, personality diﬀerences emerge by adjusting 
the various cybernetic parameters on goal-directed behavior, and personality traits can 
be seen as emergent changes to the “density distribution of [embodied] states” 
(DeYoung, 2015; Fleeson, 2001), where “states” refer to “the tendency to be in certain 
emotional, motivational, cognitive, and behavioral states” (DeYoung, 2015, p. 35). Each 
of the personality traits would be a parameter relevant to a diﬀerent cybernetic goal 
and within each goal, there is a diﬀerent target in the cybernetic cycle: goal activation, 
action/strategy selection, action, outcome interpretation, goal comparison (these being 
semi-sequential, with many happening more or less in parallel; DeYoung, 2015). The 
cybernetic function of traits, then, are: extraversion as increased reward salience (which 
is decreased in “reserved” pole), openness as increased exploratory behavior (or 
decreased in the “unimaginative” pole), agreeableness as increased

105 
cooperative/aﬃliative behavior (or decreased in selﬁsh pole), conscientiousness as 
increased goal persistence (decreased in unreliable pole), and neuroticism as increased 
defensive sensitivity to psychosocial injury (or decreased in “unﬂappable pole”; see: 
table). To brieﬂy situate these traits in the whole taxonomy, traits are in a meso-level of 
the taxonomy, with the level below them being aspects for which each trait has two (for 
instance, openness has a dimension of openness to experience or openness to intellect; 
DeYoung et al., 2007; see: below for further functional characterization). Below traits, 
each aspect has multiple facets. Above the Big Five trait level, research suggests the 
existence of a metatrait level called the Big Two (see: below; DeYoung, 2006; 2015). 
Traits and metatraits are embodied through neurotransmitter systems that can 
be functionally separated into whether they activate behavior or inhibit behavior 
(DeYoung, 2016; Gray & McNaughton, 2003; Quilty et al., 2013). The Behavioral 
Activation System (BAS) uses rewards to trigger approach behavior (DeYoung, 2015; 
Quilty et al., 2013), while the Behavioral Inhibition System (BIS) uses punishers to trigger 
withdrawal and avoidance (DeYoung, 2015; Gray & McNaughton, 2003). Importantly, 
both systems are for rewards and punishers generally, but as humans are a social species, 
many of these rewards and punishers are social in nature. Accordingly, changes in the 
approach system may aﬀect social dispositions like introversion and extraversion 
(DeYoung, 2015), while the BIS has been called an “avoidable danger” system that 
provokes uncomfortable social emotions or worries based on perceived threats to social 
positions and goals. 
The BAS is a dopaminergic system while the BIS is serotonergic, and evidence

106 
suggests that diﬀerent receptor subtypes expressed in diﬀerent parts of the brain across 
both systems can functionally activate or inhibit diﬀerent kinds of thought and behavior 
by using the same neurotransmitters diﬀerently depending on which region of the brain 
is involved and which receptor subtype is being activated (ﬁve subtypes for dopamine - 
DRD1-5 - and seven for serotonin - 5HT1-7). It should be, then, that diﬀerent personality 
traits and mental health susceptibilities can both be mapped onto diﬀerent 
neurotransmitter pathways within the BIS and BAS, and this is what we see; for 
instance, extraversion is predicted by genetic alteration of the DRD2 pathway (Smillie et 
al., 2010) for reward and punishment related to pathological gambling (Janssen et al., 
2015); openness to experience/intellect is altered by an allele that predisposes people to 
novelty-seeking and ADHD by modifying the DRD4 receptor pathway (Belsky et al., 2009; 
Del Giudice, 2018; Dobbs, 2012); similarly, the SERT gene modiﬁes traits like neuroticism 
and introversion through anxiety (Chiao & Blizinsky, 2009) with diﬀerential serotonin 
subtype activation (Carr & Lucki, 2011; Savitz & Ramesar, 2004). Genes that aﬀect 
neurotransmitter activity in these systems and subsystems functionally alter the state 
distribution called personality traits, which also impacts the dispositional risk toward 
mental health disorders (Belsky et al., 2009; Chiao & Blizinsky, 2009; Del Giudice, 2018; 
DeYoung et al., 2011; Dobbs, 2012; Mrazek et al., 2013). 
An important ﬁnding of note, is that most personality traits emerge as clusters 
tied back to just four gross diﬀerences at the metatrait level - strong plasticity and 
stability, weak plasticity and stability, strong plasticity and weak stability, and weak 
plasticity and strong stability. Here we see that niche specialization is possible by

107 
creating a hierarchy of embodied trait parameters on goal-directedness that lead to 
gross diﬀerences in temperament strategies, where ﬁner personality and role 
specialization can be tailored as one moves further down the hierarchy. Particularly at 
the gross level, this hierarchy may conform to the functioning of two major behavioral 
response systems, the BAS and the BIS, which can achieve stable response patterns by 
adjusting the sensitivity of activation and inhibition to major neurotransmitter systems 
as shapers of motivation, thought and behavior. 
As embodied pathways for temperament and personality, this may implicate a 
diﬀerent role for genes with regards to mental health susceptibility. Gene alleles that 
contribute to risk would not be “pathology variants” per se, which may make up a small 
percentage of most mental health dysfunctions (see: mutational load , Del Giudice, 
2018), but would instead work to modify the strength of embodied strategies in the 
environment by adjusting the response sensitivity of emotional, cognitive and 
behavioral trade-oﬀs, in a for-better-or-worse fashion. That is, in creating behavioral 
response preferences and constraints, we see trade-oﬀs that can a) create strengths in 
some social domains and challenges in others; b) increase maladaptivity when 
overexpressed; and c) ﬁnd idiosyncratic struggles with environmental injuries and 
mismatch. Gene studies looking at diﬀerential risk susceptibility to mental health 
disorders may inherently capture biobehavioral strategies as an inseparable relationship 
with environmental interaction. For instance, some such strategies may be “high risk, 
high reward” strategies, prone to certain mental health disorders if their optimal niches 
are rare or diﬃcult to ﬁnd, but that would not equate to pathology per se. Many

108 
susceptibilities likely capture the risks of some strategies to express mental health 
challenges as trade-oﬀs, particularly in environments of friction outside of a niche-of-ﬁt; 
for instance, idiosyncratic strategies that strain group conformity may run a high risk of 
loneliness and/or the survival stress of ostracism, but that is not a pathology. This would 
be an important change in assumption for the role of neurodiversity in mental health, as 
it would rebuﬀ a pathological or deﬁcit model. The CB5T should therefore be considered 
evidentiary weight that interactions between temperament & personality strategies and 
social environment are relevant to understanding the nature of mental health 
challenges and their treatment (Del Giudice, 2018; DeYoung, 2015; DeYoung & Krueger, 
2023).  
Neurodiversity Consilience: Contributions from Genetic Research & Gene-Culture 
Coevolution 
The role of genes in mental health disorders may be misframed as pathology 
genes, obscuring a more useful lens. An alternative frame was put forth by David Dobbs 
(2012) in his Orchids and Dandelions theory , which is strikingly akin to neurodiversity 
conjectures. The basic thesis is that most people are “dandelions,” rugged and capable 
of surviving anywhere, like a dandelion growing through a crack in the concrete, while a 
small minority of people may be more akin to “orchids” that are beautiful, but 
notoriously delicate, requiring attentive care to watering and feeding. Here, dandelions 
would be neurotypical people, while neurodiverse people might be orchids, sensitive in a 
“for-better-or-worse” fashion to the quality of parenting, environments adversity or 
support, and stressful life events or their absence. As evidence, Dobbs points to a paper

109 
by Belsky et al. (2009) called “Vulnerability genes or plasticity genes?” Belsky and 
colleagues pointed to the meta-issue of pathology gene research lying in the research 
agenda itself: no one looks to biology except to understand when something is wrong, 
and in fact, biology is implicated in all human functioning as the brain is the substrate of 
all experience (see also: autobiological information , MacDuﬃe & Strauman, 2017a; 
2017b). 
Belsky and colleagues sought to understand the role of diﬀerential susceptibility , 
or plasticity in a better-or-worse-fashion, where the mechanism is a general sensitivity to 
contexts of all kinds, particularly developmental contexts. They looked at leading 
pathology gene candidates - the DRD4, 5-HTTLPR and MAOA genes - to explore 
correlations under not just negative gene-environment interactions, but also positive 
ones. Among the ﬁndings, children who were disposed to antisocial treatment after 
being exposed to childhood mistreatment while possessing a less sensitive MAOA allele, 
were less disposed to antisocial behavior when not exposed to mistreatment (Caspi et 
al., 2002). Carriers of the short/short variant of the 5-HTTLPR gene were of greater risk 
for depression and suicidal ideation by age 26 if exposed to stressful life events, but 
were at even less risk than most long/long allele carriers when not exposed (Caspi et al., 
2003). The same gene variant was disposed to negative emotionality at 6 months of age 
when paired with insensitive parenting and childcare, but was less negative than 
controls with high-quality parenting and childcare (Pluess & Belsky, 2009; 2010). Forty-
seven children with the 7r variant of the DRD4 gene were observed to have either 
sensitive or insensitive maternal childcare at 10 months in a longitudinal study; while

110 
those with the 7r variant were more likely to have externalizing behavior at 2 years of 
age after exposure to insensitive parenting, those with sensitive parenting were even 
less to show externalizing behavior than non-7r carriers. Results consistently showed 
that the genes in question were not causal in themselves, but moderated by various 
contextual factors to produce outcomes that were either signiﬁcantly “worse,” or 
“better,” relative to various kinds of controls. 
The orchid and dandelion theory presents an alternative way of framing the data 
generally thought to support the diathesis-stress model , where environmental stress is 
thought to trigger innate vulnerabilities to mental illness predispositions. Dobbs (2012) 
and Belsky et al. (2009) showed genes to instead confer a general quality of increased 
plasticity to their developmental context in a for-better-or-worse fashion. This more 
adaptive function would explain why such genes have not been selected out of the gene 
pool, and would be consistent with one of the major personality metatraits of the CB5T 
(see: below). 
Gene-Culture Coevolution 
There is a second alternative to the pathology gene frame that is also an 
extension of the SAP, and that is a role for social-contextual strategies. Such strategies 
would draw on strategies as making sense in adaptive social niches that make sense in 
group-contexts insomuch as they add or complement some larger group adaptive 
strategy; for instance, by augmenting the explorer-exploration division of labor (H. 
Taylor et al., 2022; J. Williams & Taylor, 2006). Gene-culture coevolution theory has 
provided some unique evidence validating this idea using these same gene allele

111 
candidates, perhaps because these alleles load recurrently on the intersection of 
temperament and mental health trade-oﬀs. Here, however, the evidence highlights the 
role of those alleles in a relationship with a broader group cultural strategy. 
Gene-culture co-evolutionary studies explore how cultural strategies and 
behavioral genetics co-evolved to create functional relationships between the two, and 
when these strategies are mismatched, dysfunction can arise. For instance, the 7r 
variant of the DRD4 dopamine gene that codes for increased salience of prediction-
errors in the brain, leads to an increase in trait novelty-seeking , expressing the 
personality trait openness to experience /intellect and leading to increased risk for ADHD 
(DeYoung et al., 2011). The 5-HTTLPR serotonin transporter gene is associated with 
increased harm avoidance, negative emotionality bias and greater fear conditioning, 
increasing introversion while also increasing the risk for mood and anxiety disorder as 
mediated by trait neuroticism (Chiao & Blizinsky, 2009; Mrazek et al., 2013). Typically, 
however, these genes are not associated with these aspects of social functioning and 
personality in psychiatry research, and are instead highly researched as candidate- or 
pathology genes in the diathesis-stress model of mental health, where they are seen 
only as “risk alleles’’ for mental illness that are not assumed to be functional (Belsky et 
al., 2009; Del Giudice, 2018; Dobbs, 2012), while gene-culture coevolution assumes 
them to be functional and even advantageous in the right cultural context. 
For instance, that the 7r allele predisposes carriers to have diagnoses such as 
ADHD, but does so as a trade-oﬀ to increase trait novelty-seeking as a pathway to 
several adaptive strategies among allele carriers. The strategy may become costly when

112 
the carrier is mismatched with the social environment (i.e., a culture that is settled, 
industrial or collectivistic) or when this creative strategy is overly expressed and 
becomes too unstable (Del Guidice, 2018; Dobbs, 2012; J. Williams & Taylor, 2005), but 
evidence does not show the gene to be strictly pathological. For instance, there is 
evidence of positive selection at the gene locus for the last several thousand years (Ding 
et al., 2001), and the gene has been positively correlated with adaptive traits like 
novelty-seeking (Ebstein et al., 1996), and creativity (Mayseless et al., 2013). 
However, two ﬁndings in particular stand out for 7r carriers. One is that the gene 
shows increased carrier frequency in populations with higher rates of long-distance 
global migration, or macro-migration (C. Chen et al., 1999). A global analysis shows a 
populations’ carrier frequency to be highly correlated to the length of time the 
population spent in a macro-migratory way of life. For instance, those groups who 
traveled relatively short-distances show as having relatively fewer 7r allele carriers as 
with the Falasha Jews, who traveled 1.8 thousand miles from Israel to Ethiopia, and 
correspondingly have 11% of the population who carry the 7r allele. At the other 
extreme, those who migrated long distances show a frequency-dependent increase in 
numbers to where large majorities of the population are allele-carriers. For instance, the 
Ticuna of modern-day Columbia traveled from Asia to South America some 11.3 
thousand miles and consequently, 78% of the population carry the allele. The 
frequency-dependence itself suggests strong functionality of the allele in addition to its 
role in mental health risk, and the fact that the functionality can express itself in a strong 
majority suggests the strengths of the trade-oﬀ can be powerfully expressed in the right

113 
environment. In this case, the trait “restlessness” may help to motivate and energize a 
migratory way of life. Second, computer models suggest the allele may create an 
idiosyncratic, “unpredictable” or eccentric proﬁle, but one that may nevertheless be 
maintained by frequency-dependent selection at a minimum level in a population of 
otherwise conservative, sedentary people. Despite a potential risk that a contrasting 
way of life might create some group friction, the propensity of carriers to have 
“unpredictable [exploratory] behavior” may yet increase overall resilience to “group 
brittleness” by increasing the capacity for collective change under conditions of shared 
existential threat (J. Williams & Taylor, 2006). That is, under changing environmental 
conditions where existing group strategies stop working and old ways of life break down, 
a characteristic disposition toward novelty seeking among a small minority of the 
population may prove adaptive by providing new forms of behavioral exploration that 
increase access to new kinds of resources and new ways of life. Such models validate H. 
Taylor et al. (2022) almost 15 years later in their conception of complementary 
cognition, which would call this group-level beneﬁt an increased capacity for 
evolutionary search, in this case, one that is maintained under times of peace because 
they are particularly valuable under times of duress. In fact, models showed that in 
environments where change was neither too frequent nor too infrequent, a balance of 
generalists and specialists may have been easiest to optimize. 
While functionally quite diﬀerent, the short allele of the SERT gene (i.e. 
serotonin transporter gene; also called 5HTTLPR & SLC6A4) oﬀers many similar group-
related trade-oﬀs. The gene increases avoidance of harm (Munafò et al., 2004) and risk,

114 
increases negative emotionality including anxiety (Munafò et al., 2004; Sen et al., 2004), 
creates an attentional bias toward negative information and increases risk for 
depression under conditions of environmental risk ala as chronic life stress (Caspi, 2003), 
sensitizes fear conditioning (Lonsdorf, 2009), increases basal amygdala activation (Canli 
et al., 2005) and reactivity (Hariri, 2002), and drives an overall neurotic (Gonda et al., 
2008) and introverted proﬁle (Cain, 2013; Chiao & Blizinsky, 2009; Mrazek et al., 2013). 
This helps to explain why the SERT gene has been such a promising candidate as a “risk-
allele” or “pathology-gene” due to its relationship with mood disorders; by sensitizing 
individuals to the costs of psychosocial injury, carriers have greater environmental risk 
for anxiety and depression (Belsky et al., 2009; Chiao & Blizinsky, 2009; Lesch et al., 
1996; Mrazek et al., 2013). 
Just as the more prominent associations with mood disorders are only found in 
under-supported or adverse conditions, and carriers can show even greater resilience 
than controls in enriching circumstances (Belsky et al., 2009; Dobbs, 2012), the short 
allele of the SERT gene is also only associated with mood disorders in the cultural West. 
In the cultural East, there is no moderating inﬂuence of the gene on depression and 
anxiety (Chiao & Blizinsky, 2009). That may be because the gene-culture coevolution 
research shows the gene is highly buﬀered by collectivistic cultures that shape a 
prevailing socio-cultural strategy at the group level, and this strategy may insulate 
carriers to the worst of environmental insults and pathology risks. Speciﬁcally, as the 
number of carriers increases, the degree to which the surrounding culture will be 
collectivistic also increases, peaking at 82% of Chinese citizens possessing the

115 
short/short allele, an allele commonly thought to be a “pathological gene” in the 
American West; in turn, collectivism may also be uniquely suited to meeting the 
psychosocial needs of those carriers synergistically. Note that in a striking ﬁnding, Chiao 
and Blizinsky (2009) found it a robust association across all cultures that the number of 
carriers of the SERT short allele is correlated with the expressed strength of cultural 
collectivism at the group level; the culture and genetics coevolved on a massive scale. In 
China, cultural collectivism is thought to be expressed to the strongest degree the world 
over (as assessed by organizations who operationalize and measure these things; see: 
Geert Hofstede’s cultural dimensions; Hofstede, 2001; 2011), and incidentally, the 
strongest majority of SERT short allele carriers is found there. Notably, China’s “culture 
of we” seems to moderate the depression risk of the gene variant entirely; it is only in 
the individualistic US that the gene allele is associated with a 22% rate of mood 
disorders in the population. The strong implication is that there is alignment between 
the prevailing cultural strategy (individualism versus collectivism), the gross 
temperamental make-up of those within the group, and the degree of well-being one 
attains at the synergy or friction between the two as a cost of mismatch. 
Both the DRD4.7r and the SERT gene are examples of gene-culture coevolution, 
where the more sensitive, plastic or malleable personality strategy synergizes with 
others who are similarly disposed, and creates a group-level strategy that provides a 
necessary context for the expression of the strategy, including both the group-function 
of the strategy and the functioning of the person expressing it. With the DRD4, the gene 
is found in increasing frequency with migratory populations, and is at a higher risk of

116 
ADHD outside of those contexts (Dobbs, 2012). With the SERT, the gene buﬀers the risks 
of psychosocial threat by creating communal, moral and authoritarian “tightness” that 
creates a stable hierarchy and harmonious social order to minimize uncertainty and rank 
tensions which in turn oﬀsets depression risk, while potentially increasing conformity 
and parochialism as a kind of two-level (individual vs group-level) trade-oﬀ (Chiao & 
Blizinsky, 2009; Mrazek et al., 2013). In both cases, the genes, which are emblematic of 
these kinds of trade-oﬀs in a myriad of genes like them, defy the classical picture of 
pathology genes. Instead, they illuminate how personality strategies are fundamentally 
a relationship to an ideal socioecological context, or niche-of-ﬁt, in order to properly 
attribute suﬀering as byproducts of trade-oﬀs and mismatches that might otherwise be 
viable ways of being (Belsky et al., 2009; Del Giudice, 2018; Dobbs, 2012). This 
alternative narrative would likely be important to undercut stigma in mental health 
narratives to properly contextualize the meaning of biology in suﬀering, and can help 
increase the potential for therapeutic realignment, hope and control (see: autobiological 
information; MacDuﬃe & Strauman, 2017a; 2017b). 
Neurodiversity Consilience: The Big Two Synthesis of Cybernetic & Social Animal 
Approaches 
Evidence from the CB5T personality taxonomy shows that the B5 categories most 
people are familiar with - extraversion, openness, neuroticism, agreeableness and 
conscientiousness - are further conﬁgured at a higher level of metatraits, called the Big 
Two. These metatraits - stability (also known as alpha) and plasticity (or beta) - may be 
particularly important for discerning the broadest adaptive proﬁles of temperament and

117 
personality (Del Giudice, 2018; DeYoung, 2006; 2015), and may be implicated as the 
major divisions of functional and “normal,” non-clinical neurodiversity (Oller, 2019). 
Speciﬁcally, when you combine the two poles of each metatrait and plot them against 
one another, you may result in four major emergent proﬁles in the extreme. Here we 
will explore more on the nature of these metatraits as major cybernetic set-points as 
soft-wired proﬁles of behavior and cognition. 
A primary adaptive challenge of cybernetic beings and social animals is in how 
they orient to the unknown as the unknown is simultaneously a source of lurking threat 
and signiﬁcant opportunity (DeYoung, 2015). Organisms must defend against threat 
while pursuing opportunity, but opportunity includes knowledge that can convert the 
unknown into the known, shrinking the contours of threat and converting them to 
opportunity in the long-term (DeYoung, 2015). Personality strategies thus adopt 
diﬀerent trade-oﬀs in relation to defense and exploration in a cybernetic sense; a stable 
strategy defends existing goals by resisting perturbations to them, even at the cost of 
new information and opportunity; a plastic strategy seeks adaptive ﬂexibility by 
exploring for new information and opportunity, even at the cost of loss of stability. Gene 
and temperament changes to the BAS approach system are changes to metatrait 
plasticity, while changes to the BIS avoidance system are changes to metatrait stability. 
In the CB5T (DeYoung, 2015), some personality traits are thought to be related to 
the metatrait plasticity, while others are related to metatrait stability. For instance, the 
plasticity metatrait includes strategies like extraversion (exploratory social behavior) 
and openness (exploratory cognition and perception), because both promote more

118 
permeability and ﬂexibility in goal-setting, which allows goals to be revised under new 
conditions, information and opportunities. The stability metatrait, which includes 
agreeableness (resistance to social deviations), conscientiousness (resistance to goal 
deviations) and neuroticism (resistance to negative feedback and psychosocial risk), 
helps to conserve existing goals and resist perturbations to them with a more defensive 
posturing. From the social animal perspective of gene-culture coevolution, the function 
of these traits also cannot be separated from their eﬀect on the overall social group: 
increases to metatrait plasticity increase curiosity and reward-seeking to promote 
adaptive ﬂexibility and behavioral innovation that helps groups to adjust to changing 
ecological and social conditions (J. Williams & Taylor, 2005). Increases to metatrait 
stability avoid the psychosocial risk of the unknown which tends to conserve existing 
social conditions and commitments, conserving cooperative goals and social learning 
transmitted through culture and tradition through more morally “tight” cultures (Chiao 
& Blizinsky, 2009; Mrazek et al., 2013). In other words, strategies that express metatrait 
plasticity more tend to align with cultural individualism, while strategies that align with 
metatrait stability more tend to align with cultural collectivism. 
In summary, these evolutionary approaches to the unknown serve to give 
individuals diﬀerent strategies and niches in a social environment (Del Giudice, 2018; 
DeYoung, 2015; Gray & McNaughton, 2003). They also can, depending on the group 
strategy, enrich personality diversity within a given system because neurotypes beneﬁt 
from diﬀerent strategies serving diﬀerent roles to the group (H. Taylor et al., 2022; J. 
Williams & Taylor, 2005); for instance, more conservative temperament subpopulations

119 
in a culture may conserve group-level culture and learning, while more plastic strategies 
may promote innovation and semi-stable growth; Chiao & Blizinsky, 2009; J. Williams & 
Taylor, 2005). This may be subject to the overall extremity of the cultural strategy; some 
evidence suggests that DRD4.74 that promotes a more unstable, individualistic 
disposition may have been selected out of China, which is the world’s most collectivistic 
culture (Chang et al., 1996; Hofstede, 2011), while again, the SERT gene is a risk factor in 
the US, the most individualistic culture (Chiao & Blizinsky, 2009). 
With the CB5T, DeYoung (2015) added that there may be other emergent 
diﬀerences that are relevant in both character and function to each adaptive strategy, 
including a range of other implicated dualities to the metatraits. For instance, other 
interpretations of metatrait diﬀerences include the tendency to be oriented toward 
socialization or personal growth (Digman, 2007), self-control versus environmental 
engagement (Olson, 2005), social self-regulation versus personal dynamism (Saucier et 
al., 2013). These various interpretations can be visually represented as in Figure 1, but 
DeYoung summarized them thusly: 
These various interpretations can easily be synthesized: The self-control or self-
regulation associated with Stability should make children easier to socialize and 
may also be strengthened by socialization. The exploratory tendency associated 
with Plasticity should produce the kind of active engagement with novel and 
interesting phenomena that others tend to ﬁnd dynamic and that is likely to lead 
to personal growth. (DeYoung, 2015, p. 47) 
It will continue to be important to consider how these personality diﬀerences

120 
eﬀectively create diﬀerent dualities in each metatrait, as well as the unique emergent 
qualities of plotting the metatraits against one-another (see: below). As we will see, 
these domains may be as far reaching as diﬀerences in innate values (see below: moral 
intuitions ), the relative strength of psychosocial needs (for instance, agreeableness as an 
increased need in relatedness, or openness as an increased need for autonomy), 
thinking styles (openness to experience as experiential and mentalizing processing, while 
openness to intellect is rational and deliberative), and well-being or dysfunction 
(plasticity as increased risk for psychoticism, while stability has increased risk of defense 
disorders like anxiety and depression; DeYoung, 2015). The personality metatraits may 
correspond to the two main systems of temperament from which social niche 
specialization can be founded; one a system of approach and opportunity, the other a 
system of threat and inhibition. These may align with the BAS and BIS, major 
neurotransmitter systems in the body, and their combinatorial idiosyncrasies may add a 
further level of social functioning nuance and diversity still. We will turn to these 
diﬀerences next. 
Neurodiversity Consilience: Contributions from the Life History Framework 
The life history framework considers itself an integrative study of individual 
diﬀerences particularly around the interface of personality and physiology (Del Giudice, 
2018). Life histories see organisms allocate to various trade-oﬀs in cognition, behavior 
and sociality, which lead to embodied strengths in certain niches and roles, alongside 
related vulnerabilities. Marco Del Giudice made a major contribution in theory at the 
intersection of life history research and psychopathology with his book Evolutionary

121 
Psychopathology (2018). With an integrative framework called the fast-slow-defense 
model (FSD), he presents abundant evidence for the way in which embodied individual 
diﬀerences as biocognitive strategies can be used as a novel theoretical grounding for all 
diﬀerential psychopathological risk. The fast and slow categories may be relevant to 
neurodiversity in particular, while topics relevant to the defense portion of the model 
will be covered below in the section regarding biosocial models. Here we will see how 
the major mechanisms of temperament and personality, one’s dispositions regarding 
metatraits alpha and beta, may interact to create emergent biocognitive properties. 
These emergent life history strategies, or niche strategies, may provide a compelling 
evolutionary basis for the major neurotypes and their respective social niches. 
Regardless, the life history strategies highlight a variety of motivational, behavioral, 
cognitive and social trade-oﬀs relevant to understanding the nature of neurodiversity 
including their idiosyncratic strengths and mental health challenges, and the important 
role of niches-of-ﬁt or friction. Note, we will spend less time on the speciﬁc relationships 
of the life strategies and the functional basis of psychopathology, but much of the 
theory’s power resides in the ability of the theory to explain why the contours of 
psychopathology exist as we understand them. For more on evolutionary accounts of 
mental health disorders, see: Hunt and Jaeggi (2022). 
Drawing on interdisciplinary research, the life history framework attempts to 
account for major diﬀerences in personality (at the trait and metatrait levels), including 
motivation, decision-making, cognitive ability, self-regulation, sexual maturation and 
early environment; Del Giudice, 2018). Much of this research was initially grounded in

122 
social animal research based on r- and k-selection strategies, where animals showed a 
quantity versus quality trade-oﬀ depending on the harshness of the environment. Fast 
strategies favored low parental investment, high mating eﬀort and high number of 
oﬀspring, while slow strategies showed high parental investment, selective mating and 
fewer oﬀspring. While r/k strategies were shown to correlate ecological factors and 
patterns at the population level, it became clear there was no formal theory of fast-slow 
trade-oﬀs relevant to humans (Jeschke et al., 2008; Mathot & Frankenhuis, 2018). In 
biology, information about a fast and slow continuum emerged out of pace-of-life 
syndromes (Mathot & Frankenhuis, 2018; Reale et al., 2010), which saw a fast strategy 
associated with higher impulsivity, risk-taking, aggression (particularly for males), and 
boldness (Cole & Quinn, 2014; Coppens et al., 2010; Hall et al., 2015; Stamps, 2007), 
with less investment in learning and knowledge in favor of superﬁcial exploration and 
resource exploitation (Berger-Tal et al., 2014; Eliassen et al., 2007); other correlates 
included speed over accuracy in decision-making (Sih & Del Giudice, 2012), and 
feedforward (proactive) control versus feedback (reactive) control (Coppens et al., 
2010). A variety of embodied mechanisms were shown to be involved in ﬂipping the 
environmental switches between fast and slow strategies, including hormones (i.e. 
estrogen and testosterone), the HPA and HPG axes, IGF-1 (growth factor), neuropeptides 
(i.e. oxytocin) and cytokine (pro-inﬂammatory) systems (Del Giudice, 2018). 
In humans, the early emphasis on biological factors (initially controversial due to 
racial overtones, which has since given way to the less-problematic gene-culture 
coevolutionary theory) eventually moved to inﬂuential developmental models. These

123 
models postulated that early family environment plays a key role in setting life history 
strategies, including the sensitivity and investment of parenting to form the quality of 
parent-child and overall family relationships. These ecological and systemic variables 
play a role in moderating overall stress and attachment qualities at the family system 
level (although temperament genetics likely also modiﬁes these same niches; Belsky et 
al., 1991; Del Giudice, 2018). As echoes of fast strategies in other animals, signiﬁcant 
environmental stressors can ﬂip epigenetic switches for “live fast, die young” survival 
strategies geared toward resource exploitation, competitive antagonism and reduced 
long-term orientation. The proﬁle included high trait extraversion (assertiveness and 
dominance facets, but not warmth and sociability), risk-taking, impulsivity, and 
sensation-seeking; earlier sexual debut, unrestricted sociosexuality and higher mortality; 
avoidant attachment and reduced commitments; increased relational anxiety in women; 
and increased status-seeking and aggression, with men being more likely to use physical 
aggression and women more likely to employ relational aggression (Belsky et al., 1991; 
Björkqvist, 2001; Del Giudice, 2018). By contrast, a hedonic “slow and steady wins the 
race” approach (Del Giudice, 2018) arises in more stable environments and is correlated 
with personality traits agreeableness, conscientiousness and honesty-humility (in the 
HEXACO personality system, which adds only that dimension to the B5); secure 
attachments, an increased moral and sexual disgust response, long-term partner 
orientation, couple stability, lower sex drive, and restricted sociosexuality; low 
impulsivity, higher risk aversion, and increased future-orientation and longevity; this 
includes higher likelihood of social anxiety, insecurity and behavioral inhibition (Del

124 
Giudice, 2018). In most animals including humans, this latter temperament represents a 
trade-oﬀ in parental eﬀort over mating, with more relaxed environments allowing for 
higher somatic eﬀort, which is to say, investment in bodily maintenance, self-
development and growth as a form of embodied capital. Though on the surface the fast 
strategy seems socially undesirable, Del Guidice (2018) cautioned against romanticizing 
slow strategies: the costs of future-orientation, agreeableness (cooperative) and 
conscientiousness (goal-persistence) can be rigidity in the face of new information or the 
need to change, social conformity and a risk of being exploited, while the risks of 
modern day collectivism have also been documented in the form of ingroup bias and 
xenophobia, groupthink, authoritarianism and costs to the marginalized (Haidt, 2013). 
The Basic Model: Fast and Slow strategies 
Functionally speaking, these early strategies adapt to diﬀerent kinds of 
environments, with fast strategies “moving fast” to position themselves quickly in 
chaotic environments, while slow strategies take a slower, cooperative approach in 
stable environments. Fast strategies (socially plastic, highly ﬂexible) do this paradoxically 
by lowering innate psychological defenses (i.e., lower attention devoted to threats or 
anticipated negative consequences, or alternatively, an increase in conﬁdence) in order 
to pursue sometimes reckless and bold high-risk strategies optimized to the immediate 
“winning conditions” (the dual status hierarchies of dominance/prestige). Consequently, 
one sees early developmental opportunism in pursuing social status and acquisition, 
including early sexual debut and parenthood. More conﬁdent opportunism comes with 
the expected costs of riskier strategies: higher morbidity and mortality, as well as social

125 
and moral consequences of antagonistic and exploitative approaches; for mental health, 
this means a greater likelihood to manifest the dark triad personality traits: 
Machiavellianism, narcissism and psychoticism. 
By contrast, higher metatrait stability in slow strategies (socially reserved, high 
commitment) increases the sensitivity of psychological defenses (i.e., traits like threat 
sensitivity, harm avoidance, risk aversion, sensitivity to fear conditioning, and 
attentional bias toward negative information and emotion) to avoid anticipated 
uncertainty and risk, which leads to a) greater motivation for mutual protection and 
cooperation, and b) perceived advantage in developing somatic capital – the extended 
developmental accrual of skills, talents and social roles attained through social learning 
and social investment. This makes for a more conservative “long game” approach that 
optimizes individuals for later social success that is secure on longer-time horizons. 
Beﬁtting congruence with the CB5T, it is thought that these two strategies are 
functionally deﬁned by their relationship to metatrait stability, with fast strategies 
showing downregulated serotonin, and slow strategies showing upregulated serotonin 
activity. Similarly, the active calibration model (ACM) sees diﬀerences in stress reactivity 
including the hypo- (unemotional) or hyper-reactivity (vigilant) in fast strategies, while 
slow strategies can be reactive (sensitive) or moderated (buﬀered; Del Guidice et al., 
2011; Ellis & Del Guidice, 2014). In summary, the initial two viable personality strategies 
likely evolved to capitalize on environments with diﬀerent adaptive logic, and once 
enmeshed in a common social ecology, the strategies instead occupied diﬀerent social 
niches instead. Each temperament has strengths connected to social and psychological

126 
liabilities; the fast strategy pursues early positioning for status and rewards in a 
sometimes-exploitative fashion, while the slow strategy increases sensitivity to 
psychosocial injuries both real and imagined to encourage mutual protection and 
cooperation and over longer time scales as a group to attain together what they can’t 
alone (Chiao & Blizinsky, 2009; D. S. Wilson, 2002; Wright, 2000). In both cases, 
evidence suggests biopsychosocial mechanisms implicated in mental health disorders 
are intimately involved in creating these strategies and niches. For instance, by tying 
impulsivity to adaptability in the case of fast strategies, and fear of the unknown to 
cooperation and cohesion in slow strategies, the latter of which has been shown to 
increase risk of mood and anxiety disorders as a trade-oﬀ when not culturally aligned 
(Chiao & Blizinsky, 2009). 
The Extended Model: Two New Fast and Slow Strategies 
In his Fast-Slow-Defense model (FSD), the extended model represents the more 
speculative half of the model that is nevertheless crucial to completing the taxonomy of 
life history strategies as they round out the nature of observed mental health 
syndromes. The extended model builds on the same basic fast and slow divide that 
exists on the stability continuum of temperament (imagine a left-right spectrum), by 
suggesting that later social evolution favored new niches along the plasticity continuum 
as well (a vertical dimension, adding new fast and slow strategies beneath the old). The 
emergent interaction between the familiar stability axis and the newer plasticity axis, 
however, would have created wholly new emergent qualities for the new niche 
strategies. These new strategies would echo DeYoung (2015) in that they would come to

127 
see value and opportunity in the unknown, creating exploratory personalities (i.e., 
evolutionary search; H. Taylor et al., 2022), who could only arise to a signiﬁcant degree 
by capitalizing on late appearing social niches produced by cultural evolution (ala 
agricultural and industrial revolutions). Accordingly, these may be considered the 
cognitive niches. 
The developments of social evolution likely paralleled the rise of ongoing social 
interdependence and win-win social infrastructure (Wright, 2000), and competition for 
dominance gave way to competition for prosocial prestige including a variety of ways to 
attain it for these new niches in a social milieu: “displays of moral wisdom and political 
intelligence, artistic talent, and valuable technical skills ⎯from hunting and tool-making 
to all sorts of specialized knowledge” (Del Giudice, 2018; p. 115). This would set the 
stage for a cognitive revolution toward empathic (mentalizing) and mechanistic 
cognition to exploit the new social niches for creativity, problem-solving and innovation. 
As with DeYoung’s model (2015), these exploratory strategies were governed by changes 
to the dopamine system to energize social and mental exploration rather than social and 
material exploitation. 
There are likely several broad personality divides along this vertical plasticity axis, 
but it is important to note that how these diﬀerences are expressed in the context of 
the horizontal stability axis shapes how the plasticity phenotype is further expressed. 
That is to say, there are fast and slow versions of the plastic strategy, as being plastic or 
non-plastic (poles of metatrait plasticity) and fast or slow (poles of metatrait stability) are 
independent of one another. We will return to the major diﬀerences after sketching

128 
their proﬁles individually. 
The fast/open strategy. The fast/plastic strategy avoids the status pursuit of 
dominance, and instead gains prestige through high verbal abilities, improved 
mentalizing (cognitive empathy), and verbal or visual creativity. Correlations bear out 
the association between openness to experience and a fast strategy approach, including 
a short-term mating orientation and relatively later age of reproduction (related to 
preferences to sexual variety and reduced commitments, higher autonomy); however, 
in contrast to non-plastic variant, those high in openness to experience show less 
aggression and physical competition for dominance, and show markers of a relational 
disposition such as heightened oxytocin activity. The strategy may be optimized for the 
prestige of “popularity,” which is to say, an eminent, as opposed to dominant, 
leadership style (Gilbert & Basran, 2019), as well as aesthetic and/or verbal creativity. 
These strengths are related to the mental health costs including a higher risk of 
narcissism and some degree of Machiavellianism, increased risk of ADHD, as well as 
some of the more “exotic” mental health diagnoses such as schizotypal and delusional 
disorders, many of which are related to high exploratory and creative behavior in the 
absence of temperamental stability. 
The slow/plastic strategy. The slow/plastic strategy takes on the increased 
defensive and introverted strategy of the original slow strategy, with the added curiosity 
of the open temperament. This makes the slow strategy geared less toward social 
opportunism, and more toward the slow accrual of embodied capital in the form of 
technical and knowledge proﬁciency, and more speculatively, a rich moral imagination

129 
as an expression of a utility maximization applied to the problems of social living. As a 
slow, cooperative strategy, this temperament gains prestige through problem-solving 
specialization, which favors mechanistic reasoning and visuospatial abilities over social 
skills and artistic imagination, the latter of which might even potentially interfere with 
technical prowess. This strategy is generally high in openness to intellect and low-to-
moderate in agreeableness (particularly low in empathy and social compliance facets), 
as deﬁning personality traits. There should be downregulated oxytocin, a slow 
developmental trajectory and later sexual debut, which favors exploration of skills and 
interests. Accordingly, the costs of the slow/open strategy include a continuum of 
increasing autism-like traits with some subsets of ADHD. 
There are a few things both strategies share in common that may be key to 
understanding the functional dimension to these niches, as well as the related 
challenges. We can explore the nature of these niche specializations through the CB5T 
personality constructs (Del Giudice, 2018; DeYoung, 2015). Considering each personality 
trait as a trade-oﬀ of the broader exploration-exploitation trade-oﬀ more generally will 
help the cost-beneﬁt ratio make more sense. 
Introversion. A plausible mechanism of the dopaminergic-BAS shift toward 
plasticity is the de-energizing social rewards and creation of a state of reward 
insensitivity . Trait extraversion is reward sensitive, while the opposite of extraversion 
according to DeYoung (2015) should be what he called trait detachment. By decreasing 
sensitivity to reward systems in general, one also down regulates social rewards 
speciﬁcally, giving the characteristic quality of introversion as most people conceive it.

130 
Detachment as reward sensitivity may be a more useful lens, however, as it explains 
attentional diﬀerences and motivational challenges found in both niche strategies, 
including ASD and ADHD. A reason why this trade oﬀ may be worthwhile, however, is 
that it is necessary to create the cognitive niches by making for a slightly higher barrier 
to pursuing social action, and creating a lower barrier to cognition, i.e. taking people 
“out of” the social world and putting them “in their heads.” It should be noted, 
however, that the stability [threat-sensitivity] dimension will load heavily here. Being 
more emotionally stable, socially inhibited and reserved along the stability metatrait 
(the slow/plastic strategy) may synergize with detachment as a kind of “double 
introvert,” or true introvert, while being more impulsive and sensation-seeking (the 
fast/plastic strategy) may create an ambivert proﬁle: detached overall, but socially 
curious and novelty-seeking, with a need to balance inner and outer worlds. 
Openness. Downgrading the dopaminergic BAS may also be involved in 
heightening the personality construct openness, a cornerstone of metatrait plasticity. By 
decreasing reward sensitivity, motivation to pursue goal-directed rewards (the reward 
pathway of “wanting”) is downregulated, while the rewards of stimulation (the reward 
pathways of “liking”) is unchanged. This increases the perceived workload of rewards of 
pursuit, while making other forms of reward, like cognitive novelty, relatively more 
attractive and accessible; curiosity as a motivator increases as a way to maintain 
dopamine activity in the brain (avoid under-stimulation), which motivates engagement 
with the unknown as DeYoung formulated it (2015). However, the fast/plastic strategy 
expresses openness as openness to experience (aesthetics and imagination facets), while

131 
the slow-open strategy expresses openness to intellect . That is likely because increased 
mentalizing cognition by the fast/plastic strategy naturally attunes to social input as a 
source of rich stimulation, while mechanistic thinking by the slow/plastic strategy turns 
down mentalizing while increasing social inhibition, channeling openness toward logic 
and reasoning instead. 
Agreeableness. Both of the plastic strategies may be more disagreeable, i.e. is 
less cooperative and/or socially interested, because by downregulating social reward 
through reward insensitivity, one also increases the energy required to participate in 
dynamic social roles and expectations; this strains the costs of social engagement 
relative to the rewards (see: ratio strain ). This may help explain why masking is such a 
challenge for ADHD and ASD, why intrinsic motivation is critical for any motivation at all 
(see: special interests), and why this can be advantageous in an evolutionary search lens 
by ensuring the decoupling from ideological and political games, and motivating 
idiosyncratic novelty-seeking, which is key to the formulation of complementary 
cognition (H. Taylor et al., 2022) . 
Conscientiousness: As goal-directed pursuit (“wanting”) is a function of reward 
sensitivity, it makes sense that conscientiousness would decrease with reward 
insensitivity. That is, the ability to reliably maintain regular goal-pursuits associated with 
stable role performance is impaired as insensitivity to rewards increases. This can be 
formulated as part of the exploitation-exploration trade-oﬀ, that high conscientiousness 
is an eﬃciency of resource exploitation optimization, while high plasticity compromises 
on this (through boredom sensitivity or excessive task switching) to privilege

132 
environmental responsiveness, intrinsic motivation, and evolvability/adaptability. 
Neuroticism. Neuroticism increases at both the extreme fast and slow ends of 
the stability spectrum (Del Giudice, 2018), but it should also be mentioned that 
neuroticism may generally increase in reward insensitive proﬁles as a facet of increased 
cognitive activity overall, as greater thought content may dispose one toward rumination 
in the face of threats or threat anticipation (again, the intersection with the stability axis 
is important here). What’s more, social friction may increase from decreased reward 
sensitivity, disagreeableness, and potential eccentricity, all of which might contribute to 
social threats or anticipation thereof. 
A Quadrant Model  
Plotting each temperament on a grid (as shown in Figure 2), we see each 
temperament as a combination of temperamental elements with unique emergent 
biological, psychological and social properties. These temperamental “centers of gravity” 
are probabilistic, illustrating the most extreme ends of the poles to characterize the 
diﬀerences between them most clearly; it is quite likely that normally distributed traits 
see most people gathering toward the middle of these spectrums, with potential 
variation and overlaps across strategies, such as the ability for people to have 
mentalizing and mechanistic skills simultaneously (Del Giudice, 2018). After all, human 
nature encompasses all of these qualities, and only in the extreme may temperament 
act as a constraint that sees people heighten some aspects of a universal nature as both 
strength and challenge, including unique dispositions for psychopathological risk. Still, 
the temperament chart is likely illustrative of the basic niches and functional diversity of

133 
strategies we ﬁnd in the social world, including diﬀerent trade-oﬀs, vulnerabilities, 
values and norms of functioning. 
We will now consider how Del Giudice (2018) has characterized the social niches 
of these life history strategies, but it is worth noting an incompatibility with his model 
and the one presented herein. He has characterized his strategies based on their initial 
environments of evolutionary adaptedness (EEA), which tends to emphasize individual 
ﬁtness and reproduction strategies. Del Giudice explicitly dismisses MLS as adding to his 
analysis, and this serves to de-emphasize qualities of complementary cognition by 
dismissing the inseparable group context as an evolutionary selection pressure. Because 
MLS sees cultural evolution strengthen the relative importance of the group context 
over time, complementary cognition holds that these strategies should be seen as a 
major evolutionary transition; while they may have begun as individualistic survival 
strategies, they are ultimately co-opted at a higher level to be role dispositions, a logic 
that only gets stronger as exponential cultural evolution progresses. It is worth noting 
then, that Del Giudice’s characterization of these niches will deemphasize the role 
dimensions of the strategies, and favor characterizations based on individualistic 
survival with a potentially reductive quality. Another way this is less useful for counseling 
is because counseling theory often takes people from survival mode to thriving as a goal 
(the following section will reintroduce this valence). Still, we will maintain the language 
used and bracket it with awareness that focusing on only survival and reproduction 
strategies misses their role as social meaning strategies. After all, an evolutionary 
mechanism need not reference reproductive ﬁtness directly to be adaptive (Fox, 1986;

134 
Gilbert 1989), and social meaning strategies register adaptive success on a faster scale. 
In this case, social meaning strategies might speak to the way in which plugging into 
congruent social niches is also to plug into interdependent social reward systems that 
evolved to reward and maintain prosocial behavior, because that system aids survival at 
the group-level. However, in healthy sustainable groups, success in this regard is not 
experienced as survival at all, but as meaningful thriving - community, dignity, moral 
purpose, and so on - which is far more intuitively a measure of counseling success. 
Del Giudice’s life history strategies are as follows: the antagonistic/exploitation 
strategy (low plasticity, low stability); the prosocial/caregiving strategy (all mentalities; 
low plasticity, high stability); the seductive/creative strategy (aﬃliative & acquisitional; 
high plasticity, low stability); and the skilled/provisioning strategy (acquisitional; high 
plasticity, high stability; see: Figure 2). Each of these interact to express unique socio-
ecological strategies through the landscape of buﬀers and injuries, and accordingly, each 
has a speciﬁc set of mental health challenges. 
At the temperament level, a variety of genes target various neurotransmitters, 
neurohormones and neuropeptides pathways that interact to create some basic 
motivational systems (Del Giudice, 2018), and gene alleles may contribute to systematic 
diﬀerences in these systems as a basis for temperament. No one gene is likely 
disproportionately impacting, and the myriad of diﬀerent genes still load in diﬀerent 
ways on the same motivational systems; for instance, some dopamine genes may 
operate by aﬀecting receptor densities (DRD4) and some may clear the synaptic cleft of 
dopamine faster or slower (MAOA), but both are ultimately altering the expressed

135 
energy of the same motivational system through diﬀerent dynamics. In this way, we can 
think of many distinct allele contributions as shaping two major continuums of the BAS 
and BIS along a grid, with the interactions between the two creating four basic 
“quadrants.” These quadrants may be probabilistic “centers of gravity” that should only 
be considered heuristic starting points; for instance, they fail to factor in the 
characteristic adaptations of experience that modify these pathways further. Finally, 
environments may use a variety of factors including stress to ﬂip epigenetic “switches” 
that aﬀect these strategies, often to prepare people for environments of conﬂict and 
stress by pushing people toward fast strategies based on early adversity (Biglan et al., 
2020). This is one potential mechanism of the epigenetic eﬀects of children who attain 
high ACE scores, for instance. 
While exploring the full depth of this implication is beyond the scope of this 
review, we will consider some brief implications of their therapeutic presentation. It is 
worth noting that while this author is ambivalent about the DSM and medicalizing the 
embodied challenges faced by each life strategy, for the purposes of clarifying the 
relationship between functional strategies and mental health presentations, Del 
Giudice’s own taxonomy links strategies directly to their increased predispositions for 
psychopathology as captured by DSM-5-TR diagnostic constructs without engaging 
signiﬁcantly in issues of construct validity. His approach will be replicated below, but it 
should be mentioned that much of the strength of the approach comes from a deep and 
comprehensive review of the mental health literature, which will not be explored here. 
The following is information grounded in life history strategy research (which

136 
might be called life strategies in this model) which comes from Del Giudice (2018), 
unless otherwise speciﬁed. The categories include: the name of the life history strategy 
presented according to Del Giudice’s basic and extended model (which again, may be 
problematic from a complementary cognition perspective); an acronym for that name; 
and in brackets, the set point for each strategy based on where it falls on a) the 
behavioral inhibitions system (BIS), a psychosocial threat defense system and can be 
either fast/unstable or slow/stable, and b) the behavioral approach system (BAS), a 
psychosocial engagement system which can be either open/plastic or closed/non-
plastic. 
Prosocial/caregiving (P/C; slow/stable, closed/non-plastic). The high-stability, 
low-plasticity temperament is considered the prosocial/caregiving strategy (Del Giudice, 
2018). The hallmarks of a heightened BIS - trait harm-avoidance, negative emotionality 
and fear conditioning - create a sensitivity to social threat, i.e. “avoidable social danger” 
such as negative social experiences that threaten social positions and social goals. 
Individuals insulate themselves from perceived danger through social cohesion and 
moral tightness (Mrazek et al., 2013), leading to traditional cultural groups that value 
social stability based on communal loyalty, norm-enforcement, rigid hierarchies and 
uncertainty avoidance. This promotes a conservative collectivistic orientation to provide 
group-level harmony and security (Chiao & Blizinsky, 2009). Not being oriented to risky 
opportunism means investing in somatic capital, where people seek to learn complex 
social roles to gain social prestige and access social investment. The P/C strategy is 
associated with Big Five personality traits like agreeableness (politeness aspect)

137 
emphasizing social cohesion and conformity, and conscientiousness (industriousness 
aspect) emphasizing long-term goal persistence that favors dependability in social roles. 
The prosocial/caregivers face unique mental health challenges. As a highly 
buﬀered strategy they are resilient while in harmonious social groups like collectivistic 
cultures, but the risks of a highly-tuned BIS such as fear, anxiety and neuroticism can 
lead to greater mood and anxiety disorders in Western cultures where social uncertainty 
and ambiguity is higher (Chiao & Blizinsky, 2009). The strong reliance on a social survival 
strategy may lend itself to the security and predictability of a strong group identity and 
unambiguous rank positioning, which may create strong anticipatory threat in 
environments of rank uncertainty and individualistic roles and identities, and where the 
psychosocial damage of social losses may be more destabilizing (see: sociometer and 
hierometer; Leary & Baumeister, 2000; Mahadevan et al., 2016). In summary, this 
strategy may “stabilize” on group factors and reﬂect group health, making individuals 
resilient to the extent that groups are, ala “dandelions” in Dobbs (2012) formulation. It 
may be when groups face vulnerability in toxic or unstable social conditions (i.e., 
populism, cults, fascism, etc.) that individuals conform to and express the group-level 
dysfunction in ways that dysregulate.  
In terms of psychopathology risk, this group runs a higher risk for some forms of 
eating disorder and obsessive-compulsive disorder, which can be associated with high 
levels of conscientiousness (industriousness aspect) and agreeableness (cooperativeness ; 
Del Giudice, 2018). However, by and large this temperament may be unique in that 
extreme self-regulation allows individuals to be ﬂexible to the needs of the group,

138 
making group-level vulnerabilities like extremism, populism, authoritarianism and 
dogmatism to be most toxic. For instance, the QAnon movement, antivax movements, 
and recent far right populism in the US, may highlight individuals who may become 
mentally unhealthy when expressing unhealthy group norms. At the individual level, 
ideological dogmatism and community-level resistance to change may make destructive 
beliefs particularly dangerous to these individuals, where one will sooner break bonds 
with reality than sever ties to their ideological community as the relationship to the 
group is most important for mental co-regulation. 
Exploitative/antagonist (E/A; fast/unstable, closed/non-plastic). The low-
plasticity/low-stability strategy is an exploitation strategy in the complementary 
cognition formulation (H. Taylor et al., 2022), with neither the openness to experience 
of the plastic strategies, nor does it have the sensitive BIS of the stable strategies. This is 
an opportunistic, responsive, risk-taking approach to resource exploitation (Del Giudice, 
2018). Less social inhibition, decreased sensitivity to social threats and reduced fear of 
punishment can enable bold, competitive and opportunistic approaches. This is a fast 
strategy that thrives in conﬂict-oriented and stressful environments (Biglan et al., 2020), 
and the strategy can verge on anti-sociality under social conditions that do not 
ameliorate the potential for conﬂict and power disparities: unequal societies, honor 
cultures, or societies where the social fabric has been torn (Booth et al., 1989; 2006; 
Mazur & Booth, 1998). Personality traits may include high reward-sensitivity, which is 
associated with the personality trait extraversion (assertiveness aspect). This might lead 
to highly responsive and opportunistic strategies by motivating strong pursuit of

139 
rewards even in opposition to others. This may motivate competition for personal gain, 
and a desire for social status as force-leverager to access all social rewards. The 
potential for strong competitive motivation particularly in social settings where conﬂict is 
normalized may lead to callousness beﬁtting an exploitation strategy, and can be used to 
justify ruthlessness and domination in an absence of social control conditions - strong 
norms, beliefs, values and institutions which constrain self-interested behavior (D. S. 
Wilson et al., 2023). 
The E/A strategy might be said to “stabilize” on meeting needs for achievement 
and status, and can become destabilized in their absence. The strategy may be prone to 
mental health diﬃculties associated with externalizing disorders. For instance, conduct 
disorders (CD) and oppositional-deﬁant disorder (ODD) during youth, antisocial 
personality disorder (ASPD) and anger management issues later in life, and dark triad 
personality traits such as Machiavellianism or psychopathy in the extreme. There is a risk 
for a fast life history version of eating disorders, as well as substance abuse issues due to 
higher reward sensitivity and less BIS activation. What many of these diagnoses share in 
common is a transactional and exploitative view of people as social resources and 
rewards, an emphasis on competition, power, coercion and dominance. Social context 
matter insofar as it can moderate this motivation through social control (i.e., a reverse-
dominance hierarchy; D. S. Wilson et al., 2023), and there may be diﬃculty balancing 
drives against needs for prosocial connection, community and empathy.  
Seducer/creative (S/C; fast/unstable, open/plastic). The high-plasticity, low-
stability strategy is called seducer/creative, and may be considered one of the cognitive

140 
strategies in the extended model of the FSD (Del Giudice, 2018), or an exploratory 
strategy in the complementary cognition model (H. Taylor et al., 2022). As a survival 
strategy, the S/C strategy uses high creativity (a property of openness to experience, 
aesthetic aspect) and increased mentalizing (i.e., increased empathy and theory of 
mind) to ﬁnd opportunities for creative, imaginative or social utility in the social world, 
while seeking security through individual relationships. As a fast strategy, the S/C is 
considered uninhibited and unstable, pairing highly imaginative and highly verbal 
strengths with an empathic and relational demeanor. This suggests unique strengths 
that likely evolved late in social evolution, and a proneness to some of the more exotic 
disorders of the psychosis spectrum (Del Giudice, 2018). 
The exotic disorders are likely a combination of a cognitive strategy trade-oﬀs 
mixed with greater opportunity for environmental injuries and ecological mismatch that 
come from a minority temperament. For instance, a higher novelty-seeking personality 
can lead to novel solutions, ideas and insights, but most work environments reward this 
only at the highest levels of management; in employees where conscientiousness (i.e., 
role-based goal-persistence) is valued, “dreamers” may pose a problem. Looser 
connections and divergent thinking in general may lead to a rich imagination and sense 
of aesthetics with a variety of niche applications, but particularly in times of duress, can 
increase the risk for schizotypal and schizoaﬀective disorders (schizophrenia spectrum 
disorders; SSD). Eccentric loners may be more likely in this temperament from increased 
plasticity, which combines detachment (introversion), disagreeableness (a solitary 
nature) and idiosyncratic behavioral experimentation (high openness). Eccentric loners

141 
are highly individualistic, and may receive social friction in the form of social punishment, 
rejection and defeat, leading to defense disorders and psychosis at a higher rate in 
unstable temperaments (particularly when timed with critical developmental windows; 
see: the social defeat hypothesis of schizophrenia ; Selten & Cantor-Graae, 2005). More 
speculatively, an exploratory disposition (openness to new and better ways of doing 
things) in more exploitative social systems (such as capitalist economies) may create 
social antagonism. Traits that support non-conformity, the development of critical 
consciousness (ability to imagine better forms of social living) and perspicacity 
(awareness of exploitation; Hanna et al., 2000) may lead to a frustrated “progress” 
metaphor, social activism, counter-culturalism, radicalism and potentially, cynicism and 
misanthropy. 
Indeed, high openness to experience and the cognitive niches in general might 
be thought of as highly individualistic by nature, which might be generally mismatched 
in traditional or collectivistic cultures and exploitative economies. Highly collectivistic 
cultures show evidence that the gene alleles that predispose people to high degrees of 
openness to experience passed through, but are no longer present, suggesting the trait 
was extinguished in the incompatible environment (Chang et al., 1996). Bipolar disorder 
(BP) is also a greater risk of the S/C. The changes to the dopaminergic motivation 
systems associated with the plastic temperaments, and the lack of the “stabilizing” 
slow-strategy BIS, may lead to a reciprocal relationship between exploratory behavior 
and the disruption of social structures (i.e., sleep hygiene, work, etc.) that play a role in 
starting manic episodes. The proclivity for social instability, sensitivity and vulnerability

142 
may also play a role as a risk factor for borderline personality disorder (BPD), while the 
phenotype of individualism, social charm (mentalizing) and instability may contribute to 
narcissistic personality disorder (NPD). 
The S/C strategy stabilizes on meeting needs for creativity and intimate 
relationships, and becomes unstable without channels for one or both. A common 
theme is the exploration of idiosyncratic and experimental paths with an impulsive 
fearlessness of the consequences can lead to negative feedback received sensitively by 
an unstable temperament. A proneness to exploration (ADHD) can erode direction and 
structure in the extreme (bipolar) and may make for reactionary and unsustainable 
strategies expressed along biopsychological (schizotypal) or biosocial (borderline 
personality) paths. Schizophrenia may be more common here if a temperament with 
unstable creativity intersects with agonic environments leading to chronic or signiﬁcant 
social defeat at a critical developmental window, which may sensitize the already 
temperamentally sensitive dopaminergic pathways (Selten & Cantor-Graae, 2005). 
Skilled/provisioner (S/P; slow/stable, open/plastic). The skilled/provisioner 
strategy (S/P) is stable (inhibited BIS) and plastic (insensitive BAS) for a unique coupling 
of cognitive exploration and relative social restraint. The S/P is a slow strategy (high trait 
conscientiousness , orderliness aspect), with an aversion to spontaneity and uncertainty, 
and socio-emotional inhibition; curiosity ( openness to intellect ) is channeled inwardly as 
mechanistic cognition and deliberative logic. The S/P ﬁlls a cognitive niche, where 
accruing knowledge, information and skill mastery pays oﬀ on a longer time horizon 
(late sexual debut; Del Giudice, 2018). The role would ﬁll niches built on technology use

143 
and advanced problem-solving that would have opened up late in human cultural 
evolution. The strategy stabilizes on a precise and logical inner world characterized by 
strong intellectual and ethical engagement to idiosyncratic interests (beﬁtting an 
evolutionary search perspective). 
The S/P is most prominently associated with ASD and a slow variant of ADHD, as 
well as a slow version of bipolar disorder (BD), obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD) and 
obsessive-compulsive personality disorder (OCPD; Del Giudice, 2018). The functioning of 
OCD in this temperament may make sense as unbuﬀered BIS sensitivity. While the P/C 
strategy and S/P are both stable strategies, the P/C strategy is buﬀered through social 
order (see: moral tightness ), while the S/P is a solitary strategy (low agreeableness ), and 
expresses the orderliness aspect of trait conscientiousness possibly as a higher need for 
control to compensate for the lack of social supports in coping with neurotic potential; 
OCD may make sense as an extreme expression of this general trend. This may also 
account for the nature of ASD as an unbuﬀered exploratory mindset that must use 
solitary coping styles such as routine and hyper-control to counter anxiety and stress 
more generally. Like the S/C strategy, the S/P shares an exploratory mindset that is 
turned inward through social inhibition, cultivating a rich inner world that is more likely 
to be rationally-ordered, rather than ideologically-ordered as with the buﬀered P/C 
strategy. As with the S/C, ADHD represents a general propensity toward hyper-curiosity 
as a source of distractions, though these may be more likely to be intellectually 
generated, while the slow-form of bipolar represents the potential for high highs and low 
lows having both extreme exploratory and inhibitory temperaments.

144 
It is worth noting the theme that life strategies inﬂuence strengths and 
weaknesses as people move through a social landscape of social punishers and 
stressors. A recent study (Raymaker et al., 2020) exploring ASD and the term coined by 
the community called autistic burnout emphasized how the challenges of ASD 
manifested as compromised supports and heightened stressors. Autistic burnout was 
characterized by the absence of supportive factors, the over-presence of burdens, and a 
calculus whereby the remaining energetic load was unable to meet social expectations 
of role performance (see Figure 3). In other words, like the S/C, the cognitive niches 
must face a greater likelihood of psychosocial stressors and mismatch, which helps to 
deﬁne much of their relationship with poor mental health. 
Neurodiversity Consilience: Contributions from Moral Psychology 
The contribution of complementary cognition (Hunt & Jaeggi, 2022; H. Taylor et 
al., 2022) adds to life history research by asserting a strong group-level context to 
neurodiversity by way of MLS evolution. Only by adding the group-level context can we 
speak of individual strategies playing roles such as neurocognitive generalists and 
specialists in something, which requires seeing neurodiversity as a major evolutionary 
transition as framed by MLS. Cultural evolution is an important level of MLS because it 
both produced the group-context of human evolution, and is the perpetual product of 
the group itself. That is, cultural evolution operates on human groups to increase their 
evolvability by producing knowledge, ideologies, values, institutions, systems and more, 
which adaptively regulates the functioning of the group as a superorganism. However, it 
is also increasingly the evolutionary imperative of social agents to practically and

145 
politically shape the evolution of culture and systems as this can make a signiﬁcant 
indirect impact on their own ﬁtness, perhaps increasingly so (Heylighen, 2023; M. E. 
Price, 2023; Vidal, 2023; D. S. Wilson, 2023). In that context, neurodiversity is a major 
transition because it evolved to divide labor toward these ends and continues to inform 
the logic of cultural contribution along the exploration-exploitation divide: neurodiverse 
generalists maintain and conserve the best of the existing system, while specialists 
search for new ways to improve on the myriad of processes involved to move the 
needle in ever more sustainable and growth-oriented ways (Haidt, 2013). 
Mental well-being is not incidental, but critical in the equation. Complementary 
cognition and moral psychology may help to explain why humanistic terms like 
“meaning” and “purpose” are important aspects of well-being. These seemingly spiritual 
concepts may be integral to deep life satisfaction as a kind of evolved feedback that 
occurs when humans play values-congruent roles in interdependent groups, where well-
being is at least partially a byproduct of a group-level co-regulatory process (Beckes & 
Coan, 2011; Christakis & Fowler, 2011; Coan & Sbarra, 2015). This adds a new level of 
connotation to the concept of niche construction, a construct that captures the way an 
individual, group or species systematically modiﬁes an environment to create an 
ecological pocket optimized to the traits they use to exploit it, and where the 
constructor and the niche often co-regulate one another for mutual beneﬁt (see the life 
cycles of mutualistic species where both are interdependent for food and/or mating, 
such as bees and ﬂowering plants). In humans, social niche construction (Bergmüller & 
Taborsky, 2010; Montiglio et al., 2013) might create social niches that are favorable to

146 
one’s phenotype, determine whether a given behavior is adaptable or maladaptive, and 
lends itself to creating social roles that optimize for win-win outcomes, which in turn 
provisions wellness factors such as a sense of control, predictability, support and 
prestige. Missing from the life history research, then, is the prediction that an alignment 
between social reward systems, individualized values, and real role contributions to 
evolutionary stability or change, can help explain the more humanistic and existential 
goals of mental well-being including a) a frame for the importance of deep alignment 
between moral values, ways of being and social niche-of-ﬁt, and b) a reason why 
aligning one’s values and ways of being with a meaningful social role can feel like a 
“calling.” Speciﬁcally, that when optimizing across three biopsychosocial levels - 
subjective social reward systems, individualized life strategies, and social roles that feel 
important because they genuinely drive the cultural evolution of stability and change - 
one achieves a sense of “purpose” in “something greater than one’s self:” the 
conﬂuence of meaning-making systems, idiosyncratic strengths and a real function in 
driving the project of life itself to some unknown higher plateau. 
All of this helps to update evolutionary theory to the goals of modern therapy, 
where therapeutic success should not feel like survival at all, but thriving in a healthy 
social group where people devote their lives to meaningful pursuits of collaborative 
utopian visions, goals and values. However, in the modern world, it is increasingly 
opaque how well-being is produced at scale through the intersection of dynamic forces 
in a complexifying world, much less how incompatible visions of the future may aﬀect 
sustainable well-being across diverse people, agendas, systems and niches. What is

147 
more, the reasons why people diﬀer so deeply in how these moral visions should look 
increasingly seems less to do with facts and more about deeper intrinsic motivations, 
even as the stakes of global polarization are higher than ever. Here too, moral 
psychology can help to explain not just why the diﬀerent neurotypes serve diﬀerent 
evolutionary “purposes,” but why these functions may require diﬀerent moral 
ecosystems to socially support their functioning and coregulate their well-being. This 
may set up a ﬁght between neurotypes over incompatible visions of the future, and 
explain how some moral ecosystems can be hostile to the well-being of those 
neurotypes that ﬁnd themselves under incompatible moral and political regimes. Moral 
psychology may also help explain how neurodiversity may be of singular evolutionary 
importance in solving the biggest existential threats facing the human project. 
Morality: An Evolutionary Frame  
Neurodiversity strategies may be involved in the curation of moral capital. For 
many years, Western moral psychology was dominated by Lawrence Kohlberg’s stage 
theory of moral development as an unfolding reasoning process that developed across 
the lifespan (Haidt, 2013). However, recent evidence shows morality to be guided by 
aﬀective intuitions that can resist conscious justiﬁcation, and thereby refute reasoning 
as the basis for moral decision-making (Haidt, 2007; 2013). These aﬀective responses are 
universally cross-cultural, but vary systematically in how individuals embody them. This 
diversity of brain-based aﬀective diﬀerences is now thought to be the natural basis for 
political diﬀerences along the left-right political spectrum (Haidt, 2007; 2008; 2013; 
Haidt & Kesebir, 2010).

148 
The moral dimension of neurodiversity requires seeing morality as an 
evolutionary imperative which accomplishes two things: helping individuals adapt to 
social life by solving “the problems of social living” (Dean, 2012), and helping social 
groups survive in competition with other social groups (Haidt, 2007; 2008; 2013; Haidt & 
Kesebir, 2010). Because the scale of prosocial group life is humans’ signature adaptation 
to their environment (Atkins et al., 2019; D. S. Wilson, 1997; 2002; 2008; 2019; D. S. 
Wilson et al., 2023; D. S. Wilson & Sober, 1994), individuals’ ability to survive is 
determined by their ability to jockey for positioning and resources in the social group. 
Accordingly, one use of moral emotions is to use subconscious emotional responses that 
intuitively navigate social and political challenges, such as maintaining a positive social 
reputation in a community of gossipers (where gossip evolved to socially punish, and 
deter, those who violate group moral norms). From the groups’ perspective, however, 
harmony is most strategic especially in the face of well-organized rival groups, and 
moral systems often culturally evolve to subvert excessive individual self-interest and 
social friction (i.e., cheating, greed or conﬂict), which impair the group’s ability to 
eﬀectively organize to counter rivals. 
Socio-cultural evolution solved both dilemmas in shaping moral aﬀective 
responses to generally solve social challenges with prosocial decision-making emerging 
deep in the intuitive subconscious. For instance, this can involve curating a prosocial 
reputation with one’s personal political “press secretary,” a part of the mind-brain that 
crafts self-serving moral justiﬁcations to “spin” self-serving behavior to the deception of 
everyone, including ourselves. The press secretary automatically deploys just-so moral

149 
self-justiﬁcations to defend against probing gossip and maintain our good moral standing 
and prestige. In this way, morality helps to “bind” human groups together, but it also 
“blinds” us to uncomfortable truths and narratives that might be in our interest to 
understand. Thus, a consilience of evidence points to this aﬀective basis for morality, 
including ﬁndings about moral judgments being located in the brain in areas dominated 
by emotion, psychopathy being characterized by emotional deﬁcits, the ability to 
change moral judgment by manipulating emotion, the ubiquity of desire-motivated 
reasoning, increasing relevance of intuition in prosocial and political psychology, and a 
variety of other ﬁndings (Haidt, 2013; Haidt & Kesebir, 2010). It is the coordinated suite 
of intrinsic and extrinsic incentives and punishers that creates enough motivation to 
override self-interest and make group coordination and cohesion possible. 
Evolutionary Moral Models  
What makes an evolutionary account of morality diﬀerent from traditional 
Western views is that an evolutionary account of morality is far more expansive than 
modern psychological conceptions. Western models of morality typically acknowledge 
the morality of avoiding harm or ensuring fairness, but evolutionary models address a 
wider array of aﬀective intuitions across cultures that is more expansive, including a 
sense of fairness, loyalty, respect, tradition, care and autonomy as key players in 
regulating group dynamics (Haidt, 2013; Haidt & Kesebir, 2010). 
Here though, the details vary and apply diﬀerent nuances of evolutionary logic. 
For instance, Haidt and Kesebir (2010) developed moral foundations theory (MFT) and 
found in their cross-cultural testing, six kinds of automatic, preconscious aﬀective

150 
intuitions that respond to moral dilemmas that would have been common in the 
evolution of social groups: care/harm evolved as a motivation to care for infants but 
became a foundation for basic empathic motivations to avoid harming others; 
fairness/reciprocity motivates acts of altruism to others with an expectation of fair 
return in a tit-for-tat fashion; authority/subversion sees an orientation to respect and 
deference as the basis for social hierarchies based on prestige and leadership; 
loyalty/betrayal evolved as a way to build coalitions based on loyalty and avoidance of 
betrayal; sanctity/degradation likely began as an orientation toward purity as pathogen 
defense, but evolved into a basic orientation to neophilia (liking novelty) and neophobia 
(avoiding novelty) as either a defensiveness of traditions and rituals as sacred, or a 
willingness to break them; and liberty/oppression which evolved as a resistance to 
hierarchical over-reach as a desire to rise up under power deemed illegitimate or 
domineering. Alternatively, Curry (2016; Curry et al., 2019) employs the Morality-as-
Cooperation (MAC) model with seven moral dimensions, which echoes many of the 
same moral solutions yet splits authority into two conﬂict resolution modules. Curry’s 
model includes kinship (support and care for family), mutualism (coordination toward 
mutual gain and protection), exchange (norms of trust and cooperative reciprocity), 
hawkishness (conﬂict resolution favoring bold success) and dovishness (conﬂict 
resolution favoring deference in the face of loss), division (fairness in division of 
resources and labor) and possession (territoriality and ownership). 
There are other models that could be included in this that overlap broadly in the 
evolution of prosocial organizational psychology, which often includes or overlaps with

151 
moral psychology: for instance, the Prosocial model (D. S. Wilson & Hayes, 2018) that 
identiﬁes 8 common principles of eﬀective groups resting on evolved psychological 
mechanisms based on the work of Elinor Ostrom; and the PILAR model (Heslop et al., 
2018; Heslop et al., 2021) that identiﬁes ﬁve aspects of group dynamics and 
collaboration. But at this point, the diversity of model drives home a broad agreement, 
that there is common reference to an agreed upon footing in evolutionary theories of 
prosociality, altruism, morality, cooperation and cohesion with strong precedence in the 
evolutionary literature, including theories of kin-based selection, reciprocal altruism 
(strong and indirect), the evolution of punishment, mutualism/inclusive ﬁtness, and 
group-selection/multilevel selection (Henrich, 2004; Heslop et al., 2021; D. S. Wilson, 
2002; 2008; 2019; D. Wilson & Wilson, 2007; D. S. Wilson & Hayes, 2018; Wright, 1994; 
2001). From this literature we can see that most authors arrive at broadly similar 
taxonomies that discretize the number of socio-moral intuitions in slightly diﬀerent 
ways, yet with relatively similar premises and only minor conﬂicts in how they are 
embodied in the brain or expressed socially. Consequently, we can have relative 
conﬁdence in scholarly agreement that there are common, but varying, “taste buds” of 
the moral imagination (Haidt, 2013), which form a robust dimension of evolutionary 
psychology that turns social animals into “moral animals” (Wright, 1994). 
The Neurodiversity of Moral Actors 
The moral “taste buds” are claimed to be universal and cross-cultural in scope, 
and diversity in the patterns of expression are equally robust (Haidt, 2013). MFT in 
particular has developed a variety of inventories to test the moral taste buds in

152 
respondents across a variety of cultures, using moral vignettes designed to evoke a 
particular moral response, which can then be rated for strength or intensity. The result 
is not only broad agreement on the aﬀective domains, but clear patterns of 
neurodivergent subgrouping with respect to how salient some groups ﬁnd some moral 
domains relative to others. And as with the metatraits of personality, which organize 
lower-level patterns of diﬀerence at the trait-level, there tends to be sharp diverging 
patterns in how people respond to the moral domains as organized by this 
neurodiversity. For instance, one cluster of respondents tends to rank all six moral 
dimensions as equally salient across cultures and SES. By contrast, another group 
strongly prioritizes three domains – care/harm, fairness/reciprocity and 
liberty/oppression – as signiﬁcant, while deprioritizing the other three: 
authority/subversion, sanctity/degradation and loyalty/betrayal. It was then found that 
these diﬀerences not only correspond to the temperament basis for political 
conservatism (the former pattern) and liberalism (the latter), but could be expanded to 
illustrate the diﬀerences between liberals and libertarians based on the relative strength 
of the liberty/oppression dimension. In other words, there is a reason that similar voting 
blocs to those found in America appear across all countries and ethnicities, and it 
corresponds to innate moral diﬀerences that are functional, even as they vary 
tremendously across time and culture. 
These models do not exist in a vacuum but organize a long-standing evidence-
basis in moral psychology. For instance, in “evolution and moral diversity,” Dean (2012) 
took it as a given that “individual diﬀerences exist because the very nature of the

153 
problems of social living meant that evolution was not able to settle upon a single 
psychological type” and “a diversity...of psychological types working together tended to 
be more evolutionarily stable, thus maintaining the [diversity] of psychological types in 
our species over time.” What is the nature of these diﬀerences? In “Red Brain, Blue 
Brain: Evaluative Processes Diﬀer in Democrats and Republicans,” Schreiber et al. (2013) 
found that liberals and conservatives operate diﬀerent cognitive styles driven by 
biological inﬂuences in their political attitudes and beliefs. These diﬀerences run as deep 
as diﬀerences in brain structure, with liberals having more gray matter volume in the 
anterior cingulate cortex, and conservatives showing more gray matter in the amygdala; 
similarly, Democrats had more neural activity in the left insula, while Republicans 
showed the same activity increase in the right amygdala. The authors concluded, “these 
results suggest that liberals and conservatives engage in diﬀerent cognitive processes 
when they think about risk, and they support recent evidence that conservatives show 
greater sensitivity to threatening stimuli.” 
Personality diﬀerences are also found in the literature. In De Neve’s (2015) work 
on “Personality, Childhood Experience, and Political Ideology,” openness to experience 
predicts liberal ideologies, while conscientiousness predicts conservative ones; 
incidentally, these traits implicate opposing metatraits, the former plasticity/beta and 
the latter stability/alpha, and further reinforce that each of the major neurodiversity 
contributions are parallel echoes of the same underlying divisions. Hibbing et al. (2014) 
bore out the implication that liberals and conservatives diﬀer not just in political 
domains, but in approaches to all other aspects of life, “from tastes in art to desire for

154 
closure and from disgust sensitivity to the tendency to pursue new information.” In 
echoes of DeYoung’s postulation that a major human divide lay in opposing orientations 
to the unknown, a signiﬁcant ﬁnding is that conservatives are biased toward the 
unknown as a source of threat, with strong physiological reactions and psychological 
resources devoted to negative information, while liberals are more motivated to pursue 
cognitive novelty to satisfy a greater motivation for exploratory curiosity. 
A problem remains in that much of the moral psychology research, including 
MFT and MAC, posit two poles for liberals and conservatives, not the four found in the 
neurodiversity quadrants, and the addition of Libertarianism by MFT does not go far 
enough to achieve alignment. Robbins and Shield (2014) may have helped to bridge this 
gap in “Explaining ideology: Two factors are better than one.” The authors showed that 
while a negativity bias helps to explain a security motivation to organize against social 
threats, a feature of social conservatism (see: genetic threat sensitivity as a motivator 
for “moral tightness;” Mrazek et al., 2013), negativity bias does not explain the existence 
of a diﬀerent factor, power motivation, as strongly associated with economic 
conservatism. Robbins and Shield went on to model how there could be two routes to 
conservatism (fiscal and social) and two routes to liberalism (fiscal and social) as shown 
in Table 2, based on two separate motivational systems: weak or strong negativity bias, 
and high or low empathic concern. 
This model helps us synthesize the MFT with other moral and political 
psychology ﬁndings, by breaking liberalism and conservatism into social and economic 
variants. These are in turn expressions of the strong and weak poles of two motivational

155 
spectrums 𑁋power/empathy and negativity/positivity 𑁋in a direct parallel to the other 
models of neurodiversity. This would see moral neurodiversity echo the other forms of 
neurodiversity as varying expressions of universal motivations as they give rise to a raft 
of downstream eﬀects. Moral neurodiversity would align with the other models of 
neurodiversity, with conservatism resolving along the exploitation aspect of the 
exploitation-exploration tradeoﬀ, and liberalism along the exploration dimension. Yet 
where H. Taylor et al. (2022) would consider this complementarity along the 
exploration-exploitation tradeoﬀ, Hibbing et al. (2014) set it up as a ﬁght: “the 
supporters of tradition and stability, sometimes referred to as conservatives, do battle 
with the supporters of innovation and reform, sometimes referred to as liberals.”  
The Functions of Moral Neurodiversity  
Neurodiversity may be signiﬁcant to evolution as a “moral pluralism” that has 
been centered in cultural evolutionary accounts (Haidt & Kesebir, 2010). The evolution 
of morality is speciﬁcally to “bind and build” (Haidt, 2007; 2008; 2013; Haidt & Kesebir, 
2010) which captures evolved moral functions such as facilitating tribalism, building 
coalitions, organizing toward shared challenges and generally suppressing self-interest 
to boost social trust and group cohesion. In this way, human moral psychology oﬀers 
prosocial motivations for individuals to function as an interdependent whole. The story 
of multilevel selection has ampliﬁed this theme over time, with group-level selection 
pressures (such as intergroup competition) making interdependence a target of 
selection. This puts moral evolution at the heart of a major evolutionary transition, 
facilitating groups to become increasingly indivisible social superorganisms that operate

156 
as if they were a single organism (Christakis & Fowler, 2011; D. S. Wilson, 2002, 2008; 
Wright, 2000). 
Such an evolutionary account reframes the individualistic life history strategies 
as serving moral social roles that help co-regulate “something larger than themselves.” 
This vision of neurodiversity is no longer an epiphenomenon (a causally-irrelevant 
secondary property) of evolution, but centers neurodiversity as a purposeful feature of 
this change. The fact that cultures invariably express some manifestation of [social and 
economic] conservatives and progressives is part of the evolutionary story, as moral and 
political neurotypes antagonistically co-regulate the “moral commons” that are key to 
the cultural evolution of high-functioning groups. They do this by exerting diﬀering 
cultural inﬂuences on the law, institutions, beliefs, lifestyles and so forth, to push and 
pull at the adaptive evolvability of the superorganism in the hopes of increasingly non-
zero-sum beneﬁts. 
In humans, the social glue of moral communities is moral capital , which is “the 
degree to which a community possesses interlocking sets of values, virtues, norms, 
practices, identities, and technologies that mesh well with evolved psychological 
mechanisms and thereby enable the community to suppress or regulate selﬁshness and 
make cooperation possible” (Haidt, 2013, p. 341). From an evolutionary perspective, the 
function of morality is group cohesion of a pack/group/tribe, and moral capital is the 
degree to which a group can harness shared trust, synergy, agreement, conﬂict-
resolution, expectations, understanding and intentionality at the group-level 
(importantly, the Western frame of morality as a kind of reasoning and primarily seen as

157 
revolving around issues of harm/care is rejected as a feature of WEIRD countries, while 
most other countries disavow this narrow morality in favor of a richer view of what can 
be sacred; Haidt, 2013). It follows that moral neurodiversity sees each life strategy as 
contributing a diﬀerent function to moral capital, or perhaps, diverse kinds of moral 
capital altogether through the operation of the respective subcultures. 
It has already been shown that life history strategies predict responses to the six 
moral foundations (Gladden & Cleator, 2018). For instance, political and personality 
psychology show a strong serotonergic defense system (BIS) to be attuned toward 
threat sensitivity, uncertainty avoidance, a higher need for order and structure, and 
lower self-esteem, all of which deﬁnes the stable strategies shared by social 
conservatives and libertarians as social liberals ( neophobia ; Jost et al., 2003; McCrae, 
1996). From a social functionalist standpoint, the stable strategies embody a defensive 
orientation to experience that provides a social function: to conserve tradition, respect 
authority, police ingroup loyalty and sanctify rituals to maintain a given way of life. Here, 
mental health challenges themselves serve a prosocial function: a basal neuroticism 
promotes anxious uncertainty, which is countered by moral tightness, i.e. reliance on a 
rigid hierarchy and ingroup for security, promoting a stable collectivistic response 
(Mrazek et al., 2013). However, an externality of this strategy is that new and innovative 
solutions to problems may be systematically peripheralized, which can make the group 
brittle in times of environmental change where it is new group-level approaches that 
are needed (J. Williams & Taylor, 2005). Liberals, then, balance this equation with a 
shifted dopaminergic approach system (BAS) that promotes the personality trait

158 
openness to experience (neophilia; McCrae, 1996; Settle et al., 2010), which 
characterizes the plastic strategies. Liberals and libertarians exhibit a greater emphasis 
on values of care/harm, fairness/reciprocity and liberty/oppression, which facilitates an 
openness to change in service of new social conﬁgurations that might ultimately yield 
even greater moral capital at the group level at the risk of short-term disruptions. Note 
that libertarians (social liberals) embody both the plastic and stable conﬁgurations of 
the BIS and BAS systems, and ﬁscal (economic) conservatives occupy the non-plastic and 
unstable conﬁgurations, conserving the way a quadrant model can use set points of the 
BIS and BAS to model moral and political neurodiversity. 
Functionally, there are several dynamics to moral neurodiversity, but at the 
highest level there is a similar bifurcation to the Big Two in personality psychology. Here, 
metatrait plasticity is associated with individualizing values (harm/care and 
fairness/reciprocity) while metatrait stability includes those as well as three binding 
values (binding of ingroups; ala authority/respect, ingroup/loyalty, and sanctity/purity; 
Gladden & Cleator, 2018; Haidt, 2013). Thus, the neurotypes aligned with metatrait 
plasticity embody more individualistic values, while those aligned with metatrait stability 
embody more collectivistic values (and social liberals, who are in both conditions, 
embody both sets of values, as value system should be thought of as two separate 
continuums; Oyserman et al., 2002). An alternative system by Sinn and Hayes (2017) 
casts the diﬀerences between the two groups as universalizing values and dominating 
values (i.e., dominating toward outgroups). That is, another logical implication of 
individualizing values like harm/care or fairness is that they should be universally shared

159 
on the basis of being individual rights; similarly, binding values like authority/respect, 
ingroup/loyalty and sanctity/purity lend themselves to dominating outgroups as 
collectivistic social orders create a strong group strategy that can be formidable in 
intergroup competition. Both, then, lend themselves to diﬀerent group-level moral 
orders and cultural strategies in the extreme. 
While the US represents the world’s most individualistic cultural strategy (more 
liberal) and China the most collectivistic cultural strategy (more conservative; Hofstede, 
2001; 2011), neither is monolithic, and modern democracies tend to be inclusive to all 
political strategies at a subcultural level. Consequently, all moral neurotribes come to 
represent political blocs found in most countries with remarkable cross-cultural 
consistency (i.e., Europe has versions of America’s left, right and libertarian blocs, 
including a right with ﬁscal and social wings). This likely reﬂects their respective social 
function as a kind of social yin-yang at the group-level: broadly speaking, a tension 
between stability and change. Yet each subgroup likely embodies a moral function that 
attends to diﬀerent dimensions of the moral ecosystem at an even ﬁner level, oﬀering 
unique moral perspectives and contributions that oﬀset the costs and blinders of 
another political bloc (Haidt, 2013). Within these ecosystems, plastic values would 
contribute individualizing/universalizing values, values that frame ethical issues 
individualistically, including promoting diversity, egalitarianism and universalism to 
resist within-group exploitation (Sinn & Hayes, 2017), while stability values would 
embrace both individualizing and group binding values - values that center tradition and 
culture to conserve the hard-won moral capital-building institutions of the group life,

160 
encounter threat through ingroup order and loyalty, and unify in domination or 
exploitation of outgroups (Haidt, 2013; Sinn & Hayes, 2017). 
Moral Neurodiversity as Evolutionary Purpose: Trade-oﬀs, Niches and Mismatch  
Each of the neurodiverse morality strategies “binds and blinds” members into 
“ideological teams.” Moral neurotribes have unique styles of moral self-regulation, 
while contributing speciﬁc forms of moral capital to the larger diverse superorganisms of 
which they are a part, often as a dynamic tension with other moral communities that is 
partly antagonistic, partly complementary. In addition to their contributions, each 
neurotribe has moral and social liabilities owed to their blind spots. From a certain 
vantage, every culture and society is an experiment to ﬁnd the best way to harmonize 
their diverse moral contributions, lest the blind spots of one or more neurotribes 
contribute to imbalance and downfall of the whole. 
The plastic neurotypes are devoted to the plight of individuals against monolithic 
and oppressive groups, but can approach change with reckless abandon for what might 
be lost when rending the social fabric (Haidt, 2013). Non-plastic neurotypes center the 
maintenance of the group’s traditions and systems at the cost of oppression and 
marginalization, a dynamic tension that may promote cohesion and cooperation, at the 
cost of great suﬀering in the arc of cultural evolution (Haidt, 2013). Sinn and Hayes 
(2017) cautioned against false equivalency between the two, however, making the case 
that MFT should be replaced by evolutionary coalitional theory (ECT), which tracks 
evidence that conservatives also rate higher on social dominance orientation (SDO) and 
right-wing authoritarianism (RWA). They argue that while the dominance and

161 
exploitation of outgroups was a viable reproductive strategy for prehistorical alpha 
males, the strategy has clear moral costs in the modern world (Sinn & Hayes, 2017). 
However, there is some evidence that societies have diﬀerent “modes” of operation 
depending on whether they face times of scarcity or abundance, peace or threat; 
diﬀerent types of conservatism may be suited either to bureaucratic order suited to 
times of abundance, or the hawkishness suited to times of conﬂict (Drew & Kriz, 2012; 
Wright, 2009). Controversy aside, moral and political neurodiversity assumes that moral 
pluralism is evolutionarily necessary, as curating diverse forms of moral capital is critical 
to managing collective change sustainably. It follows that each moral neurotype serves 
an evolutionary purpose in a larger moral cosmos. 
Summary: Evolved Morality in “Something Greater Than One’s Self”  
Integrating the life history quadrants with moral diversity, we see neurodiversity 
to be a story of moral and political actors, with a partially innate basis for their 
diﬀerences (i.e., soft-wired preferences for political and moral ideologies; Haidt, 2013; 
Jost et al., 2003; McCrae, 1996; Settle et al., 2010). Building atop life history research, 
moral and political psychology repurposes niche strategies into niche contributions. The 
slow stable strategy turns prosocial/caregivers into social conservatives. They conform 
and exclude to protect their hard-won moral capital, and in the process, facilitate a 
“binding” moral imagination that conserves cultural norms, values and beliefs. The fast 
non-plastic neurotype is associated with ﬁscal conservatives who repurpose the 
antagonist/exploitative strategy. These economic conservatives conserve power 
structures as an externality of maintaining their own status and inﬂuence. The fast

162 
plastic strategy counters conservative inﬂuences with liberal/individualizing values. 
Building on the seducer/creative strategy, a progressive moral imagination stems from 
seeing people as individuals, with trait openness as the empathic motivation to 
universalize improvements to individual rights, or else seek systemic changes to the 
underlying social barriers. Finally, later reﬁnements of MFT (Haidt, 2013) brought the 
slow plastic strategy into the fold by introducing the Liberty/Oppression moral domain, 
which sanctiﬁes autonomy as a resistance to abuses of power while being less 
empathically oriented toward harm/care. Social liberalism is consistent with the 
skilled/provisioner strategy and is associated with libertarian movements in the US. On 
the one hand they are politically independent and resistant to social control over 
freedom of thought; on the other, there is a conservative streak in preserving the 
cooperative problem-solving of the social order, which supports role specialists to act as 
hyper-rational utility maximizers. It should also be noted that while the above taxonomy 
emphasizes innate diﬀerences, consistent with life history research, moral psychology is 
also accommodating of environmental factors. For instance, experiments show that 
fewer early friendships and reduced social network size predicted whether someone 
high in trait openness was more likely to become libertarian versus liberal (Settle et al., 
2010). 
Moral Neurodiversity and Epistemic Injustice 
Importantly, the complementarity of moral neurodiversity resists reduction to 
social Darwinist stereotypes such as intelligence, strength, moral character, or 
normality. Each neurotype serves an evolutionary role when achieving niche

163 
congruence, largely by failing to achieve “Übermensch” status in any other way. For 
instance, “intelligence” is a trait that is a stereotype threat (Priscott & Allen, 2021) 
because it is often ascribed to social status and success. Yet what we think of as 
intelligence is likely a tradeoﬀ with several mental health downsides, most prominently 
associated with the cognitive niches and their mentalizing and mechanistic cognition, 
but potentially including motivational and social challenges as well (Del Giudice, 2018). 
In fact, some important evolutionary roles such as culture conservation (i.e., social 
conservatives) are likely best performed by embracing an anti-intellectual disposition: 
conformity, groupthink and dogmatism help to resist challenges to the ingroup 
narratives that coordinate moral capital (Henrich, 2016). Going further, no neurotype 
needs to understand their evolutionary logic to function, much less requires some kind 
of ultimate intellectual grounding with reality; traditionally, it is mythic relationships with 
reality (see: practical realities ; D. S. Wilson, 2002) that have been both suﬃcient and 
common to social and mental functioning (Henrich, 2016; Ratnayake, 2022; D. S. Wilson, 
2002). 
Alternatively, the question of “what is normal” has always been in dialogue with 
neurodiversity and mental health, in part because long before neurodiversity was a 
construct, the social diagnosis of neurodiversity was “being weird.” However, moral 
neurodiversity oﬀers us some relative context here too. Conservative neurotypes place 
a premium on policing normalcy because they care about what is normal as a 
mechanism for social conformity, cohesion and moral tightness that helps fulﬁll their 
group-binding function. In contrast, individualistic “weirdness” has a contrasting moral

164 
capital that requires change agents to antagonize the system by disrupting those group 
norms as a feature, not a bug. In other words, there is a reason some people care about 
what is normal, but that should not be considered evidence that all people should be; as 
with all things, the relative power imbalance between these two subgroups becomes 
the real issue. 
Moral Psychology and Complementary Cognition 
We return to complementary cognition to illustrate its parallels between moral 
psychology (visualized as a social change process in Figure 4). Broadly speaking, social 
and economic conservatives exploit existing resources with systems that make past 
ways of life sacred and unchangeable so as to conserve their hard-won moral capital 
across generations. Conversely, social and economic liberals explore new ways of 
improving moral capital outside of the existing tradition, including better solutions to 
our social, intellectual and technological problems. To speak of liberal values like 
“progress” or “truth” is to make a values-based frame for this evolutionary imperative; 
after all, societal progress is the ultimate goal of all exploration, another way of saying 
that evolutionary search seeks to improve group evolvability (H. Taylor et al., 2022). 
Indeed, despite major therapies advocating for the importance of values-based change, 
the literature says very little about what human values are; the evolution of moral 
neurodiversity may oﬀer a unique explanation as to why moral frames regarding diverse 
ways of being are signiﬁcant to human narratives and behavior. 
Moral neurodiversity is relevant to understanding all levels of neurodiversity, 
and not just a pollyannaish coating on an otherwise science-based model. For instance,

165 
the strong implication for seducer/creatives is that biopsychosocial traits associated 
with costly trade-oﬀs are nevertheless functional; they may even aid in their sociomoral 
role to seek out novel information for the purposes of evolutionary search. Everything 
from a novelty-seeking attentional style, a mentalizing (imaginative & empathic) 
cognitive style, and a highly responsive (sensitive) behavioral style support this purpose, 
even when they contribute to an ADHD-like proﬁle of social, mental and behavioral 
challenges. All moral neurotypes have moral and cognitive blinders, and include a range 
of intrinsic and extrinsic factors that resist conscious self-control. Moral neurodiversity 
tells us that aligning with a moral niche-of-ﬁt - values-aligned work, community and 
esteem - are what align the factors outside of one’s control to energize psychosocial 
resources and exert eﬀective self-control over prosocial agency. This is moral niche 
construction. 
Moral psychology highlights that there is a political dimension to complementary 
cognition, as contributions toward exploitation and change are necessarily in social 
opposition to one another. Liberal explorers must ﬁght the cultural status quo to drive 
social change against the cultural grain, while conservative exploiters are tasked with 
defending against such change. Often it is simply who has the balance of power as 
expressed by neurominorities and majorities, that determines whose behavior, 
cognition, or aﬀectivity has become “the problem.” Similarly, ADHD or ASD are often 
framed as a problem by corporate or school settings that value industrial settings 
optimized for the economic purposes of the other neurotypes (D. Price, 2022), and 
stereotype threats are primed in work environments that over-represent neurotypical

166 
signposts (Priscott & Allen, 2021). When neurotypes self-organize into neurotribes built 
from their diﬀering values to construct the prevailing environment of punishment and 
reward, they are creating a moral or political niche. Corporations, churches, schools, 
artist collectives, and social justice groups each attract, and sustain, diﬀerent 
neurotypes; they also punish those who cannot resonate with the subcultural values, 
norms and mores that regulate the institutional goals in question, creating 
environments deeply stressful and injurious to those who do not naturally align. Moral 
niche construction is about moral niche alignment. 
Groups embody diﬀerent forms of moral capital to coregulate their shared 
activities, and we can assume these subcultural diﬀerences can be quite stark and 
impactful to people with contrasting biopsychosocial needs. Social environments 
organized along speciﬁc neurotribe values may vary signiﬁcantly: in terms of social 
hierarchy versus relational egalitarianism; assumptions about competitiveness versus 
empathic support; ideological conformity versus intellectual autonomy; unpredictability 
versus structure and routine; role perseverance versus role creativity. Values-organized 
moral niches may oﬀer variable levels of social resources and support, or adversity and 
punishment (see: biosocial models, agonic and hedonic environments), shaping patterns 
that bear on what can be mentally sustained according to diﬀerent neurotype needs. 
Put another way, when a given neurominority faces an environmental mismatch, they 
may confront environments of defeat, alienation, disenfranchisement and moral injury 
(see: biosocial models’ section) . As we will see, this bears heavily on the etiological 
gradient of neurominority well-being as a function of external and internalized

167 
oppression, including epistemic injustice (see: biosocial models). 
Alternatively, ﬁnding a moral niche-of-ﬁt may scaﬀold a path of growth to life’s 
most important answers: meaning, purpose, morality, belonging and worldview. Niches 
are supra-individual, social preconditions to individual thriving as they align intrinsic and 
extrinsic factors and place them under individual control. When someone is treated as 
they yearn to be treated within a values-aligned community, for instance, they feel 
safety and belonging (J. T. Cacioppo & Patrick, 2008; Leary & Downs, 1995), and so 
congruent community is an important form of moral niche construction. Being seen and 
respected for one’s strengths and competence, and not judged for one’s liabilities, is a 
source of niche-congruent esteem and prestige that confers conﬁdence (Mahadevan et 
al., 2016). Esteem is also related to one’s ability to perform the values-aligned activities 
their strengths lend themselves to, which is rewarding and motivating, creating the 
importance of meaningful work (Hari, 2018) as a moral niche activity. When factors like 
these and more (see: biosocial models; Hari, 2018) come together, it may register as a 
holistic form of well-being associated with both individual happiness and prosocial 
purpose in something bigger than one’s self (M. Larsen et al., 2023). Succeeding 
according to cultural evolution is not to play games of survival and self-interest, but to 
thrive playing a values-aligned role in a healthy group. Accordingly, moral neurodiversity 
turns life survival strategies into evolutionary meaning strategies that reverberate when 
one’s subjective meaning-making machinery is values-aligned with social reward 
systems in “something bigger than one’s self.” Framed with the moral valence of 
important values, the alignment of these dimensions can oﬀer purpose and direction in

168 
life, which may be important life organizers of particular importance to fast strategy 
neurotypes that struggle with life commitments. 
There is an evolutionary truism of social life in a global, interdependent world: 
we are all in the same [evolutionary] boat (Wright, 2000; 2009). It is likely in the best 
interests of all neurotypes that we increasingly recognize the moral dimension of 
complementary cognition as a game where we only win when we all win. To that end, a 
logic to be parsed out further is: to what extent should each neurotype be aﬀorded its 
own niche organized for its own needs and activities, and to what extent should each 
neurotype compete or negotiate to inﬂuence the shared moral commons to exert 
inﬂuence over other neurotypes and oﬀset one another’s blinders? These are likely 
equally important goals: on the one hand, greater recognition and allowance for 
discrete, semi-autonomous moral niches to coexist at every scale as a mediating factor in 
numerous social problems; on the other hand, the need to harmonize political 
antagonism and polarization into a constructive yin-yang coregulation and 
complementarity. Neurotribes must live and let live, and learn to listen across deeper 
divides than we realize. 
Neurodiversity Consilience: A Speculative Synthesis 
We will end this section by incorporating information about neurodiverse 
survival strategies and meaning strategies for a more complete picture and speculate 
about some of the biopsychosocial dynamics (see Figure 5). Think of this as a broad 
functional analysis that lacks total scope, variance or depth, but may hint at general 
patterns. Most importantly, it can usefully tease the biopsychosocial complexity of a

169 
consilience frame, which will be relevant to later exploring ADHD and ASD. The titles 
include: an acronym for the survival strategy; a values-based archetype; and in brackets, 
the set point for each strategy based on where it falls on a) the behavioral inhibitions 
system (BIS), a psychosocial threat defense system and can be either fast/unstable or 
slow/stable, and b) the behavioral approach system (BAS), a psychosocial engagement 
system which can be either open/plastic or closed/non-plastic. 
P/C as Cooperative Conserver (CC; slow/stable, closed/non-plastic) 
The CC takes the prosocial/caregiver survival strategy – increased social cohesion 
driven by the harm-avoidance of a slow-strategy BIS – and gives it moral direction as a 
cooperative strategy (Mrazek et al., 2013) that is ideal for conserving cultural solutions 
across generations (Haidt, 2013). Conversely, a less sensitive BAS makes the trade-oﬀ of 
reduced cognitive openness (plasticity as exploration) in favor of greater industriousness 
(i.e., the goal-persistence aspect of conscientiousness that lends itself to resource 
exploitation). The more sensitive BIS means being sensitive to “avoidable social danger” 
through traits like harm-avoidance, negative emotionality and sensitive fear 
conditioning, which can proactively avoid threat and injury (DeYoung, 2015). 
Such a disposition views the unknown of an uncertain future as threatening 
(DeYoung, 2015), which triggers pulling together to face threats collectively akin to the 
tend-and-befriend threat response (S. E. Taylor et al., 2000), which motivates ally-
seeking as a response to threat. At scale, however, this is done through a more passive 
preference for increased social cohesion called moral tightness, which ameliorates 
uncertainty in advance through perceived access to social resources. Moral tightness is

170 
the result of strong conformity to norms and mores and low tolerance for divergence 
therein as morally justiﬁable (Haidt, 2013; Mrazek et al., 2013). In this way, individuals 
with more defensively-oriented temperaments, such as carriers of one or two copies of 
the short allele of the SERT gene, create a group-level strategy associated with moral 
capital: synergistic threat orientations result in strong group-level cooperation as an 
adaptive strategy to defend against rivals and challenges, which requires heavy policing 
of rules and norms to protect social harmony (Haidt, 2013; Mrazek et al., 2013; 
Oyserman et al., 2002). Connecting the dots, then, a high threat of the unknown, 
including the attendant predilection for this temperament to suﬀer mood disorders and 
anxiety only in individualistic societies (Chiao & Blizinsky, 2009) is a functional group-
level interaction that motivates strong social cohesion with which to counter this threat. 
In other words, mental health challenges en masse can be functional in an MLS 
framework when they help individuals at one level, turn into an adaptive superorganism 
at another. 
As a moral strategy relevant to cultural evolution, this is a cooperation and 
conservation strategy , where the CC neurotribe sees the group itself as sacred (Haidt, 
2013). This leads to another cultural evolutionary dynamic, where the CC neurotribe 
builds, then maintains or protects, a group culture that enshrines much of the secrets of 
their success in shared myths, beliefs and values (Haidt, 2013; Henrich, 2016). Adaptive 
functioning is not primarily a function of reasoning abilities, but loyalty to shared 
ideologies, narratives and myths shape a practical reality with a few truthful elements, 
and even more motivating elements; this comes to structure a deeply adaptive

171 
relationship with the land through a trans-generational process of cultural evolution 
(Harris, 1974; Henrich, 2004; D. S. Wilson, 2002). A key adaptive feature of a practical 
reality is the moral capital it engenders reduces social friction and maximizes social 
harmony. This can lead to negative trade-oﬀs at the group-level when strong impulses 
to eliminate all uncertainty, anxiety, ambiguity, threat and friction promotes cognitive 
and moral blinders like conformity, groupthink, authoritarianism and xenophobia (i.e., 
high ingroup/loyalty, authority/subversion ; Del Giudice, 2018; DeYoung, 2015; Haidt, 
2007; 2008; 2013; Haidt & Kesebir, 2010). Such societies can be particularly devastating 
for the plastic temperaments, who thrive in more individualistic, loose and autonomous 
environments. In terms of downstream social well-being, then, the trade-oﬀ for 
cooperative conservers is that a traditional, closed and ingroup biases maintain their 
collective success, but it can also maintain the roots of rigid social dysfunction, 
inequalities and injustice (Del Giudice, 2018). 
At the trait-level, cooperative conservers are deﬁned by being reliable and 
persistent, and working well with others; that is, the combination of high 
conscientiousness (industriousness aspect) and high agreeableness (politeness aspect). 
They are low in openness to experience , and thus, are incurious about diﬀerent or better 
ways of doing things, which contributes to sanctifying the existing practices, norms, 
beliefs and values as wise, respected and pure (high sanctity/degradation value). Of the 
stability strategies, the CC is a group-level strategy almost entirely “buﬀered” (oﬀsetting 
of stress) by cultural collectivism, or political conservatism in Western countries, where 
the collectivistic moral capital mediates against ambiguous threats (Chiao & Blizinsky,

172 
2009). As a corollary, when this temperament is in a society that lacks these collectivistic 
features, such as higher cultural individualism, short-term orientation and/or low power-
distance (Hofstede, 2011), the increased threat perception can go unbuﬀered and 
becomes associated with a risk for depression or anxiety (Chiao & Blizinsky, 2009). It 
follows that the greatest mental health risks for this temperament are found in its 
unique connection to group-level factors like a congruent culture and healthy society, as 
a need to function in a well-adjusted socio-moral environment. In other words, the CC 
neurotype is highly self-regulated to be ﬂexible to the needs of social roles and groups, 
but when the culture as a whole becomes unhealthy – inequities, low moral capital, loss 
of institutions, and so on – it may contribute to populism, extremism or any cult-like 
movements that feature shared neuroses: delusion, paranoia, aggression, volatility and 
militarism (see: QAnon). 
A feature of moral tightness is co-regulating the group through gossip and 
reputation, where social information is shared, reputations and social positions 
adjusted, and norm violations indirectly policed. Rules and norm enforcement is 
important. High conscientiousness, which makes for reliability and persistence in goals 
and roles, can also make for intellectual rigidity and incuriosity; a less intellectual or 
critical approach, coupled with deference to authority may make for clients who 
struggle with experiential or intellectual therapies, and instead prefer therapists who 
present as culturally-congruent authorities. Rigid gender norms, behavioral inhibition, 
excessive deference to authority and the social order, are all features of the underlying 
strategy that may be pathologized in some models, but which should be avoided here;

173 
these characteristics are necessary features of the strategy despite coming with some 
individual costs. They should be seen in light of the function of the strategy, and 
rebalanced in ways that creatively avoid dysfunction rather than being pathologized or 
changed outright (as this likely will only set the therapist and client up for failure). 
Cooperative conservers are found in roles that reward reliability, cooperation, 
duty, consistency and persistence. The values that follow are perseverance, duty, honor, 
deference, purity, respect, loyalty and sacriﬁce on behalf of the group. While deeply 
meaningful, these values may also enshrine the moral blinders of this strategy: the costs 
of justifying the existing ways, including systems that marginalize and oppress; making it 
heretical to question the righteousness of tradition and identity; groupthink, 
authoritarianism, xenophobia and a callousness to outgroup members; the tendency to 
externalize and escalate conﬂict between groups when a way of life is threatened; the 
tendency for collective mental ill-health if the group as a whole becomes dysfunctional 
(see: the Q anon phenomena). As a slow strategy, then, it can be tempting to idealize its 
conformist, obedient, and rule-following ways as a path to social success, but this should 
be avoided for the reasons above (Del Giudice, 2018). The temperament can be 
associated with neurodiversity in expressing an introverted and neurotic disposition, but 
this is typically buﬀered in the correct group setting, which presents as a strong impetus 
to conform. Pathologizing this or other features would be to lose sight of the social 
function as a valid evolutionary strategy, or “purpose,” and its primacy in well-being. As 
with all neurodiversity strategies, therapists that can ally with the strengths of the 
strategy, speak the moral language of the strategy, and ﬁnd ways of highlighting costs

174 
and framing alternatives, will have the most success. 
E/A as Heroic Protector (HP; fast/unstable, closed/non-plastic)  
The life history strategy called E/A seeks to adapt through competition and 
exploiting resources and social status (Del Giudice, 2018). In a modern cultural context, 
HP strategies are pushed to use their power and achievement motivations in a variety of 
prosocial niches. In the Morality-as-Cooperation framework (MAC), heroism is the value 
ascribed with hawkish strategies that often ﬁnd prosocial use when directed toward an 
outgroup or toward rule-violators and free-loaders (Curry, 2016). Here, a value in bold, 
risky action can be found in service of protecting, enforcing norms, eminent leadership, 
opportunism and achieving, all of which can be given moral valence that can be 
rewarded in a prestige hierarchy. Alternatively, honor is the dominant value as one who 
avoids losing face by rising to perceived challenges swiftly and aggressively, despite the 
chance for violence (Mazur & Booth, 1998; Sapolsky, 2017) Assertiveness as a power-
motivated strategy can be prone to antisocial exploitation in the extreme, but modern 
roles for achievement and competitively-oriented people might ﬁnd prestige as 
(athletes), protectors (police), ﬁghters (soldiers), self-sacriﬁcers (ﬁremen), gamesmen 
(lawyers), and gamblers (traders). 
One frame for this is “honor” as a value. Honor cultures are a group-level 
strategy that traditionally emerge in harsh environments, and require competitive 
escalation and the saving of face (never backing down from a challenge) as necessary 
survival tactics. HPs may be uniquely suited to surviving the honor cultures of chaotic, 
harsh environments (Booth et al., 1989, 2006; Mazur & Booth, 1998), with analogs as far

175 
back as baboon primate societies (Sapolsky, 2017). However, when the social fabric 
evolves on a more prosocial footing (Wright, 2000), HPs may be ideally repurposed into 
meaningful roles motivated by the pursuit of excellence, strength, and victory. However, 
this duality embodies a potential trade-oﬀ for the strategy: prosocial HP community 
members may be capable of great callousness toward other neurotypes if the others, 
when failing to play the same status games or make demonstrations of “strength,” come 
to be seen as weak, losers or generally deserving of disrespect and exploitation. 
The HP strategy may stabilize on achievement and power, as their needs are 
predominantly met through competitive achievement and status, which becomes an 
intuitive channel for buﬀering stress. The strategy seeks external feedback of power and 
respect, which is internalized as self-respect and self-image, and helps cope with 
adversity. However, living in an antagonistic mindset for too long, especially in unequal 
social conditions that makes relative status diﬀerences more salient (Wilkinson & 
Pickett, 2011), may be uniquely bad for mental health in this population. That is, 
excessively priming the social world through a lens of power and status can lead to a 
“mentality” imbalance of spending too little time in an empathic frame of mind with 
which to relate to others, or the self, with compassion (see: biosocial models; Gilbert, 
2000b; 2005c; 2014). If compassion and empathy are seen as a weakness, the eﬀect 
may be further magniﬁed. In early environments of adversity, or current environments 
of scarcity, inequality and threat (see: agonic environments), a need for respect may 
become callously expressed as a need for domination and fear as status feedback, 
making for bullies who seek to instill defeat on others (Björkqvist, 2001), and who can

176 
justify any injury to the weak as a morally righteous “natural social order” (Haidt, 2013) 
Accordingly, the most common diagnoses for HPs are externalizing disorders (Del 
Giudice, 2018). That includes antisocial personality disorder or conduct disorders; dark 
triad personality traits like Machiavellianism, psychopathy and to a lesser degree, 
narcissism; and anger disorders and substance use disorders. The substrate may be 
simple extraversion as reward sensitivity (DeYoung, 2015), which maps onto power 
motivation as power is a leverager of all other social rewards (Del Giudice, 2018). 
Converting power motivation to sacred values may lead to the worship of domination 
and “strength,” leading HPs to play a signiﬁcant role in “toxic masculinity” or patriarchal 
subcultures that become salient in times of conﬂict. CCs can synergistically reinforce 
such cultures through their own enforcement of hierarchy and gender roles in a “hawk 
and dove” strategy (see: MAC; Curry, 2016; Curry et al., 2019). As features of a fast 
strategy more generally, the proﬁle also includes impulsivity and risk-taking, meaning a 
propensity to react with volatility and impudence. HPs may need to sometimes need to 
manage the negative social consequences of risky and impulsive decision-making. In 
general, an HP is seen as being neurotypical, as it is primarily an insensitive, 
externalizing strategy. 
Politically, the strategy is most likely to be a form of ﬁscal conservatism (Robbins 
& Shields, 2014), with a “winner-take-all” mentality that seeks to justify and conserve 
existing power structures as a function of trying to protect their own social positions and 
successes, or with the hope of someday achieving them. The result can be a callous 
“bottom-line” ﬁscal attitude that is mentally corrosive to other neurotribes by enforcing

177 
toxic political narratives and economic and workplace environments. When expressed 
selﬁshly, cynically or misanthropically, the HP may be particularly dangerous, particularly 
if they have power and inﬂuence, for being more inclined than most to justify 
dehumanization, coercion, bullying, or exploitation especially when they have little 
prosocial accountability or cannot ﬁnd a path toward respecting those aﬀected.  
The tendency to see life as a competition, or to seek power for its own sake, may 
require leaning into the “heroic” dimension of prosocial prestige hierarchies for 
balanced well-being. Therapies that are comfortable with confrontation and are not as 
experiential, excessively compassionate or intellectual, may be useful, and avoidance of 
excessive narratives of victimhood or vulnerability may be important to curating a story 
of strength in the face of adversity. 
S/C as Prosocial Visionary (PV; fast/unstable, open/plastic)  
The S/C survival strategy (Del Giudice, 2018) adopts a moral valence when 
mentalizing strengths (aesthetic and verbal creativity, theory of mind; Del Giudice, 
2018) come to serve social functions: to spread creativity and compassion, envision new 
goals or ways of life, or else use individualizing and universalizing values to resist within-
group oppression and make social progress (Haidt, 2013). This is accomplished when a 
BAS geared toward plasticity (trait openness to experience ) is coupled with a BIS 
adjusted for less stability (a “responsive” proﬁle of risk-taking and impulsivity). The 
resultant PV meaning strategy is unstable for better and worse, and occupies an 
ambivert middle-ground of prosocial motivations that aﬀords a unique role as a social 
specialist in the cognitive niches (Hunt & Jaeggi, 2022).

178 
The strategy is more unstable in two ways: PVs are chronically under-stimulated 
due to increased novelty-seeking (reduced reward sensitivity, increased detachment ), 
and emotionally unstable as a reactive fast strategy. This may make for a trade-oﬀ in 
having the potential for extreme adaptability and growth, at the cost of extreme 
instability of mood and perception (Del Giudice, 2018). Socially, PVs are less extraverted 
than neurotypicals, and therefore more detached (DeYoung, 2015) with a range of 
implications. First, PVs may be less warm and cooperative (trait agreeableness ) due to 
being less reward sensitive, with the upside of a greater latitude for individualistic, 
idiosyncratic and intrinsic motivational interests beﬁtting a cognitive explorer (H. Taylor 
et al., 2022). Second, PVs are introverts but not strong introverts. An “ambivert” proﬁle 
may result from the intersection of reduced extraversion (trait detachment) alongside 
reduced social inhibition (a “responsive” fast strategy). Rather than social reward-
seeking (seeking status or belonging as primary motivations), social stimulation-seeking 
is the goal; when openness to experience is combined with a capacity for social intuition 
(i.e. mentalizing as empathy and theory of mind; Del Giudice, 2018), trait novelty-
seeking can be channeled outward toward social niches like helping behavior, social 
exploration, communication and performance roles. Finally, a higher need for novelty, 
stimulation and exploration can be expressed creatively (mentalizing as verbal and 
aesthetic creativity; Del Giudice, 2018) both behaviorally – as art, crafting and 
performance – and cognitively, as a range of implications ﬂow from having a ﬂexible 
imagination as a kind of cognitive holism (Carrol, 2020) for a cognitive niche. Taken 
together, PVs may make for natural roles as creatives (artists), helpers (therapists),

179 
visionaries (entrepreneurs), meaning-makers (gurus), social critics (comedians), change 
agents (activists), story-tellers (journalists), performers (actors) and explorers 
(travelers). 
In contrast to CCs, PVs exploratory motivation can lead to divergence from 
traditional socializing inﬂuences as an innately individualistic, non-conforming way of 
being. PVs are oriented toward personal growth over socialization (Digman, 2007), more 
engaged with inner and outer worlds (Olson, 2005), and therefore show a preference for 
personal dynamism rather than social self-regulation (Saucier et al., 2013). This aﬀords 
PVs the scope one needs in an explorer role, to inﬂuence and telegraph potential new 
directions in culture, language, media, technology, business and entertainment. The 
trade-oﬀ of this strength is a risk-prone corollary – a lack of psychological defensiveness 
may make bold strategies possible, but it also makes social risk unavoidable. Individuals 
experimenting with lifestyle and worldview, especially in opposition to those protecting 
the status quo, may ﬁnd themselves vulnerable to destabilizing mental and social 
inﬂuences. One might characterize the PV trade-oﬀ as a “high risk, high reward” strategy 
for creative exploration, and one that necessarily requires an unstable, ﬂuid way of 
being to enable rapid growth, yet making rapid deterioration just as likely. Alternatively, 
PVs may carry an externalizing risk when used as a survival strategy in adverse 
environments if social detachment becomes a risk for callous self-interest in high-
conﬂict environments (see: heightened risk for narcissistic personality disorder; Del 
Giudice, 2018). Here, strengths in mentalizing may justify social manipulation as an 
adaptive tool, a proﬁle that may also partially explain the related risk of borderline

180 
personality disorder (Del Giudice, 2018). 
Given a sociomoral valence, an exploratory approach requires individual 
freedoms ( individualizing morals) to experiment with life, and sees social progress as a 
universalizing of these rights for all, while resisting social harm, unfairness and control 
that can be domineering at the group-level (Haidt, 2013; Haidt & Kesebir, 2010). This is 
political liberalism, which may include other values such as eﬃciency/waste (Graham et 
al., 2013). A left-leaning mentalizing strategy at the intersection of social and cognitive 
niches is uniquely suited to thinking critically about oppressive social systems and 
ideologies that entrap and disenfranchise, with social justice as a natural moral endpoint 
(i.e., critical consciousness ). This broad phenotype is behind the intellectualism of the 
humanities and social sciences, with an inclination toward curating “social facts” (Haidt, 
2013) to foster social meta-awareness. Hanna et al. (2000) talked about a similar quality 
as perspicacity, which sees past the dominant social narratives to the hidden rules and 
realities underlying oppressive systems. The risk of the perspicacity in cognitive niches 
may be depressive realism , where being aware of life-limiting oppressive factors that 
entrap, alienate and subjugate, naturally makes one feel powerlessness, cynical and 
misanthropic about an individual’s chances to change systemic barriers and injustices 
(Hanna et al., 2000). As a moral niche, perspicacity as critical consciousness can be 
institutionalized in various cognitive niche roles, and such roles may even be necessary 
to oﬀset the powerlessness of perspicacity as a depression risk. Yet it should be noted 
that justice goals are not without their moral blinders. PVs with a strong justice ethic may 
morally over-police themselves and other neurotribes who do not virtue signal

181 
harm/care values, and PVs may self-righteously undervalue other moral contributions 
like tradition, competition or truth in their eﬀorts. 
PVs thrive in safe environments, where their diﬀerences can be valued and 
idiosyncrasies tolerated, and where their pursuit of experimental ways of life can be 
oriented toward independence, self-development and creative expression. There may 
be a greater strength of need for social support through individual relationships over 
group belonging ( agreeableness , compassionate aspect and individualizing , not binding, 
values). Stimulation-seeking (trait openness to experience, novelty-seeking) may be 
channeled idiosyncratically through a mentalizing cognitive style that is experiential and 
intuitive, using the implicit learning of pattern-recognition geared to mining patterns in 
sensory data (DeYoung, 2015). A PV proﬁle that is eccentric, and that eschews norm 
conformity as a precondition of social support, may ﬁnd friction in the neurotribe world 
of conservative collectivism, which is exempliﬁed by the East Asian proverb: “the nail 
that sticks up will be pounded down.” Individualism is seen as immodest and 
unjustiﬁable as a persistent motivator to violate norms and mores (Mrazek et al., 2013). 
It is perhaps no coincidence that the gene allele associated with PV novelty-seeking, the 
DRD4.7r allele, seems to have passed through China, but was selected out of the 
population speciﬁc to their culture region, possibly as a function of environmental 
mismatch (Chang et al., 1996). 
In general, the downside trade-oﬀs of a cognitive niche lie in idiosyncratic 
strategies in rare niches, and that may make for common mismatches in traditional and 
economic niches that etiologically contribute to mental health risks. However, it is worth

182 
contextualizing the role of mismatch itself. Traditional conservative niches are punishing 
to a PV way of being at multiple levels. Capitalist economies embody the values of 
exploitative strategies, oﬀering consistent moral injury, a lack of moral niches, and a 
general moral mission that PVs struggle against (recall that such resistance may be an 
innate moral “purpose” of sorts; Haidt, 2013). Capitalist economies also withhold 
monetary support for those that have not proven their economic value, yet exploratory 
strategies are a life-long experimental process, where vulnerability, and the importance 
of support, are front-loaded. In summary, PVs can be misaligned to the neurotypical 
world in multiple ways. 
PVs may face signiﬁcant passive adversity and mismatch, but they are also 
vulnerable as a high-risk, high-reward strategy built atop an unstable and sensitive proﬁle 
of varying intensity. The psychopathology proﬁle of open/plastic temperaments begins 
with ADHD-like foundation of divergent thought, loose connections, imaginative beliefs 
and emotional instability, and extends through some of the more “exotic” mental health 
diagnoses of the psychosis spectrum (Del Giudice, 2018; Hunt & Jaeggi, 2022). This 
includes bipolar disorder, schizotypal personality disorder, schizophreniform disorder, 
delusional disorders, schizoaﬀective disorder and borderline personality disorder. This 
proﬁle is predictable in that a PV fast strategy is doubly unstable along the BIS 
(emotional and motivational stability) and BAS (creative instability; high openness, 
mentalizing and novelty-seeking). As one increasingly expresses one or both forms of 
instability along the phenotypic spectrum, one may turn up both the strengths and 
challenges associated. Imaginative potential may lead to delusional beliefs, for instance,

183 
which may create group friction in the wrong niche, but make for an ideal social niche as 
a messianic ﬁgure (see: group ﬁssion), or a shaman who serves social and healing 
functions (Del Giudice, 2018; Hunt & Jaeggi, 2022); these are also traits that beneﬁt 
visionary entrepreneurs, story-tellers, artists and entertainers in the modern world. 
Extraordinary creativity as an over-expression of the strategy, the likes of which might be 
found in profoundly eccentric historical ﬁgures like Salvador Dali, may illustrate two 
principles: ﬁrst, that a high-risk, high-reward strategy does not guarantee evolutionary 
success by deﬁnition, only a commitment to an experimental strategy that must be 
deployed across a range of unknowable environments, where social factors are key; 
second, that as one increasingly expresses a strategy in terms of its strengths and costs, 
one only increases the importance of niche-congruence to leverage one’s strengths and 
oﬀset one’s challenges. Finally, just as instability may be functional as the lynchpin of 
exploratory plasticity and growth, social plasticity may have similar trade-oﬀs that are 
centered in some etiologies. Plasticity may lead to a chameleonic adaptability to multiple 
social niches, but it may also lead to identity diﬀusion if overly used in a critical 
developmental window. The extreme relational poles of BPD may make sense as 
speciﬁcally an unstable PV strategy that faces early abandonment and complex trauma. 
Schizophrenia may be when an unstable PV strategy meets chronic or profound social 
defeat in a critical developmental window (Selten & Cantor-Graae, 2005). 
The PV strategy may do well with more creative, expressionistic and social 
therapies over more intellectual or manualized approaches, though this may depend on 
whether it occupies a more behavioral or cognitive sub-niche. One therapeutic goal may

184 
be the struggle for purpose. Novelty-seeking and adaptability may lead to a reactive 
disposition that hops between niches to avoid life commitments that are feared to be a 
boring loss of autonomy and opportunity. Layered on this is the perpetual struggle to 
balance enough structure to support a dynamic and sustainable way of being, without 
so much structure that life feels boring, oppressive, constraining and stiﬂing to one’s 
autonomy. It becomes important to frame these tensions and how they may be 
resolved through uniquely sustainable, if rare, PV niches. For instance, some niches that 
build in suﬃcient role-complexity can sustain novelty-seeking as a commitment, while 
avoiding the costs of niche hopping, where a lack of commitments can lead to painful, 
hollow and shallow life engagement over time. Fast-strategy impulses will be helped in 
this regard with life commitments that center on core strengths and moral values, 
which, it should be stressed, can be diﬃcult to ﬁnd in a capitalist economic 
environment. 
The stabilizing need for PVs has two dimensions – relational and creative – and 
may ﬂuctuate accordingly through dramatic upheavals in individual relationships and 
support networks, or in environments that stiﬂe creativity or chaotically destabilize. PVs 
may face a variety of unique challenges on this front, such as the struggle to balance 
relationships and manage diverse networks. PVs may grapple with the paradox that time 
spent investing in social pursuits may feel as though it competes with self-investment 
and personal goals, while under-nurtured relationships may leave PVs feeling a 
disproportionate sense of social danger and vulnerability. Some PVs may ﬁnd danger in 
leaning into the hedonic expression of a fast-strategy (trait novelty-seeking) that

185 
struggles with narcissistic emptiness and meaninglessness; others may use relationships 
instrumentally to achieve personal goals and damage relationships and reputation 
beyond repair. Fast strategies may be shaped in part by developmental inﬂuences from 
chaotic, stressful, abusive and neglectful environments early in life (Biglan et al., 2020), 
and those that struggle with trauma or other developmental disruptions may feel stuck 
in a survival strategy, and unable to access the PV meaning strategy. Thus, appreciating 
how mental health struggles interact with the long-term niche construction of meaning, 
role and purpose is a core therapeutic goal, framed in part by therapeutically reducing 
fast strategy costs through more sustainable moral niche commitments. 
There is a history in mental health of seeing PVs as unstable, eccentric and 
abnormal, and it can be easy to pathologize the self-aggrandizing tendencies or loose 
connections of creatives. The ﬁeld can hyperfocus on the instability of manic episodes, 
psychotic breaks, delusional beliefs or relational instabilities including a sometimes at-
all-costs pharmacological goal of medicating PVs toward “normality,” where the need to 
dull or extinguish all excitable energy may be assumed. The costs of these narratives 
should be weighed in the context of this functional analysis. The risks of this strategy are 
part of what makes it meaningful, and the strategy may require experiential data about 
real world costs and opportunities to experimentally learn a sustainable exploratory 
path through it, where fast strategy excess is reined in by life wisdom earned 
authentically over long time-scales. Ultimately, the goal may be not to suppress fast 
strategy characteristics therapeutically or pharmacologically, but to channel them into 
values-congruent meaning strategies and role commitments, where an optimal balance

186 
of novelty and sustainability can be iterated upon. 
S/P as Truth-seeking problem-solver (TP; slow/stable, open/plastic)  
As a meaning strategy, the S/P adaptive niche may see mechanistic strengths 
(logic, reasoning and explicit learning) bent toward a meaning strategy of pursuing 
knowledge and truth, solving problems realistically, and maximizing ethical utility. TPs 
have the exploratory openness (trait openness to intellect ) of the cognitive niches as 
well as the psychological defenses of the stability strategies (harm avoidance, risk 
aversion), with unique properties emerging at the crossroads. The combination makes 
for cognitive independence as cognitive exploration (plasticity and openness to 
intellect). A possible downside is the lack of group stress-buﬀering enjoyed by the CC 
strategy, or the relational stress-buﬀering of the mentalizing PVs. The result is a kind of 
“double introvert,” with a socially-detached BAS and socially reserved BIS, where both 
meaning-making and stress-coping are a solitary aﬀair, channeled through an increased 
sense of personal control. Mechanistic cognition is stabilized through access to one’s 
inner world of systematic, logical and “bottom-up” thought that can also be deeply 
introspective and imaginative, and requires social niches to aﬀord one the ability to 
access this way of being. The aﬀective inﬂuence of the social world is peripheralized 
(increased mechanistic cognitions is also reduced mentalizing cognition) to resist 
intrusions on personal interests and goals, but there can be ambivalence about the 
trade-oﬀ: what can be sustained as an enriching social circle built on parallel intellectual 
interests, all too often ﬁnds the mismatch of solitude, alienation, misunderstanding, and 
rejection instead.

187 
The fundamental trade-oﬀ of the strategy is to be valued as rational and skilled 
(trait openness to intellect ), with a potential to struggle relationally in the social 
mainstream (low trait agreeableness in both reward detachment and social inhibition). 
A slow strategy inﬂuence on personality may be the orderliness aspect of 
conscientiousness , presenting as a strong need for personal control to pursue personal 
goals and cope in their own style. TPs may ﬁnd moral valence in problem-solving, truth 
and justice (speciﬁcally, ethical utility maximization) as metaphors for life, meaning and 
social progress. This may make for equal parts confusion, cynicism and alienation when 
discovering that the social contract pays lip service to these ideas, but is typically far less 
interested in intelligent optimization of the moral commons than dogmatic adherence 
to religious myths and political ideologies (Henrich, 2016; D. S. Wilson, 2002). Like the 
PVs, TPs may be more oriented to personal growth (Digman, 2007), engagement with 
inner worlds (Olson, 2005), and an inner “dynamism” (Saucier et al., 2013), but beﬁtting 
a more stable slow strategy, they also exhibit greater self-control (Olson, 2005) and 
social self-regulation (in terms of explicit rules, less than norms and mores; Saucier et 
al., 2013). TPs need for intellectual autonomy may run afoul of a social world built on 
more than just explicit rules, which they are happy to adhere to, but often runs equally 
on implicit rules of cultural norms and mores, which are harder to grasp. A higher need 
for “bottom-up” intellectual stimulation and a mechanistic cognitive style oriented to 
reason, logic and explicit learning, and may be more disposed to autism, subtypes of 
ADHD, and obsessive-compulsive disorder (Del Giudice, 2018; DeYoung, 2015). 
Problem-solver strengths revolve around high mechanistic cognition which makes

188 
them eﬀective systematizers, problem-solvers and prone to hyperrationality. Moral 
intuitions center on their being a more intellectual exploratory strategy rather than 
social or behavioral (see: PVs). The values that follow are individualizing/universalizing 
values centered on harm/care , fairness/reciprocity and liberty/oppression (Haidt, 2013). 
These values orient TPs to protecting people from within-group oppression, but may 
skew toward freedom of thought and speech, which is their primary point of social 
friction (note the congruence with socially liberal political positions in the US). Some 
evidence suggests that less early social exposure among individuals genetically disposed 
toward openness to experience has been shown to predict the shift from liberal to 
libertarian political allegiance (Settle et al., 2010), showing an environmental pathway 
that may push in a similar direction. 
A paradoxical prediction might be that a TP slow strategy lends itself to a strong 
moral binding dimension despite its cognitive individualism (Haidt, 2013; see also: moral 
tightness; Mrazek et al., 2013). Yet while the CC slow strategy expresses a strong 
sociomoral order that conforms to shared myths and ideologies for moral capital, TPs 
may express a binding morality more idiosyncratically. TP religious or spiritual 
orientations may be more fringe or intellectually oriented, with robust personal 
philosophies, codes and ideologies; part of the function of such beliefs is nevertheless 
the same as CCs: to motivate self-regulation, self-inhibition and guide moral emotions 
like guilt and shame. TPs show a vulnerability to “high-control groups and cults” (D. 
Price, 2022), which may oﬀer a sense of belonging alongside control as a coping style; 
alternatively, they may ﬁnd a healthier expression in “nerdy” subcultures where people

189 
can bond over similar intellectual interests, hobbies and subcultures (Silverman, 2016, D. 
Price, 2022) Contrary to stereotypes, the temperament can be sensitive to the plights of 
others, particularly the thought of committing moral injury by causing unintentional 
harm to others. Their own sensitivities and vulnerabilities to social injury may allow for a 
robust point of reference to understanding the pain of others, but this is more likely to 
be cognitive empathy rather than aﬀective. Unlike CC’s, TP universalizing values (Haidt, 
2013) will extend moral considerations beyond a narrow social ingroup, and instead 
applies to all humans as individuals, where the goal is to intelligently and rationally 
optimize ethics for all. Returning to the paradox, TPs can be simultaneously 
individualistic and morally “tight” by expressing as a signiﬁcant value in “personal 
responsibility” in a further echo of social liberalism. TPs may be less interested in 
connecting to people, but often highly interested in doing right by them. 
TPs are cognitive explorers in the truest sense, and a moral value in cognitive 
autonomy (openness to intellect) and insensitivity to social punishers (trait 
disagreeableness, reduced mentalizing cognition) is a strength: to embolden the pursuit 
of realistic problem-solving and knowledge by ignoring the social friction caused by 
divergence from the mainstream. The trade-oﬀ, however, is that emotional pain is 
turned down, not oﬀ, and a perceived deﬁcit in empathic understanding and social cue 
sensitivity may lead to painful and bewildering social feedback. The diﬃculty of 
processing this pain may be laborious and require explicit eﬀort and intention; as a 
“compensatory strength,” however, it may also contribute to cognitive models of 
understanding people that far outstrip normal aﬀective empathy. Those who must

190 
intellectually navigate the social world may naturally generate, and be uniquely suited 
to professionalizing, complex social models of hidden social rules (anthropology and 
sociology), understanding how the mind-brain works (biopsychology), or the complex 
interplay of social forces at great scales and depths (MLS evolution). 
Social insensitivity may systematically contribute to moral blinders when it scales 
to discounting the social problems that economic liberals understand intuitively. 
Discounting social problems becomes easier when problems can be attributed to 
individuals who fail to “play by the rules” or do not intelligently optimize for “the long-
game;” eﬀectively, social ills become failures to live up to TP values. This is a particular 
danger when TPs oﬀset the pain of social injury by leaning into their primary positive 
social identity as intellectuals, leading to a toxic schema of rank ordering people by 
“intelligence” as eﬀectively a superiority narrative that provides ego protection. Taken 
to extremes, a misanthropic view of people as “stupid” can ameliorate the pain of 
loneliness in the short-run while reinforcing that loneliness in the long-run, and further 
entrench such moral blinders. Toxic vulnerabilities may be a particular problem as social 
vulnerability is at its height in adolescence, a critical developmental window where the 
late sociosexual debut of slow strategies (Del Giudice, 2018) is most vulnerable to the 
abundance of psychosocial injuries (Selten & Cantor-Graae, 2005). When social struggles 
extend to romantic struggles, a lack of adequate stress-buﬀers can be compounded with 
blows to the ego, and the stakes of rejection and exclusion become higher. The synergy 
of adolescent social struggles, inadequate buﬀers and slow strategy developmental 
vulnerability may uniquely align to reinforce a reputation as being dispositionally

191 
negative, i.e. “cranky,” which can reinforce challenges later in life (Shackman et al., 
2016). 
Concurrently, these same social barriers provide ample reason to avoid the 
opportunistic attention-seeking of fast strategies, and motivate self-investment in 
somatic capital and Self-development. This is another trade-oﬀ, where social friction or 
even social pain is perhaps functional as a compensatory strength. Inhibited social 
temperaments may struggle with feelings of shyness, social sensitivity, struggles with 
friends and romance, and ultimately later sexual debut (Del Giudice, 2018). The utility of 
these struggles may require resolution later in life, if relationship-development fails to 
break trajectory. Forging connections may always feel hard, and this may make it even 
more diﬃcult to break down defenses learned in adolescence, particularly as low 
psychological defenses are a prerequisite for trust and connection. The tenuousness of 
relationships may lead to people-pleasing (D. Price, 2022), which can create a sensitivity 
to guilt when disappointing others, or a persistent frustration at subsuming one’s own 
needs. Struggles with friendships and romance throughout the lifespan may engender: a 
persistent drive to mask to attain short-term social rewards at the expense of long-term 
authentic and congruent relationships; a sensitivity to feeling unattractive or low status; 
an uncertainty about one’s social reception and fear of rejection; and a susceptibility to 
loneliness, anxiety and depression. 
Diagnoses common to TPs include ASD, a slow-variant of ADHD and OCD (Del 
Giudice, 2018), and a high likelihood of psychosocial injuries and mismatch (see: autistic 
burnout; Raymaker et al., 2020) is typically ignored, but must be assumed. The logic of

192 
these challenges, social and otherwise, align with a variety of trade-oﬀs. TPs cognitive 
style is slower, conscious and deliberative, which is useful for processing complexity, but 
not optimized decisional eﬃciency (which, it should be mentioned, sacriﬁces depth and 
complexity). This may contribute to chronic decision-fatigue and unpredictability 
avoidance. A need for orderliness and preparation to create a sense of comfort also 
makes for painful discomfort when chaos and uncertainty cannot be avoided. A 
negativity bias may result in processing painful social experiences in ways that generate 
excessive rumination, while dispositional worry and stress to proactively anticipate 
threats may become neurotic when real threats loom large. A “slow-to-warm-up” 
temperament may see lost social and relational opportunities pile up, and introverted 
masking in an extraverted political environment may lead to social burnout (Raymaker 
et al., 2020). Hierarchical environments and integrated teams may make for exhausting 
masking at best, and present dangerous social pitfalls at worst. 
TPs occupy a moral niche where pursuing knowledge, evolving technology and 
maximizing ethical utility are moral goods that are fundamental to cultural evolution and 
the human project. Yet niches that minimize unnecessary socializing and maximize 
cognitive autonomy may be precious and rare, beﬁtting these niches as typically being 
frequency-dependent specialists (Del Giudice, 2018; Doyle, 2020; Hunt & Jaeggi, 2022). 
A speciﬁc work culture or role that is non-hierarchical, egalitarian, or at least provides 
license for decisional autonomy may feel freeing, particularly when work politics are 
absent. Niche construction may be a challenge of professionalizing a special interest, 
which may also require no shortage of luck and optimal positioning, and social

193 
gamesmanship like networking is rarely an ally. Many traditional capitalist niches may 
pose a challenge to plastic temperaments more broadly: jobs can stop being interesting 
or stimulating past an initial period; opportunities for growth may be limited if 
promotions go through middle management; long-term specialization may feel high risk 
if the quality of ﬁt is not guaranteed; typically, jobs are geared for exploitation, not 
supporting an “orchid” for a long-game payoﬀ. Ultimately, jobs that oﬀer unique roles 
that are adjunct specialists to larger teams and organizations may be useful if they 
require niche skills and knowledge and allow some decisional autonomy. Thriving may 
be found as professionals: experts (information technologist), mechanical problem-
solver (engineer), practical problem-solver (builder), knowledge authorities 
(teacher/professor), imagineer (writer), experimenter (scientist), and specialist 
(sommelier). 
For all slow strategies, being in the right niche and role unlocks resilience and 
potential social attractiveness, and TPs may be a particularly “late-game” payoﬀ (their 
niches can be deeper, and require more development) that is secure over longer 
horizons. The adolescent period can be particularly vulnerable to the psychosocial 
injuries of loneliness and defeat; unsafe environments that may create unsustainable 
political dynamics that load on neurotic potential. TP stabilizing needs require time 
spent in salient personal interests, solving meaningful problems, using and developing 
skills, exploring intellectual worlds, and ultimately, the niches that value and sustain 
these qualities through respect, safety and autonomy. An excess of stressors and 
impoverished supports, plus excessive social expectations, can lead to burnout

194 
(Raymaker et al., 2020). In the culture of mental health treatment, TPs may be seen as 
strange, hyper-rational, and under-emoting people who intellectualize their problems as 
a neurotic defense (i.e., over-thinkers; Del Giudice, 2018). However, this would 
pathologize a meaning strategy that lacks the proper framing to be understood on their 
terms; TPs are smart, ethics-driven optimizers seeking to systematically evolve to the 
moral commons. 
Part III: Biosocial Niche Dynamics 
The extended evolutionary synthesis (EES) showed that human beings oﬀer a 
range of individual adaptations (bipedalism, opposable thumbs, language, and so on) 
that add up to unprecedented behavioral plasticity. This pays oﬀ socially as the group as 
a whole becomes more evolvable . Humans can cooperate, cohere and coordinate in 
ways that far surpass humanity’s nearest evolutionary cousin, but what’s more, they can 
progressively hone their prosociality through cultural evolution. A downstream 
consequence of prosocial selection pressures may be selection for particular kinds of 
roles, including generalists and specialists, but others too; for instance, the major 
evolutionary transition known as complementary cognition (H. Taylor et al., 2022) may 
be an early, fundamental resolution of the exploitation-exploration trade-oﬀ. Far from 
personality dispositions undergoing selection pressures toward a singular ideal human 
type, personalities may have functionally evolved as social niche specializations that are 
critical for adaptive group organization and change. Personalities as social niche 
specializations - for instance, social and creative roles, or knowledge and problem-solving 
roles - may also highlight a striking functional relationship to the trade-oﬀs underlying

195 
psychopathology, and account for diagnostic variance therein (Del Giudice, 2018; Hunt & 
Jaeggi, 2022). 
To understand social niche specialization and its relationship to 
psychopathology, one must understand social niches, which are composed from the 
human social dynamics that speciﬁc roles co-evolved within. Niche-construction is 
where an organism actively modiﬁes its environment to shape its own selection 
pressures (Laland et al., 2016), and collectively, humans have done so to tremendous 
success, allowing humanity writ large to adapt to any ecological niche. Individually, 
however, people must also construct social niches, which use only a portion of the total 
behavioral plasticity available to humans (Montiglio et al., 2013). Social niches are 
critical to avoiding excess conﬂict (for instance, competition in the job market) and are 
generally costly to change (Bergmüller & Taborsky, 2010). Evolved niche specializations 
are premised on this, and constrain behavior in key ways; as these specializations are 
largely heritable, the trade-oﬀs involved are made in advance of individual agency. 
Individuals, then, are forced to ﬁnd social subgroups, environments and dynamics where 
their strategies are prosocial to leverage success, lest they undergo negative selection 
pressures that may register as psychological pain and dysfunction. 
In summation, human social niches may be fundamentally understood as mental 
health feedback about the psychological sustainability of current social conditions, and 
this feedback may be critically important for individuals to understand and use in 
optimizing their well-being. Niches in the aggregate may be atomized into a variety of 
discrete pathways and substrates relevant to mental well-being, while managing the

196 
data of these substrates in the aggregate may be a life task: to curate emergent 
psychological sustainability by optimizing niche construction across the lifespan. 
However, to the extent that this feedback is real and intelligible, it is currently obscured 
by modern mental health which is, to reverse a quote by Garson (2022), “all pathology, 
no purpose” (an updated view of the potential role of biology in mental health disorders 
is provided in Figure 6). As a critical extension of evolved neurodiversity, we must learn 
to understand, and listen to, well-being feedback at this level. 
Mental Well-being as Social Niche Feedback: Hari’s Lost Connections model 
In section I of this chapter, we eschewed a simple and reductionist view of mental 
health and well-being as narrow theories of biological reductionism, or in the case of 
some evidence-based practices, cognitive deﬁcits. We could just as easily extend the 
case of problematic reductionism to other etiological attributions: family dynamics, 
attachment injuries or and/or trauma have all become convenient scapegoats for the 
origins of all human distress. Here we will consider that a social niche is composed of 
multiple streams of information, actions, needs and biopsychological substrates that 
allow for complex, multi-dimensional meaning in life, or etiologies when it is missing. 
These pathways in turn track various relationships to one’s social environment as 
feedback about their present congruence or mismatch with an ideal niche or niches, 
which vary across one’s many intersectional identities and their multitude of niche 
ecologies. 
An illustrative model of well-being as a social niche does not come from a social 
scientist, but a science journalist who aggregated key ﬁndings in challenge of the

197 
medical model. Johann Hari (2018) wrote the book “Lost Connections” to put forth a 
model of eight causes for depression and anxiety that repudiate the simplistic notion of 
an intrinsic, uncontrollable chemical imbalance. Oﬀering his own experience with 
depression, alongside a variety of criticisms of the medical model akin to those 
cataloged in section I, Hari then presents research for eight pathways to depression as 
framed by interviews with the leading researchers. Hari posited these as 8 “connections” 
humans, as social animals, have with their social world. 
These connections are also invariably a source of depression when these 
relationships are severed or injured: 1) disconnection from meaningful work; 2) 
disconnection from other people, 3) disconnection from meaningful values, 4) 
disconnection from childhood trauma, 5) disconnection from status and respect, 6) 
disconnection from the natural world, 7) disconnection from a hopeful or secure future, 
and 8/9) the real role of genes and brain changes. It is worth noting that one could make 
compelling additions to this list – disconnection from a balanced diet, which could be 
framed by research on the gut microbiome; disconnection with physical activity and 
exercise, which could include research about the dangers of excess sitting; 
disconnection from sleep hygiene, which often compounds worsening mental health; 
and even disconnection from daily “structure,” which might speak to the background 
importance of environmental, social and occupational routines and roles obligations 
that meta-regulate all sleep and activity in the above activities, and seems to contribute 
to mental dysregulation (Levenson et al., 2015). 
Hari’s contribution is that there are eight substrates for well-being that can be

198 
framed as natural relationships or “connections” with the social world to coregulate our 
brain, mind and spirit. Alternatively, Hari’s account could be said to be a formalized 
model of human “meaning” where metaphysics is eschewed for the science of meaning: 
as an evolved, multidimensional, and physically tethered relationship with one’s 
environment that is purposive and socially embedded. On both counts the conceptual 
frame is uniquely well-suited to being modeled as an evolutionary social niche which 
serves as the meta-regulator of biopsychospiritual well-being. Hari ﬂirts with the same 
idea by returning again and again to the conceptual framing of people as social animals: 
“You aren’t a machine with broken parts... You are an animal whose needs are not being 
met” (Hari, 2018, p. 311); and on humanity’s groupish nature: “So every human instinct 
is honed not for life on your own, but for life like this, in a tribe... Humans need tribes as 
much as bees need a hive” (Hari, 2018, p. 91). Though Hari approached evidence that 
suggests a causal role of these factors in depression, we suggest that framing them as an 
evolved social niche adds further weight to their polemic value by providing an 
epistemic footing for further research and development. For instance, framing the lost 
connections as a social niche allows us to answer Tinbergen’s four questions about the 
causation, development, function and evolution of each domain (Nesse, 2018), which 
may prove a fruitful direction of inquiry. 
Let us expand on the case of “lost connections” as a key substrate of an evolved 
social niche by exploring Hari’s own connections. 
Disconnection from meaningful work. Meaningful work is about the importance 
of a sense of control and an optimal ratio of eﬀort-to-reward in staving oﬀ stress,

199 
particularly in a work setting. Hari cites the work of Michael Marmot, author of the 
seminal Whitehall I and II studies (Marmot, 2006; Marmot et al., 1984; Marmot et al., 
1991) which showed that: a) as one’s degree of control over their work increased, one 
could predict reduced risk of depression and lower emotional distress, and b) the lower 
one’s rank in the British Civil Service, the higher their mortality risk across multiple 
health metrics including angina and chronic bronchitis, because lower power makes for 
lower control and eﬀort-to-work balance. Meaningful work, then, also captures factors 
related to social hierarchy – which reduces control and the eﬀort to reward ratio down 
the social gradient - as disempowerment and social devaluation. 
Disconnection from other people. Drawing heavily from the work of John 
Cacioppo, Hari highlighted his seminal work in loneliness to show that perceived, not 
actual, disconnection from other people was more dangerous for mortality than smoking 
and obesity, and predicted extreme stress, and depression through controlled 
experiments (J. T. Cacioppo & Patrick, 2008; J. T. Cacioppo et al., 2013; S. Cacioppo et al., 
2015). Loneliness, J. T. Cacioppo argued, is a survival drive to motivate reconnection with 
one’s tribe as a survival mechanism, but one that can backﬁre. He further tracks Robert 
Putnam’s (2001) work on the loss of the “third space” in American social life, which 
historically included places of community gathering like churches or bowling alleys, and 
shows loneliness to have ballooned from social trend to Western epidemic. 
Disconnection from meaningful values. Hari draws on the work of Tim Kasser 
(2002) whose “Aspiration Index” measured the degree to which someone endorsed 
“junk values” as a singular pursuit of materialism and social status. Higher scores

200 
predicted higher rates of anxiety and depression, while ﬁner grained measures revealed 
day-to-day experience to be oriented toward anger and despair, away from joy and 
meaning. This was partially a factor of being extrinsically, rather than intrinsically, 
motivated, with research showing that externally-motivated achievements – money and 
status – failed to promote lasting changes in well-being, unlike intrinsically-motivated 
achievements (Pink, 2018). External benchmarks for success likely had four mechanisms 
of toxic eﬀect: a transactional approach to relationships, excessive social comparison, 
intrusive perceived social judgments, and a way of life that actively encouraged people 
away from the real sources of life satisfaction, meaning and connection. Consequently, 
Western cultural messages of a “keeping up with the Joneses” mentality become a meta-
problem: while good for capitalist economics, they actively derail those individuals who 
fail to identify core values as a guide toward lasting well-being. 
Disconnection from childhood trauma. Hari explores the correlations discovered 
by Felitti et al. (1998) from the Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACE) study, which found 
childhood emotional abuse to signiﬁcantly predict adult depression and anxiety, and 
Felitti’s prior work where he discovered adult obesity was commonly a subconscious 
protective mechanism to avoid sexual advances due to early childhood sexual abuse. 
Hari’s broader thesis was that children commonly use self-blame to maintain a sense of 
control rather than acknowledge their fundamental powerlessness, and that a range of 
psychological problems may share similar pathways - ways of seeing the world that 
entrench maladaptive patterns of relating to the world that load on many of these other 
factors.

201 
Disconnection from status and respect. Hari pulls from the work of Robert 
Sapolsky (1994; 2017), who studied baboons in Kenya for the better part of his career. 
Baboons organize along a strict social dominance hierarchy where absolute power 
allows the alpha to bully all those beneath them, while alternatively, one’s absolute 
powerlessness allows anyone in the group to bully them (see: displaced aggression). The 
physiological consequences of being on the bottom of the pecking order are stress-
based disorders of the endocrine system that leave no part of physical health untouched 
- ulcers, poor sleep, hair loss, immune system dysregulation, appetite loss, social 
avoidance and submissiveness, and symptoms eerily resembling depression and anxiety. 
At its root are two status-based problems, insecure status (which can aﬀect anyone up 
and down the power gradient), and low status, with humans suﬀering both particularly 
in societies that exacerbate class inequalities. Paul Gilbert’s seminal work (1992b) 
emphasized this view of depression as a human submission response to signal defeat in 
the face of conﬂict. In a larger context, Wilkinson and Pickett (2011) showed modern 
societies oﬀer social hierarchies of unprecedented scale due to capitalist economics, 
which oﬀer regular humiliating signiﬁers of one’s lowly or insecure status, which is 
relentlessly primed by social media. Wilkinson and Pickett (2011) made their seminal 
contribution to show that at least eleven modern social epidemics - including violence, 
poor social trust and mass incarceration - are worsened in a dose-response fashion as 
power inequalities expand, including all forms of mental illness. 
Disconnection from the natural world. This research shows that people who 
leave green spaces become more depressed, and people who move to them show a

202 
reduction in depression. Other research highlights that city areas with relatively more 
green spaces reduce stress and depression, and those that show the clearest beneﬁt are 
depressed people themselves, with a ﬁve fold increase. Human biophilia, an aﬃliation 
for our ancestral habitat, which is broadly speaking, the natural and varied earth biome, 
makes natural environments confer energy and resilience that can be lost in its absence. 
Disconnection from a hopeful and secure future. Hari tracked Michael 
Chandler’s (Chandler & Lalonde, 1998) research about the relationship between suicide 
among native North Americans and the loss of their way of life through culture-
destroying reeducation eﬀorts and the subordination in the conﬁnes of their 
reservations. The fewest suicides were among those groups who had high control over 
their cultural way of life, while the most were in those groups who were over-controlled 
by the surrounding US or Canadian governments. Connecting this with research on 
depression, and people who must work patterns of insecure work or who struggle to 
ﬁnd any work at all, a thesis emerges that people who cannot ﬁnd a path forward for a 
hopeful or secure future are at a heightened risk for depression. This echoes long-
running research about the resilience-conferring eﬀects of hope and purpose in life 
(Erickson et al., 1975). 
The real role of genes and biology. Hari tracks two separate stories regarding 
genes and biology. The ﬁrst is neuroplasticity, which dismantles the idea of a static brain 
deﬁned by genes and ﬂips it on its head, showing the brain is constantly reﬂecting one's 
changing relationship with the world. Indeed, neuroplasticity also works with depression 
and anxiety, but to entrench the eﬀects of the deleterious life factors mentioned

203 
elsewhere, transforming psychosocial factors into biology. Secondly, when gene variants 
do impact risk of depression, they seem to do so only in certain environments or in the 
face of certain adverse life experiences, questioning the nature of pathology genes akin 
to the work of Dobbs (2012) and Belsky et al. (2009). Most of the scholars researched 
for Hari’s book felt that the number of people who likely had “endogenous depression” 
were “vanishingly small,” and when asked to guess at their numbers, provided answers 
ranging from 1 in 20, to only a few hundred worldwide. Evidence from a study by Brown 
and Harris (1978) challenged the concept from another direction, showing that when 
eﬀorts were made to compare patients with reactive versus endogenous depression, 
both groups had similar life circumstances, but the endogenous group simply did not 
have their life circumstances taken into account. 
Hari ends with four reasons the brain-based myths might remain: a) that people 
may ﬁnd their depression mysterious if they currently have everything they should have 
according to the standards of the culture, where the cultural standards themselves may 
be broken or inaccurate; b) that a disease-model seems as though it would reduce 
stigma, though evidence shows you are more likely to experimentally shock someone 
with a chemical imbalance than someone who is depressed for life circumstances (S. 
Mehta & Farina, 1997); c) it is politically challenging to suggest that the way we are 
collectively living may negatively impact our mental health; d) because entire industries 
such as pharmaceuticals are massively ﬁnancially invested in the narrative status quo. 
Hari also mentions some implications of a possible paradigm change: people require 
empathy, not sympathy, because a model of universal human vulnerabilities means

204 
depression and anxiety can aﬀect anyone; that being “insane” is a rational response to a 
“mad” world; and that changing the social status quo becomes a logical consequence of 
biopsychosocial suﬀering when we understand it to be feedback about the way we live. 
Hari’s model is a useful starting point for the idea of social niches as conﬁgured 
out of mental health feedback for a variety of reasons. First, Hari’s model draws on 
prominent research in their various ﬁelds, from John Cacioppo, Michael Marmot, Robert 
Sapolsky and others. While the biomedical paradigm de-centers these individual 
contributions as outliers, Hari provides an explanatory frame - a social animal 
perspective - to hold them together as a consilience that can stand against the zeitgeist. 
Second, it shows that a social niche model of mental health is, in the words of Gilbert 
(2019) “integrative, contextual, evolutionary and biopsychosocial,” allowing us to see 
people in a multi-dimensional way not just for what might be there - active injuries and 
adversity - but what might not be there in the form of missing resources and 
relationships with the social world. Third, many of Hari’s connections encroach on one 
another: meaningful work brings in the role of power in curtailing control and 
satisfaction; junk values take us away from social relationships; a hopeful future is 
improved by a sense of control, which is the focus of meaningful work. Each dimension 
is perhaps interconnected with the others, and while they should be individually 
understood, they must also necessarily be referenced against the larger indivisible social 
niche complex. Finally, each connection necessarily brings in some larger backdrop of 
cultural, economic and political forces as bearing on the immediate factors of a social 
niche. Consequently, when we speak about social niches as feedback about how we are

205 
living, they are quite likely feedback about how we are collectively living as well, which 
has political implications that might help shift the conversation about mental health and 
social change (see: agonic and hedonic social environments). 
Mental Health and the Substrates of a Social Niche: Mechanisms and Models 
Hari’s model sacriﬁces data depth for persuasion and impact, which, it should be 
noted, is eﬀective. It might be worth exploring some of the best contenders for 
mechanisms among the existing literature to formalize the model in question and bear 
out the implications for conceptualization and treatment. We will start with the 
mechanisms that highlight why there is the potential for three of Hari’s lost connections 
to be injurious: disconnection from a hopeful and secure future, disconnection from 
other people, and disconnection from status and respect. We argue an understanding of 
the second order cybernetics concept relational agency (Heylighen, 2023) is key to 
understanding three aspects of individual human niches: the resources and injuries of 
goal-directedness, the resources and injuries of community relationships, and the 
resources and injuries of games for status and prestige. 
Cybernetics: Goal-directedness, Direction and Motivational collapse  
Cybernetics is a useful science to understand how human beings might be 
“connected” to their environment in purposive ways. Cybernetics comes from Greek 
roots, meaning “to steer, navigate or govern.” The ﬁeld is a study of goal-directed 
behavior, and a branch of systems theory that explores goal-directed agents in a 
systemic environment. A later evolution of the ﬁeld, second-order cybernetics, became 
important in modeling the social agency of living complex adaptive systems (Heylighen

206 
& Joslyn, 2003). This was in part by recognizing that observers of a system (such as 
scientists) are organisms with goals themselves, and limit their understanding of a 
problem-ﬁeld under observation based on their own narrow goals and models. 
Consequently, second-order cyberneticians began to disentangle their own goals and 
models as distinct from those of the research subjects, and ask questions about agency 
itself. 
Second-order cybernetics integrates across the fragmented social sciences to 
build a non-reductive understanding of humans in context and in motion. While Western 
positivists spent much of the twentieth century modeling research subjects as objects 
rendered passive and pre-determined by biology, cybernetics tried to understand how 
goal-directedness worked: how can an organism be motivated by something that, by 
deﬁnition, has not happened yet? The answer has much to say about the science of 
“free will” or nature versus nurture, and brings a number of topics into dialogue such as 
autonomy, self-organization and subjectivity. It is uniquely poised to comment on 
human nature, mental health and well-being, as social agency - centered by second-
order cybernetics - is what may be compromised in mental dysfunction (DeYoung & 
Krueger, 2023). 
The cybernetic ontology for human nature and life in general is one of one of 
relational agency (Heylighen, 2023). In contrast to thinking as old as Aristotle and 
Newton, the universe is not composed of inert objects, but “networked agencies,” which 
make up every constituent level of reality from atoms, to molecules, to cells, to humans. 
With the advent of agent-based modeling and reactive network methodologies, there

207 
has been progress in clarifying ideas on a way of thinking about the world as old as 
prehistoric animism. Organisms are both: a) interconnected networks of agents that are 
co-evolving and co-adapting to produce a higher-level whole or super-agent , and b) 
each is agentive in its own right, which is to say, teleonomic . Teleonomy speaks to 
organisms built for cybernetic, or goal-directed, functioning that is directed toward some 
ultimate attractor state, or states, reﬂected en masse in utopian thinking. Attractor 
states are qualities of the environment that draw the organism’s agency toward it. In 
the case of organisms, the teleonomic meta-goal is self-maintenance , or self-
propagation of one’s own life process across time and space, and this organizes a variety 
of adaptive sub-goals: for instance, resource pursuit and threat avoidance. 
Ultimately, then, purposive agency requires a goal of goals, a meta-goal that 
organizes all sub-goals strategically and eﬃciently, and that process is one of niche 
construction . Niche construction is the ultimate co-regulator of sustainable self-
maintenance, where an organisms’ adaptive tool kit is maximally synergistic with one’s 
environment. In the case of humans, one’s individual niche is social, made up of other 
social agents and symbiogenic cooperators networked into a higher agency, or super-
agent - i.e., the agency of an emergent team, tribe or society. In summary, the ultimate 
teleonomic or purposive meta-goal of a relational agent is to seek a social niche-of-ﬁt, 
which engages the individual in soliciting ongoing feedback about their success or failure 
to steer toward this progress. Humans have evolved the hard-wiring to register this 
feedback along a variety of key social substrates, registering success as subjectively 
meaningful, rewarding and sustaining; while set-backs and failures are demoralizing,

208 
with signs of agentive collapse proving to be psychologically unsustainable when a niche-
of-ﬁt feels forever out of reach. For this reason, the default condition of social animals is 
to a) seek purposive agency to stave oﬀ agentive collapse (mental health issues), and b) 
curate relational networks to carve a social niche capable of sustaining one’s agency. 
Agency and mental health. Goal-directedness speaks to a variety of principles 
with respect to mental health. First, that motivation is not to be taken for granted, as it 
is a physical substrate which can collapse (DeYoung & Krueger, 2023). This is a departure 
from the stance that motivation is based on pure will, an endless resource that can only 
be missing due to brain dysfunctions, so we must understand how cybernetics reframes 
our understanding of motivation. Complex living systems like humans minimally require 
three components to be cybernetic: ﬁrst, that goals, and their values, be physically 
embedded in the system, though their form may change and evolve; second, a way to 
represent the current state and compare it against the ideal state via feedback; third, an 
operator can facilitate bringing the current state toward the goal state. Note, that 
cybernetic conceptions of psychological goals are quite broad. They might range from 
goals that are subconscious and automatic (for instance, the autonomic nervous system) 
to conscious and deliberative; they are inclusive to constructs like needs, drives, 
emotions, cognitions and behaviors; and they require seeing all parts working in concert 
to energetically propel an individual toward an outcome across time and space to 
organize adaptive behavior. The physical instantiation of goal-directedness is a 
cybernetic cycle (DeYoung, 2015) and it includes: goal-activation (a need becomes 
suﬃciently motivating; action-selection (a decision is made about a strategy); action

209 
(behavioral strategy); outcome interpretation (information as feedback); goal 
comparison (register the success or failure of the eﬀort). 
The embodiment of agency. Anticipation-control theory (Heylighen, 2005) 
eﬀectively models the brain as a physical system that embeds the cybernetic cycle. The 
theory proposes that the brain is tasked with a) representing the environment through 
patterns of sense data, which is then organized as a hierarchy of senses up through 
concepts as a mental model of the world, or “worldview,” b) the model is held in 
memory to compare it against incoming experience, c) “prediction errors” are 
noteworthy as they oﬀer feedback to the model to reﬁne subsequent predictions, d) 
positive outcomes to achieve, and threats to avoid, are predicted, prioritized and 
decided upon, e) behavior “steers” toward the positive and avoids the negative across 
time and space, and f) the results of success or failure are used to reinforce successful 
behavior or learn from failure, and generally provide for the needs and drives of self-
maintenance. 
A uniquely integrative theory by Hawkins and Blakeslee (2005) accounted for 
both anatomy and function of the brain eﬀectively bore out the anticipation-control 
theory in the way the model would expect, including thinking and conscious attention 
being largely devoted toward prediction errors - the unexpected - as serving to reﬁne 
models toward predictability. Work like this is exemplary of a broader convergence on 
the view of the brain as a prediction machine across neuropsychology and related ﬁelds, 
including perspectives outside of cybernetics (Clark, 2016). They have been bolstered by 
a consilience of evidence from everything from Bayesian mechanics (Friston, 2010) to

210 
dopaminergic functioning as anticipatory motivation (Bromberg-Martin et al., 2010; 
Sapolsky, 2017; Schulz, 2016; Wise, 2004). The predictive brain has been useful in 
formalizing theories of depression, anxiety, ADHD and autism (Del Giudice, 2018) as 
embodying a physical relationship to expectation as a physical substrate of motivation, 
threat avoidance, prediction-error, and cognition. 
Recall that DeYoung’s cybernetic theory of personality is one where personality 
traits are the evolved parameters of the cybernetic cycle. The behavioral activation 
(BAS) and inhibition systems (BIS) work by altering orientations to goal stability 
(inhibition) and goal plasticity (approach). Here, there are echoes of social niche 
specialization - that strategy trade-oﬀs are heritable, and therefore made in advance of 
individual choice - as inherited components of personality (i.e., temperament), 
speciﬁcally as cybernetic parameters over which one has little control. The rest of 
personality, called characteristic adaptations - where people learn goals, strategies and 
interpretations throughout the lifespan - is the learned component which helps reﬁne 
personality and bridge the gap between temperament and the immediate social 
environment. Characteristic adaptations might include adopting new goals, learning 
new interpretations, reprioritizing sub-goals, experimenting with new strategies, and so 
on. 
Embodied feedback: motivational collapse. Within this frame, DeYoung and 
Krueger (2023) argued that all psychopathology can be framed as a failure of 
characteristic adaptation to achieve important goals (in the cybernetic sense). This is 
true even in less obvious forms of psychopathology; for instance, while depression has

211 
obviously been framed as a catastrophic loss of motivation, obsessive compulsive 
disorders’ repetitive behaviors can disrupt goal-directed eﬃciency, while narcissistic 
personality disorder impedes relational goals. The authors also maintain that cybernetic 
dysfunction is not synonymous with “brain disorder.” Many etiological pathways can 
impede cybernetic goal-directedness, including biological, psychological and social. Even 
in the case of extreme personality traits and their corresponding neural sensitivities and 
trade-oﬀs - diﬀerences in motivation, emotion, cognition, and behavior - extreme trait 
values only imbue risk for particular forms of psychopathology, and are never 
pathological in and of themselves. Meanwhile, all people are at risk of some form of 
psychopathology, in that all people can have characteristic adaptations break down, 
leading to cybernetic compromise. 
The primary shift in this equation is that we can model the conditions of 
cybernetic collapse as a dynamic relationship with one’s environment which can be 
either more or less sustainable. The functioning of dopamine illustrates the basic nature 
of a goal-directed circuit. Dopamine is released in anticipation of a motivating outcome 
to facilitate energetic pursuit of a behavior, and if one experimentally inhibits the 
dopamine, one does not get the behavior (Bromberg-Martin et al., 2010; Sapolsky, 
2017). Dopamine, then, is “gas in the engine” for an organism that releases gas in 
anticipation of the journey, and speciﬁcally, the rewards of the destination. From this, 
many implications for psychopathology follow. 
First, because motivation is fundamentally tied to cybernetic expectation and 
prediction (again, physically embodied by representations in the brain), all people are

212 
vulnerable to motivational collapse when there a) is insuﬃcient positive expectations 
available, and b) when there is no hope of escape from psychological threats. This 
explains a variety of phenomena. For instance, the learned helplessness experiments, 
where animals without hope of escape stop trying to help themselves even after escape 
became possible (Seligman, 1972); and the importance of hope as a psychiatric variable 
(Erickson et al., 1975), as hope is motivation tied to the realistic possibility for change 
and achievement of important goals. It also explains why people are not realistic in 
sustaining good mental health, but have a delusional positivity bias because long-term 
realism is less important to agency than short-term motivational “fuel” (Henrich, 2016; 
Ratnayake, 2022; Sharot et al., 2012). 
The connection between realistic goal-attainment and motivation means that 
attenuating the chance of success is paradoxically a demotivator. This points to a key 
cybernetic “injury” called entrapment: when one is stuck without a realistic behavioral 
pathway to chase the good or escape the bad, it can shut down all motivation (H. Choi & 
Shin, 2023; Gilbert & Allan, 1998; Gilbert et al., 2004; Griﬃths et al., 2014). This 
becomes a pathway for cybernetic dysfunction when the loss of either a) a sense of 
control or b) realistic hopes for the future (i.e., motivators) predictably leads to 
energetic collapse, i.e., the depression of agentive collapse (see: depressive realism ; 
Alloy & Abramson, 1988). By contrast, the diﬀerence between depression and anxiety 
may be one of probability. A high probability of a negative outcome (inability to escape 
a threat) or absence of a positive one (nothing to look forward to) is depression 
(DeYoung, 2015; Gilbert & Allen, 1998; 2001a); a less probable or controllable sense of

213 
threat (or riskier opportunity) would be anxiety, which increases as one’s chance of 
success becomes more uncertain (DeYoung, 2015; Erickson et al., 1975). Here, 
operationalizing a “sense of control” may be one’s probabilistic prediction of success 
using their best behavioral strategies. 
The nature of cybernetic or motivational collapse sketches a view of a spiral 
dynamic intrinsic to the nature of goal-directedness, wherein anxiety and depression 
increase as chances for success in important goals dwindle. The nature of this feedback 
loop has a variety of implications for viewing the spiral dynamics of depression and 
anxiety as inevitable, predictable, normal and even necessary, all in contrast to the 
diathesis stress model of mental health. 
Let us layer onto this model the personality factors that create individual 
diﬀerences in the operation of this circuit. Here are three examples. 
First, individuals with high trait detachment, may see motivational resources 
become “thinner” as a trade-oﬀ of decreasing reward-pursuit and increasing novelty-
seeking, and this disposition may spell greater vulnerability to depression risk when a) 
one is generally under-stimulated and therefore motivationally sensitive to boredom, 
and b) by being more sensitive to the eﬀort-to-reward calculation known in behaviorism 
as ratio strain. Ratio strain determines what degree of eﬀort is justiﬁed for a particular 
reward as a “ratio” of reward size to eﬀort. For people with fewer motivational 
resources, there may be greater sensitivity to goal-directed barriers of all kinds as these 
individuals arrive at an unsustainable ratio more quickly; i.e., they have “less gas in the 
tank.”

214 
Second, higher trait detachment may also lead to higher openness to 
experience/intellect as these individuals are more open to new information. Whereas the 
single-minded eﬃciency of a reward-sensitive person can lead that individual to screen 
out information unnecessary to their goals, a more detached person can be less 
attached to a single goal (see: plastic), and able to consider alternative goals, 
perspectives and information (see: openness ), at the cost of motivational eﬃciency (see: 
trade-oﬀs) . However, in addition to boredom sensitivity, taking in more information may 
have its own risks. As increased openness leads to taking in more information and 
perspectives, there may be a greater risk of perspicacity, i.e., the ability to perceive the 
oppressive conditions of social systems to one’s own goals, and this may increase 
susceptibility to depressive realism (Hanna et al., 2000). 
Finally, novelty-seekers may also struggle with the goal selection part of the 
cybernetic cycle: a bias toward immediate stimulation and novelty-seeking (see: time 
discounting), even when in service of an exploratory disposition (H. Taylor et al., 2022), 
and this may make it diﬃcult to “ﬁnd a sense of purpose in life,” i.e. to eﬀectively orient 
to a long-term teleonomic meta-goal that can organize life’s sub-goals toward a long-
term moral and sustainable niche. In other words, detached people may struggle with 
direction in life, and this may lead to chaos on immediate thoughts, feelings and goals by 
failing to organize the meaning of life events relative to a long-term arc or story; i.e. 
create a persistent sense of meaninglessness. 
In each of these three examples, the personality trade-oﬀs made in advance of 
the individual’s agency predictably led to risks for speciﬁc forms of psychological pain.

215 
Critically, however, one of the lessons of an epistemic injustice framework is that 
despite the increased likelihood of cybernetic breakdown, personality does not equate 
to an inherent risk for psychopathology. The purpose of the cybernetic parameters is to 
create functional roles (see: moral psychology) and strategies (see: life history research) 
that are necessary for cultural evolution (see: complimentary cognition); i.e. they 
embody important evolutionary trade-oﬀs. 
Goal-directedness and the dangers of motivational collapse help to substantiate 
Hari’s model as an embodied relationship to one’s niche. Speciﬁcally, cybernetics helps 
us to understand the “lost connections” of meaningful work and a hopeful and secure 
future. A cybernetic frame might essentialize the embodied psychological substrate as: 
a) a sense of control, which is the probabilistic eﬃcacy of a mental and/or behavioral 
strategy for bringing about a desired goal, b) realistic expectations of a positive outcome 
to either avoid a threat or pursue an opportunity, and c) a teleonomic sense of purpose 
as a life organizer of all sub-goals, cognitions, emotions and motivations. The more 
general shift underlying these propositions is that humans’ adaptive capacities are as 
relational agents. Agents make a variety of trade-oﬀs: they can build accurate models of 
the world and future to anticipate real threats and opportunities, or less accurate 
models that better motivate agency; they can optimize for decisional eﬃciency or 
behavioral ﬂexibility; and so forth. Personality factors show many of these trade-oﬀs 
have been made in advance, and this is normal, despite a clear role in psychopathology 
(Del Giudice, 2018; DeYoung & Krueger, 2023; Hunt & Jaeggi, 2022). The downside of all 
relational agents is that a goal-directed relationship with the world that transcends time

216 
and space has the propensity for cybernetic collapse. As a corollary of a super-powered 
ability to model ideal niche conditions, one can also realistically model the real hurdles 
of a diﬃcult path forward. Indeed, we might extend an argument by Henrich (2016) that 
intelligence is not all it is cracked up to be. Just as being less rational was more adaptive 
in prehistory because poking sacred cows was only a path to exclusion, seeing the world 
more clearly is a psycho-motivational risk as one takes on more burdens the more one 
“sees.” 
Relational Agency: Community Networks, Status Hierarchies and Social/Status 
Collapse 
No agent is an island, and the relational nature of agents is that they exist in an 
ecosystem of interaction and social interconnectedness (Heylighen, 2023). Two of Hari’s 
niches are social or relational in nature: the disconnection from other people, and a 
disconnection from status and respect. These may be said to reference two kinds of 
social dynamics that compose a social niche - the dynamics of intimate relationships 
that link to form community, which references safe trustworthy relationships and 
collaborative support networks; and the dynamics of status hierarchies, which can 
correspond to prosocial prestige and eminence, or antisocial competition and 
dominance. Both social dynamics have their own unique evolutionary function and 
development, with diﬀerent dynamics that are more or less sustainable; both have 
unique forms of social feedback and positioning, and both share a special interplay 
between them. 
A social ecology can be modeled as a social complex adaptive system (Heylighen,

217 
2013; Preiser et al., 2018; D. S. Wilson et al., 2023) or superorganism (D. S. Wilson et al., 
2023; D. S. Wilson & Sober, 1989; D. S. Wilson, 2023) independent of scale or 
complexity. Whereas other social animals have relatively ﬁxed group sizes and 
dynamics, a key feature of the human story is that groups are malleable and evolvable, 
and cultural evolution has increasingly toyed with social dynamics, structure, complexity 
and group size over time. Over the last 300,000 years (Hublin et al., 2017), human 
cultural evolution reorganized the principles of social life based on cultural inheritances – 
ideas, beliefs, norms, practices, and values – which made it possible to explore diﬀerent 
potentialities for group organization, coordination, cooperation and cohesion (Del 
Giudice, 2018). Early band forms of organization, based more on kinship relations, came 
to be reconﬁgured around new principles: mutualism/coalitions, exchange/reciprocity, 
and various forms of conﬂict resolution, including hawk and dove contests, 
division/fairness, and rights of possession (Curry, 2016). Bands of 30-50 people came to 
be nested into large tribes of thousands, with intermediate clans or villages of 150-200 
(Del Giudice, 2018; Dunbar, 1993). This relatively rapid expansion of human social 
organization (in evolutionary terms) was made possible by the human adaptive complex, 
a suite of co-evolved adaptive traits – social coordination, transmitted knowledge, 
cause-and-eﬀect problem-solving, tool-use, and linguistic communication – and this 
allowed humans to transcend to a new cognitive niche that dominated all other species 
in their respective ecologies (Pinker, 2010; Tooby & DeVore, 1987).  
By playing with the form and function of human social life, cultural evolution 
allowed human social groups to experiment with the social order and its goals

218 
(Christakis & Fowler, 2011). New social niches were created, and new psychosocial 
mechanisms evolved to support ever more prosocial group conﬁgurations (Hayes et al., 
2020; D. Wilson, 2002; D. S. Wilson et al., 2023). Unprecedented group ﬂexibility, 
however, necessitated the resolution of various trade-oﬀs at the group-level, including 
the balance between conformity and innovation (Del Giudice, 2018), exploitation and 
exploration (H. Taylor et al., 2022) and generalism versus specialism (Hunt & Jaeggi, 
2022). This leg of cultural evolution likely led to the systematic diﬀerentiation of 
cognition and personality to adapt to, or support, diﬀerent sociocultural ecologies and 
strategies (Del Giudice, 2018). Other novel capacities allowed for the rapid re-
conﬁguration of group life: for instance, humans evolved biological sensitivities that 
enabled them to shift from a social life of relative independence to one of strong 
interdependence very quickly (see: the hive switch , Haidt, 2013; Wright, 2009). It follows 
that many of the genes associated with mental health disorders are those associated 
with the heritable trade-oﬀs linked to these new capacities (Del Giudice, 2018; Haidt, 
2013). One reason may have been interactive: that despite the beneﬁt of new social 
roles and dynamics for human evolvability as a whole, evolutionary innovation comes at 
great cost to individuals. Experiments in social living make for social friction and mental 
anguish when they go against the grain of group life. 
Some of these trade-oﬀs may express themselves in relation to two common 
pathways of social organization. Network communities emphasize proximal relationships 
that propagate into webs of cooperators who can dynamically coordinate and cohere to 
solve diﬀerent group-level problems (Christakis & Fowler, 2011). Status hierarchies are

219 
typically associated with dominance in many primates (Sapolsky, 1994; 2017), but were 
co-opted by humans to reward valuable knowledge, skills and contributions with 
prestige and allow the expansion of varying role specialists – healers, artists, tool-
makers, teachers and others. Network communities and status hierarchies each add 
something valuable to a social complex adaptive system, while creating positional 
challenges to social agents; for instance, the need to “get along” or “get ahead” (Del 
Giudice, 2018). 
Network communities. Network communities are groups of people who are 
more connected to one another than to other actors in a social network (Christakis & 
Fowler, 2011). Within social networks, all relationships propagate outward up to six 
degrees of separation and three degrees of inﬂuence, and have both local (relational) 
and global (community) consequences that capture diﬀerent qualities of life in the 
network. For instance, networks have contagion - the spread of everything from 
emotion to germs, money, obesity, violence and fashions - which varies based on one’s 
transitivity - the degree to which one is a part of groups where everyone knows each 
other (high transitivity), or whether they are unlikely to know each other and be nodes 
that connect diﬀerent groups (low transitivity). Christakis and Fowler highlighted four 
properties of life on the network: 1) individuals shape their network, 2) networks shape 
the individual, 3) one’s friends aﬀect them, 4) one’s friends’ friends’ friends aﬀect them, 
and 5) the network has a life of its own (i.e., emergent properties ). 
Such networks are the basis for cooperation, coherence and coordination, and 
importantly, they tend to function optimally in relatively egalitarian forms. Both excessive

220 
power inequalities (excess aggression, competition, bullying), and excessive self-interest 
(free-riders, cheats, defectors as lower-levels of selection undermining higher levels) can 
produce a toxic eﬀect on a groups’ adaptive ﬂexibility (Junger, 2016; D. S. Wilson et al., 
2023). This has historically led to the evolution of social controls on such behavior – 
moral norms regulated by gossip, ostracizing, and reputation-systems – that reward 
prosocial behavior and punish antisocial behavior (D. S. Wilson et al., 2023). In 
aggregate, these forms of social control have been called a “reverse dominance 
hierarchy” (Boehm, 2012) as a group-selected protection on moral capital to inhibit 
excessive self-interest or power-seeking. Consequently, community relationships are 
built on mutual trust, safety, support and reciprocity, and include relationship types 
such as romantic partners, friendships, coworkers and allies that thrive on a “win-win” 
logic (Wright, 2000). These “horizontal” relations of relative equals (it should be noticed 
that status diﬀerences are normal, but constrained in healthy small band societies 
known to be eﬀective in these areas; D. S. Wilson et al., 2023) are disrupted by the stress 
of more “vertical” power relations, which can complicate relationships with social 
comparison, conﬂict, competition, and the stress of social evaluative threat (Wilkinson & 
Pickett, 2011). 
Social hierarchies. Hierarchies likely began as dominance hierarchies, where 
social status was conferred by the threat of social violence, and won by those most able 
to enforce their will in the face of resistance from others. Such hierarchies, exhibited 
strongly by primates like baboons (Sapolsky, 1994; 2018), have a number of principles: 
a) they are governed by one’s resource-holding power (RHP) to secure social rank and

221 
pursue higher status to access resources like food and sex in service of self-interest; b) 
one’s rank determines one’s ability to bully others - a common stress relief tactic and 
tool to enforce rank (see: displacement aggression; Chance, 1984; 1988) – meaning 
those at the top bully all beneath them, and those at the bottom are bullied by all above 
them; c) all contests and conﬂicts are zero-sum (or “win-lose”); a loser can reconcile 
with a winner by showing deference and submission following defeat, allowing the 
victor to attain status and the loser to remain in the group; d) rank uncertainty creates 
persistent stress, fear and conﬂict throughout the hierarchy, while low status confers the 
worst bullying and fewest rewards, resulting in depression-like features: stress, anxiety, 
social avoidance and submissiveness, hair loss, heart arrhythmias, and immuno-
compromised disease susceptibility (Björkqvist, 2001; Chance, 1980; 1984; 1988; Gilbert 
& Allan, 1998; Gilbert & Basran, 2019; Sapolsky, 1994; 2018). One’s survival is always at 
stake in the social games of a dominance hierarchy, as being outside the group confers a 
high risk of death in the wilderness, while low status is little better: a miserable life of 
constant bullying, no social support (grooming), no chance of mating or intimacy, and 
early stress-induced mortality. 
Alternatively, as social interdependence and complexity increased, prestige 
hierarchies arose as freely given status to those with special knowledge, skills and 
expertise (Henrich & Gil-White, 2001), expanding a prosocial path for role specialists and 
prosocial cooperators to gain status through contributions to the group and prosocial 
behavior. Status evolution had shifted in evolutionary prehistory by co-opting rank, a 
mechanism of dominance, and transforming it into the “carrot” of prosocial prestige; by

222 
the time of band-level human groups, prestige was a reward for ﬁlling a variety of 
prosocial roles including social roles (chiefs and shamans), crafters (potters, basket-
weavers, boat-makers, tool and weapon makers), performers (story-tellers, dancers), 
teachers and experts (in hunting, geography; Hunt & Jaeggi, 2022; Sugiyama & 
Sugiyama, 2003). With the rise of agriculture and industry, the increasing stratiﬁcation of 
society    created a multitude of new niches requiring specialized skills and knowledge. A 
majority of successful strategies with which to compete for mates could now be based 
on something other than violence and domination (Del Giudice, 2018; Gilbert & Basran, 
2019). Indeed, the eﬃcacy of domination as a path to status likely decreased as social 
interdependence evolved, making one’s good standing in the group to be paramount as 
early as prehistory. Competition has since been channeled into other forms such as 
organized sports and politics, while the adaptive value of political prowess, social 
intelligence, prosociality and specialism has increased exponentially (Locke & Bogin, 
2006; Puts, 2010). 
By the time humans reach modernity, most disputes had shifted to a new form 
of social capital: the goal of competition was to be perceived as having superior 
competency in some social role – ally, friend, sexual partner, employee, community-
member, and so forth. This new currency was based on capturing social attention in an 
attention hierarchy , where one’s prowess was based on their social attention holding 
power (SAHP; Gilbert & Basran, 2019). Such hierarchies better synergize with the logic of 
community networks and the need to maintain relationships, and thus they are 
compatible with people being friendly, supportive, altruistic, and prosocial. That is,

223 
people compete for ways to provide for one another’s needs most eﬀectively or else, 
ﬁnd new ways of providing for people’s needs. Even to the extent that one is self-
serving, they must appear to be friendly and altruistic to be socially rewarded with 
prestige, and thus, all roads end in selection pressures to strengthen the prosociality or 
non-zero sumness of prestige hierarchies (Gilbert & Basran, 2019; Wright, 2000). This is 
not the case where the social fabric has decayed; here honor cultures arise that revert 
back to dominance-based organizing principles (Booth et al., 1989; 2006; Mazur & 
Booth, 1998).  
Prestige hierarchies oﬀer a variety of group functions, such as organizing group-
decision-making and coordination based on experience, expertise, and eminence 
(prosocial leadership); conﬂict resolution; maintaining cooperation and social order; and 
scaﬀolding the development of younger generations by motivating skill development, 
i.e. modeling role-based behavior and making it attractive (Gilbert & Basran, 2019; de 
Waal, 2013; Hunt & Jaeggi, 2022). It follows that a key prosocial psychological 
mechanism is a motive to curate prestige, reputation and esteem (Hari, 2018; 
Mahadevan et al., 2016; Zink et al., 2008), which in turn unlocks access to a variety of 
social, sexual and physical resources (Del Giudice, 2018; Sugiyama & Sugiyama, 2003). 
Accordingly, one view of neurotypes might see role-based trade-oﬀs as broad prestige 
strategies geared toward speciﬁc kinds of prestige capital. 
As niche feedback, one cannot easily extract prestige from feedback about 
community or meaningful work: a dimension of meaningful work is no doubt the 
prestige of prosocial role contribution, and a dimension of community is to relate to one

224 
another based on the roles we play, and the esteem we are aﬀorded. There has been 
some debate about whether self-esteem is feedback about community belonging – the 
sociometer theory of self-esteem (Leary & Baumeister, 2000; Leary, 1999; 2004) – or 
whether esteem is a separate form of feedback about “winners and losers” – the 
hierometer theory of self-esteem (Mahadevan et al., 2016). However, it makes sense 
that there would be separate substrates for the non-zero sum (“win-win”) relationships 
of a more “horizontal” nature versus the zero-sum (“win-lose”) dimension of “vertical” 
relationships. Each form of relationship has a diﬀerent game theoretic calculation 
(Wright, 2000), has been converged at by others theorists as distinct types of aﬃliative 
and antagonistic relationships (Gilbert, 1989; 1992a; 1992b; 1995; 2000b; 2005a; 2005c; 
2017), and corresponds to diﬀerent neurotransmitters, peptides and hormones that play 
to each form of social logic (Booth et al., 1989, 2006; J. T. Cacioppo & Patrick, 2008; 
Mazur & Booth, 1998; Zak, 2012). 
Despite the shift from zero-sum “win-lose” competition to non-zero-sum “win-
win“ type competitions (Wright, 2000), prestige relations are still vertical relations and 
both dominance and prestige draw on common substrates of competition and power. 
Though prestige supports a win-win interdependence at a community-level, individuals 
are often hierarchically ranked with regard to respect (Hunt & Jaeggi, 2022). The 
perceived zero-sumness, scarcity and opportunism of status shifts is nevertheless 
associated with high social stakes, and prestige competition may trigger a strong stress 
response regardless of whether a given social hierarchy is based on attention or 
dominance. Social evaluative threat sees stressors with a social evaluative dimension

225 
produce high levels of cortisol and a pro-inﬂammatory cytokine response when 
compared to equivalent stressors without the social evaluative dimension (Dickerson et 
al., 2009). A variety of mental health related phenomena are related to the dimension of 
status: in a context primed by diﬀerences of power, status and respect, low status may 
confer biopsychosocial stress vulnerability; high status individuals may trigger 
deference, submission, insecurity and stress responses in lower status people; and an 
ongoing struggle to attain the recognition of status can lead to feelings of inferiority and 
marginalization, which are related to loneliness, depression, and anxiety (Gilbert & 
Basran, 2019). It is also the case that where people have a variety of mechanisms to 
detect status diﬀerences, the lines of dominance and prestige blur, and status-based 
psychopathology risk can be common. Social media propagates common signposts 
about social inequalities, and in societies with large diﬀerences in social stratiﬁcation, 
feelings of defeat can emerge automatically from subconscious signiﬁers about relative 
status diﬀerences (see: social comparison ), status insecurity, low status, competitive or 
reputational loss, and social evaluative threat (Wilkinson & Pickett, 2011; Zink et al., 
2008). 
Social mentalities: meaning-systems that embody social relations.  As with goal-
directed agency, there are pathways to internalize the feedback of social relationships. 
This has been framed by Paul Gilbert (1989; 1992b; 1995; 2000b; 2005c; 2017) as social 
mentality theory (SMT). Social mentalities are modular cybernetic systems that 
conﬁgure to the circumstances and goals of diﬀerent kinds of social relationships, roles 
and dynamics. Mentalities are built for roles such as care-giving, care-eliciting,

226 
cooperation, competition and sexuality, and Gilbert (1992b, p. 120) frames their 
function as creating “a nucleus of meaning around social interaction.” Social mentalities 
directly correspond with the major dynamics of social life – i.e. goal-directed acquisition, 
community networks and social hierarchies – or else with the various roles one plays 
within them, i.e. care-givers and receivers. We can surmise social mentalities have co-
evolved alongside social roles and group dynamics; mentalities oﬀer a psychological suite 
for preparing, attending, processing and strategizing for the social logic needed for 
common social challenges and situations. For instance, the cooperative mentality 
prepares one to think in terms of non-zero-sum outcomes, emphasize belongingness, 
and think in terms of social ethics and morality; the competitive mentality prepares one 
to think in terms of one’s place in the hierarchy, zero-sum wins and losses, and conﬂict 
escalation. 
Aspects of mentalities correspond to cybernetic systems, including a) a biosocial 
goal, b) an information-processing algorithm, and c) a behavioral strategy, which 
simpliﬁes the cybernetic cycle to the three broad domains of psychology: aﬀect, 
cognition and behavior. However, these are not inseparable: biosocial goals energetically 
orient an individual toward a class of goal; cognition recruits feedback to steer toward 
progress in one’s goals; and behavior implements a strategy of pursuit across varied 
circumstances and terrains. Most mysteriously are biosocial goals in the domain of 
aﬀect. Biosocial goals refer to what Del Giudice (2018) called motives, which are distinct 
from emotion. Biosocial goals or motives are “biologically signiﬁcant goals” which 
humans are evolutionarily prepared to pursue in a need/drive dynamic. Biosocial goals

227 
help one position themselves to achieve social success or avoid failure depending on the 
salient social role or context (Gilbert, 1992a). Alternatively, emotions are modular, 
transient and responsive, ﬂexibly modifying the goals set by motives in temporarily 
activated states to rapidly coordinate subordinate mechanisms of perception, attention, 
memory, learning and physiology (Tooby & Cosmides, 1990; 2008). For most purposes, 
emotions can be classiﬁed into three basic systems which modify one’s mentalities at 
any given time, energizing or de-energizing one’s motives: a) one of positive aﬀective 
system that is stimulated by seeking and acquisition (see: the behavioral activation 
system), b) one of negative aﬀect that is stimulated by threat and avoidance of social 
danger (see: the behavioral inhibition system ), and c) a positive aﬀect system for safety 
and aﬃliation (see: rest and digest ; Gilbert, 2014). Thus, while emotions are more 
transient and context-dependent, biosocial goals are enduring evolved social 
motivations (Gilbert, 1989; 1992a; 1992b; 2005a; 2005c; 2014) that compose the basic 
needs and drives of human nature. Outside of CFT, little of the literature has addressed a 
therapeutic role for biosocial goals. 
Biosocial goals motivate strategies in pursuit of speciﬁc classes of social goals and 
roles. They do so in response to social needs – such as safety, respect and control – 
which orient biosocial goals to the social information and strategies required to meet 
immediate social needs, as well as long-term strategies to attain social positions (for 
instance, becoming pair-bonded, ingroup positioned, or of high social status). This basic 
feedback loop has proven such a reliable proxy for social success, it is likely a proxy for 
evolutionary success, and one need not reference a separate reproductive logic as a

228 
measure of “ﬁtness” (Gilbert, 1992b). 
Such biosocial goals are likely tied to the basic functioning of neurotransmitters, 
neuropeptides and neurohormones, which act as energetic resources in service of 
speciﬁc motives. Contrary to common assumptions, these biological systems can be 
modiﬁed: a) based on social learning that shapes one’s predictive model of the world, as 
biological substrates are cued based on anticipated actions in one’s environment (see: 
cybernetic agency), and b) through social feedback that activates states to modify these 
neurotransmitter/goal systems directly. This latter system is perhaps least expected, as 
biological agency with regards to mental well-being is often framed as unidirectional and 
genetically-determined by the medical model. In contrast, biosocial goals incorporate a 
direct pathway from social input to the modiﬁcation of key biological systems (see: 
social injuries ). Speciﬁc mentalities solicit forms of salient social feedback using rule-
governed algorithms to determine success or failure according to the type of biosocial 
goal, feedback that is registered automatically and subconsciously (Leary, 2004; Leary & 
Baumeister, 2000; Mahadevan et al., 2016; Zink et al., 2009). Thus, human beings 
embody cues of social success or failure as diﬀerent energetic states that feel either 
positive and energizing, or negative and de-energizing, creating a physical substrate for 
social meaning with nuanced consequences for well-being. Gilbert (1992, p. 121) sums 
up the relationship with mental health succinctly: “Hence the need for love, a sense of 
belonging and purpose make life meaningful and are associated with positive aﬀect. 
While rejection, a loss of social place and marginalization can make life seem 
meaningless and are associated with negative aﬀect.” In other words, biosocial goals

229 
help invert a common mental health assumption: bad biology does not make someone 
depressed and irrationally socially pessimistic; normal biology makes someone sensitive 
to social struggles, which depresses physiology, and feeds back into social struggles in 
unsustainable ways. 
Biosocial Niche Resources: Energy, Meaning, Strengths and Resilience 
The operation of biosocial models sets up a key understanding of the 
internalized resources of internalized social experiences, and the costs as directly related 
to their injury or absence. 
Social baseline theory (SBT) frames these costs and resources in ways that are 
useful. The brain is seen as having a “social baseline” because it assumes proximate 
access to biosocial resources as a baseline for a social creature (Beckes & Coan, 2011; 
Coan & Sbarra, 2015). These expectations for social support and high-quality 
relationships discount the perceived costs of the environment. For instance, if a subject 
is bio-energetically taxed and then asked to assess the expected diﬃculty of climbing a 
speciﬁc mountain, the mountain is perceived as further away and steeper; however, 
when standing next to a friend, the mountain is perceived as closer and less steep 
(Schnall et al., 2008). The brain’s resources, then, are endogenous, bound in 
physiological, cognitive and neuropsychological mechanisms, yet they are co-regulated 
by proximity, access and expectations of a supportive social milieu. Cues of support 
include physical touch, but include more abstract relational processes as well. Within 
the brain, the feedback of social interdependence, joint attention and shared goals 
operate as “indistinguishable” from physiologic resources like glucose, and are

230 
considered prerequisites for optimal functioning and normal eﬀort discounting. 
Inversely, attenuating one’s access to these resources strains cognitive and physiological 
loads to provide both acute and chronic stress and distress, including emotional de-
regulation, as the loneliness literature attests (J. T. Cacioppo & Patrick, 2008). Further, 
one’s perception of themselves as having access to social, and therefore endogenous, 
bio-energetic resources can shift individuals either toward strategies of general 
energetic investment, or those of energy conservation. In summary, bio-energetic and 
emotional coregulation is physiologically tied to one’s social positioning and access to 
social resources. 
Here we will explore three examples of neurotransmitter, peptide and hormone 
systems as a way of understanding the “bioenergetic resources” of diﬀerent social 
experiences and their eﬀect on well-being, as well as ways of curating such energy for 
resilience. These resources correspond to the logic of diﬀerent forms of social 
mentalities, and by extension, the supportive resources of a social niche as a social 
baseline. Importantly, the goal is to be able to frame goals of well-being in terms of 
pursuing a range of niche-based social relationships and roles – a balanced social life – 
that can optimally co-regulate one’s bio-energetic resources, while also deconstructing 
narratives about one’s relationship to their biology that create helplessness, 
hopelessness, stigma, defeat and alienation (MacDuﬃe & Strauman, 2017a; 2017b). 
For our purposes, we will consider how these substrates feed oﬀ of speciﬁc 
social feedback for better and worse. This information can be used in a variety of ways, 
including validating, externalizing and universalizing nuanced social experiences and

231 
their “costs” as contributors to negative aﬀect, social injury, and spiral dynamics that end 
in depression, anxiety or other “defense disorders” (Del Giudice, 2018; Gilbert, 2014).  
We will frame these classes of social experience as having four kinds of positive 
beneﬁt when present and regularly rehearsed: they b) act as internal resources in 
energizing behavior, c) confer speciﬁc psychosocial strengths, d) confer resilience, and e) 
feel subjectively good and meaningful in ways we associate with optimal mental well-
being. Alternatively, their absence or injury can induce spiral dynamics by reversing 
these four beneﬁts (see: next section). Consequently, we can distill three types of rules, 
experiences or dynamics for energizing behavior associated with resilience, and three 
kinds of experiences and states that are associated with a range of psychopathological 
states. We will consider what this means in terms of the “cost” of both a lack of 
resources, and an increase in allostatic load from stress and traumatic stress in the next 
section. We will then consider the goals of attaining resources and the therapeutic 
encounter, as well as framing experience in ways that frame relational agency to re-
energize deleterious states of anxiety and depression. Finally, we will emphasize the 
importance of framing ultimate attributions to validate unsustainable conditions, frame 
sustainable conditions, and create purposive goals as moral contributions toward social 
sustainability. 
Dopamine bio-energetic resources: motivation & curiosity. Dopamine 
functioning corresponds to what Gilbert calls the “seeking and acquisition” domain of 
positive aﬀect. Positive aﬀect within any mentality is attained by reasonable 
expectations of attaining a salient goal-state (reward), which is tied by embodied states

232 
of motivation as it feeds oﬀ of a realistic path to goal attainment. This corresponds to 
the basic neural pathways of hope and faith, as positive expectations energize 
psychosocial resources in the present. Motivation is proportionate to one’s perceived 
probability to successfully achieving a given goal, a phenomenon illustrated by 
dopamine “ramping,” i.e. when dopamine is released in anticipation of attaining a goal 
separated by space and time, and increases with increased proximity to the goal-state 
(Berke, 2018). In other words, dopamine is a resource that provides more motivation 
the greater one’s chance of success in the goal being pursued, so hope and faith are 
optimized when they have some probabilistic relationship to the real world (McGuire-
Snieckus, 2014). This also means that dopamine functioning captures one’s relationship 
to their goals . Inversely, dopamine is blocked by perceived barriers – of time, eﬀort, 
resources or distance – to a reward. This is illustrated in the behavioral phenomena 
called ratio strain, where the ratio of rewards to eﬀort is “strained” when there 
becomes too much work for not enough reward. This is studied by neuroscientists as an 
“eﬀort-to-reward” imbalance, or the automatic perception that a goal is “too much 
work” to be “worth it,” as one becomes demotivated in their thoughts of pursuit. 
Therefore, dopamine ﬁring also captures one’s barriers to, or distance from, their goals. 
Ratio strain leads to perceiving the environment as more costly, and harder to navigate, 
which can act as a physiological demotivator; when barriers stack as accumulating 
demotivators, this feeds back into the cybernetic cycle, putting all goals further out of 
reach. In this sense, dopamine has an inborn downward spiral dynamic we can call 
motivational collapse .

233 
Dopamine has another function in its relationship with learning. Dopamine ﬁring 
rates respond to violations of expectations about expected rewards relative to 
encountered rewards. A positive reward prediction error (RPE) occurs when a reward is 
better than expected, and dopamine the ﬁring rate increases. A negative RPE occurs 
when a reward is worse than expected, and the ﬁring rate decreases. The system shows 
no change by simply attaining a reward that is exactly as expected. Scholarship has 
tended to view this as a reinforcement learning signal, but an updated view sees that as 
only one function in a broader category: midbrain dopamine neurons respond to 
“salient” events that include unexpected rewards, but also novel stimuli, aversive 
stimuli, and highly intense visual and auditory events, while suppressing activity when 
these are not present (Horvitz, 2000). The more general function, then, is to orient 
individuals to “salient,” i.e. requiring one to be “response-ready” for good or ill in the 
environment. That includes cognitive novelty, which may or may not have value, and 
depending on one’s environment or cognitive strategy, may signal new opportunities for 
rewards, strategies and information that may be worth the opportunity costs (Del 
Giudice, 2018; DeYoung, 2015; H. Taylor et al., 2022). Thus, the brain also optimizes for 
not just for known rewards, but for exploring for new opportunities: opportunism might 
include rewards, but also, information-seeking to update prediction models (i.e., 
curiosity), threat-responsiveness (responding quickly when taking risks), and a general 
preparation for ecological unpredictability. Thus, dopamine also captures a relationship 
to unpredictability and the unknown , including motivating curiosity to pursue the 
unknown in search for information to update predictive models.

234 
Importantly, individual diﬀerences in dopamine functioning seem to trade-oﬀ 
the relative value of exploiting known rewards and resources against the value of 
behavioral ﬂexibility, which allows one to explore for new and potentially better 
information and strategies (DeYoung, 2015; Humphries et al., 2012; Keeler et al., 2014; 
Natsheh & Shiﬂett, 2018). The latter corresponds to individual trait novelty-seeking, 
which is geared toward reward-independent exploration and behavioral ﬂexibility (Li et 
al., 2017; Natsheh & Shiﬂett, 2018). The former is the trait reward sensitivity or reward 
dependence, an opposing pole to novelty-seeking which favors activity that has been 
established as rewarding (the former; DeYoung, 2015; Li et al., 2017) . While 
conventional wisdom is that one ought to balance these trade-oﬀs against one another 
(Natsheh & Shiﬂett, 2018), it is also thought that extreme poles therein may make for 
cognitive specialists (H. Taylor et al., 2022). Alternatively, environmental cues may help 
shift strategies, as the overall balance of tonic ﬁring may be set by the average reward 
rate in one’s environment as a capture of the relative risks and opportunity costs of 
exploitation versus exploration (Costa et al., 2014). Much of this can be synthesized with 
a relatively simple dopaminergic mechanism to capture this trade-oﬀ in the brain, which 
involves a balance of activity between the dopamine receptor subtypes, the “phasic” D1 
receptors responsible for “preparing” potential actions, and the “tonic” D2 dopamine 
pathways responsible for “selecting” behaviors from the prepared options (Keeler et al., 
2014). Dopamine genes that reduce tonic activity or over-activate the D1 pathway may 
push people toward an exploration strategy by tipping the balance between these 
systems (Keeler et al., 2014; Sethi et al., 2018), while high tonic dopamine activity is

235 
associated with an exploitation strategy (Humphries et al., 2012). This has a range of 
implications including creating more perceived options for decisions and making 
decision-making, including exploration strategies being relatively less eﬃcient but more 
ﬂexible to change, biasing one toward proximal rewards while reducing long-term 
motivation, and creating a “boredom sensitivity,” capturing just some of the trade-oﬀ 
costs and beneﬁts (Keeler et al., 2014; Malkovsky et al., 2012; Natsheh & Shiﬂett, 2018). 
This also goes some way to explaining the exposed dopamine deﬁcit hypothesis of 
ADHD as an exploratory strategy (M. S. Gold et al., 2014). 
Dopamine functioning thus captures two potentially diametrically opposed 
relationships to the environment, one to exploit resources through the rewards of 
behavioral-pursuit, the other to explore for stimulating novelty by satisfying curiosity in 
realms of imagination, intellect or curiosity, i.e. information-pursuit in service of 
behavioral ﬂexibility and social contribution (DeYoung, 2015; H. Taylor et al., 2022). 
However, one could equally frame another trade-oﬀ in dopaminergic functioning, 
between cognitive realism, which helps one achieve real-world success through 
accurate problem-solving and goal-pursuit, and cognitive idealism, which creates a bias 
toward delusional optimism as a way of creating psychosocial resources in the present, 
such as a positive state of mind and embodied motivation, willpower and resilience 
(McGuire-Snieckus, 2014; Sharot et al., 2012). Such trade-oﬀ dynamics can be equally 
extreme, with excess idealism becoming so delusional as to jeopardize basic survival or 
mental health (McGuire-Snieckus, 2014), while other evidence shows a positive mindset 
also confers some survival beneﬁt (see: positive psychology); indeed, evidence suggests

236 
that early cultural evolution was built on delusional beliefs that helped coordinate large 
groups (Henrich, 2016), and to the extent that such beliefs were “delusional”, may 
alternatively be framed as biasing entire groups toward shared psychosocial resources 
(Coan & Sbarra, 2015). Regardless, within a given individual, one is always trading oﬀ the 
need to be accurate, which may make carry downside risk of perceiving numerous 
demotivating barriers (see: depressive realism; Alloy & Abramson, 1988; Hanna et al., 
2000), versus the need to delusionally bias toward the positive as a way to curate 
psychological positivity and its various embodied resources (Sharot et al., 2012). Given 
that insuﬃcient positive aﬀect can lead to motivational collapse and behavioral inertia, 
both dimensions of this trade-oﬀ must be considered with equal survival value, and 
various strategies and cognitive specializations that lean toward one or the other (see: 
openness to experience vs openness to intellect), must likewise be valued. 
Let us review the four ways in which dopaminergic energy is a cognitive and social 
resource for sustaining positive aﬀect. 
Dopamine energizes behavior. Dopamine energizes motivation toward goal-
directed behavior and information-seeking behavior, which is critical to enacting 
important adaptive behavior. 
Dopamine feels good (and meaningful). While dopamine used to be considered a 
“pleasure chemical,” more recent research suggests it is more associated more with 
“wanting” than “liking.” The association with dopamine and pleasure may instead be 
the subjective pleasure of being energized and motivated towards one’s goals, as states 
of excitement, hope and control. The positive aﬀect of stimulation-seeking is associated

237 
with joy, fun, pleasure, humor & exploration (DeYoung, 2013). 
Dopamine is a resource/psychosocial strength. When one is positive, 
optimistic and hopeful, or stimulated and engaged, one can draw on states of 
willpower, persistence, drive and tenacity. Dopamine, and by extension, the social 
experiences that provide it, is a bio-energetic resource that confers psychosocial 
strengths which facilitate further goal-directedness or novelty-seeking, i.e. dopamine 
provides “fuel for one’s mental gas tank.” 
Dopamine confers resilience. When one has positive aﬀect of phasic or tonic 
dopamine activity, one can inhibit negative aﬀect and stress, including more bio-
energetic resources with which to employ more sophisticated coping strategies and 
embodied strengths. 
The bio-energetic resource of a hopeful and secure future, or meaningful work, is 
about energetic resources, strengths, resilience and pleasure that makes life 
meaningful, while the world can injure these same pathways in ways that require 
understanding, validation, externalization, normalization and re-energizing. 
Identiﬁcation of the classes of intrinsic motivation that can be satisﬁed to confer 
resources, meaning, energy, and resilience, allows one to be strategic in curating a social 
niche. At the same time, by understanding when such resources are damaged or cut-oﬀ, 
we can validate or justify the pain of compromised role-functioning for the purposes of 
healing. As an added level of control, this knowledge is useful for curating energizing 
experiences, as well as shaping one’s predictive model to provide greater anticipatory 
resources (i.e., increased hope and control). We can recenter the importance of hope as

238 
a key therapeutic variable (Erickson et al., 1975) – the physiological energization of 
behavior via a realistic path to a long-term supportive niche – while “hopelessness” 
suﬀers from the lack of such a vision or resources. Alternatively, unpredictability and 
uncertainty are deleterious because they engender a lack of control, which cuts through 
resources with worry and anxiety, and reduces motivation; tools and strategies are 
needed that increase control at this important level. 
Oxytocinergic bio-energetic resources: safety & connection. Oxytocin is a 
bonding chemical, initially recruited during child-birth to bond mother to infant in an 
attachment bond. Children will develop a secure and safe base with which to explore 
the environment when set up correctly, and will become distressed when out of 
proximity to attachment ﬁgures. Children who are deprived of this bond can undergo a 
failure to thrive and develop a range of psychopathological outcomes including autism-
like symptoms, persistently dysregulated HPA axis, stress dysregulation, face-blindness, 
and an inability to respond to trusting physical contact or social pleasure from a primary 
attachment ﬁgure, among others (Cochran et al., 2013; Fries et al., 2008; M. A. Mehta et 
al., 2009; Nelson et al., 2011). Social and monogamous species show signiﬁcant amounts 
of oxytocin in the reward centers of the brain, while more solitary species do not (J. T. 
Cacioppo & Patrick, 2008). Oxytocin captures a need for social connection. 
As people age, oxytocin bonds transcend mother-infant connections to support 
all signiﬁcant friends and relationships, and social baseline theory suggests it should 
subsume attachment theory as a broader frame of how and why all intimate 
relationships provide social co-regulation (Beckes & Coan, 2011; Coan & Sbarra, 2015).

239 
Indeed, oxytocin may scale to support the functioning of entire network communities, 
increasing social alignment by using the neuropeptide as a social glue. Apes spend ten 
percent of their social life grooming one another to facilitate social bonding and stress 
reduction to facilitate “social harmony” (J. T. Cacioppo & Patrick, 2008). Weddings see 
oxytocin levels surge after a ceremony, not just in the wedding party, but in a radiation 
out through family, friends and guests, moving down a gradient of eﬀect the further one 
is from the bride and groom across their social networks; the bride sees the highest 
oxytocin rise, then the bride’s mother, the bride’s father, and ﬁnally the groom (whose 
rise in testosterone inhibits some oxytocin relative to the bride’s family; Zak, 2012). 
Oxytocin may also be a key biological mechanism that ﬂips a “hive switch” turning 
relatively independent people into a highly interdependent superorganism, by 
facilitating de-individuation – where individual identities fall away and one begins to feel 
connected to “something greater than themselves” – during mass events like raves and 
communal dance (Haidt, 2013). Oxytocin captures an ingroup eﬀect, as evident that a 
rise in oxytocin not only increases trust in a relational partner, it increases suspicion of 
those framed as an outgroup (De Dreu et al., 2011) . 
Oxytocin is recruited for non-physical bonds in the establishment of all 
relationships built on psychological trust, safety and connection. The chemical is part of 
a constellation of psychosocial mechanisms in the brain such as mirror neurons, which 
track micro-expressions and body language for signs of comfort and social feedback, as 
well as a representational brain, which models one’s self-concept as “extended” by 
relational partners: an individual “budgets” bioenergetic resources as if familiar others

240 
were part of the self (Noakes, 2007), while the brain responds to threats directed at 
connections as if they were directed at oneself (Beckes et al., 2013; Coan & Sbarra, 
2015). Oxytocin machinery works in concert to model social interdependence physically 
in the brain across barriers of time and space. 
Oxytocin acts as a socially co-regulating, “win-win” feedback loop. As one 
engages in a virtuous cycle of positive interactions, bonding activities and relational 
depth, oxytocin increases feelings of attachment and connection through a sense of 
trust. Studies showed trust can be experimentally induced using oxytocin: in ultimatum 
games where a person can give their money to an anonymous stranger to have it 
tripled, and then the stranger decides how much to give back to the investor, oxytocin 
overrides the rational fears of cheating and betrayal (see: the prisoner’s dilemma ); and 
across variants of the experiment, oxytocin infusion can lead both the investor, and the 
anonymous stranger, to be more trusting and generous (Kosfeld et al., 2005; Zak, 2012). 
Indeed, the handshake likely evolved as a basis for cooperative intergroup trade to 
lubricate cooperation across social divides, in part by overriding rational fears of 
defection in both partners, and creating suﬃcient bilateral trustworthiness – moral 
behavior – to make intergroup trade possible in human prehistory (Zak, 2012). 
Consequently, trust is a potent dynamic at the heart of oxytocin’s eﬀect, creating 
subjective rewards of peace and comfort while turning down perceived social danger, as 
a win-win outcome of social attunement between two people. Trust and trustworthiness 
are embodied resources that facilitate connection and psychological safety. 
The win-win of oxytocin occurs through a virtuous cycle of psychosocial

241 
attunement. As psychosocial feedback of intimacy, openness and authenticity is 
reciprocated in both partners, these conscious and unconscious social cues trigger 
peptide release that iteratively facilitates further connection. The rewards are two-fold: 
a gain in resources, rewards and resilience, and a decrease in psychological costs. 
Oxytocin calms the threat-sensitive amygdala, inhibits fear-conditioning, and quiets 
social fears and worries; importantly, oxytocin is also a potent stress inhibitor, as the 
traumatic stress of loneliness can attest, causing signiﬁcant impairment social cognition 
and leading to paranoia and agoraphobia in extremis. Oxytocin reduces physiological 
and perceived social danger . Concurrently, oxytocin activates the “rest and digest” 
system promoting a subjective sense of peace, calmness and comfort; oxytocin also 
primes the release of dopamine and serotonin, which increases social motivation and 
social pleasure, while desensitizing social threat (J. T. Cacioppo & Patrick, 2008; Gilbert, 
2014; Zak, 2012). Oxytocin also increases pain tolerance, and improves social cognitive 
capacities: it upregulates social attention (screening out non-relational distractions), 
increases facial recognition, sensitizes social cue responsiveness, and facilitates social 
openness and generosity. Oxytocin improves a harmonious sense of connection that 
makes the world feel safe and manageable, but only during states of interdependence. 
Consequently, one can make a bold claim: psychological safety is a relational 
construct. For instance, the data about who gets PTSD on the battleﬁeld also implicates a 
strong social valence. It is not simply those who are exposed to the violence of war who 
become traumatized, but those who feel unable to help their comrades, or have a 
childhood trauma that aﬀects their ability to form trauma bonds, or those who lose the

242 
comrades they were trauma-bonded to, or those who feel connected to the innocents 
who lose their lives (see: moral injury), all of whom are at a far higher risk of developing 
trauma (Junger, 2016). Some trauma research suggests that the acute psychosocial 
damage of trauma is to drive a sense that the world is unsafe which compromises the 
ability to feel safe in relationships, impairing both the relationships and the ability to 
socially co-regulate. This process becomes a self-organizing feedback loop that can 
prevent the ability to feel trust and safety, injure and disrupt important relationships, 
and impair social coregulation. As stress rises, social motivation falls away, a protective 
impulse takes over, hypervigilance is reinforced, and social stress cues repel others, all 
of which puts social connection further out of reach the longer the spiraling continues (J. 
T. Cacioppo & Patrick, 2008). The downward spiral of oxytocin is the traumatic stress of 
social collapse. 
There is an evolutionary reason for why psychological safety and peace are 
facilitated through relationships: if you set up the stress system in this way, humans 
presented with a stressor will be naturally oriented to seek social support as a 
subconscious physiological stress relief tactic (Kikusui et al., 2006; H. Taylor et al., 2000), 
and this serves to bring people together in times of duress. In human prehistory, 
stressors often came in the form of rival outgroups, where it would be useful to rally 
with allies to protect children and mount a defense (Crockford et al., 2017; S. E. Taylor 
et al., 2000). This is a passive stress system in the body works, the tend-and-befriend 
response, and it makes stress regulation, including one’s global sense of threat in the 
world, a measure of one’s connectedness in their social environment. Indeed, one’s

243 
likelihood to both recover from, or grow from, a traumatic social injury like bullying, has 
everything to do with whether they are soothed directly following the encounter, a 
process called social buﬀering (Carnevali et al., 2020; Crockford et al., 2017; Heinrichs et 
al., 2003; Kikusui et al., 2006). Stress- and threat-management are relationally managed. 
Loneliness shows a diﬀerent side to the same dynamic – when insuﬃcient social 
connection is registered through low oxytocin levels, a switch ﬂips wherein individuals 
prepare for the harsh reality of life outside the protective embrace of the group. The 
result is a physiological cascade across bodily systems: the immune system shifts away 
from socially transmitted diseases toward a proinﬂammatory bacterial defense against 
potential physical wounds; sleep dysregulation and heightened vigilance; loss of social 
attention and increased social suspicion from the heightened sense of danger, and a 
variety of other downstream self-regulatory consequences (J. T. Cacioppo & Patrick, 
2008). The social collapse of trauma and loneliness can look very similar, in part because 
a social distancing can self-organize in both the victim and their social network, as self-
protection self-organizes into a spiral dynamic where one avoids social inﬂuences, or 
repels them, making it increasingly diﬃcult to disrupt the cycle of self-organizing 
loneliness. In sum, oxytocin captures a need for trust and safety through relationships as 
a basic orientation to perceived threat which is encountered socially by a social species; 
the loss of relational co-regulation can be framed as an increased exposure to negative 
threat stimuli, and the absence of protective factors to social thriving. 
A note on individual diﬀerences. By disengaging reward sensitivity , as is 
implicated with neurodiversity, one creates the strength of openness , but may

244 
compromise the trait agreeableness to varying degrees. The result is less social 
motivation, which can impair a) the motivation to connect, b) the ease with which one 
feels connection, c) the stability of the perceived connection, and d) the eﬀort 
associated with connecting. This general proﬁle of introversion, which DeYoung suggests 
should be rebranded as detachment, may also make for a dispositional struggle with 
relational co-regulation in times of adversity or due to trauma. Neurodiverse people 
may generally struggle with co-regulation and eﬀort-discounting because all 
relationships feel “higher barrier” to maintain, leading to a proﬁle of fewer, richer 
relationships (greater transitivity in social networks), but also one of potentially greater 
precariousness if these few relationships become strained or in times of duress. A further 
note. Most neurodiverse social “deﬁcits” have less to do with absolute, then relative, 
diﬀerences. Research shows autistic people can be eﬀective conveyors of information, 
and that social deﬁcits go away in congruent communities where authentic 
communication styles and perceived diﬀerences are reduced (D. Price, 2022). In this way, 
oxytocin captures the environment of connection , and whether one can connect in their 
preferable style. 
Let us review some ways in which oxytocin is a social and cognitive resource for 
sustaining positive aﬀect: 
Oxytocin energizes behavior. Oxytocin motivates trustworthiness and generosity, 
as well as social motivation and pleasure by priming the body for dopamine and 
serotonin, which inhibits social threat. Social motivation is critical for the openness, 
curiosity and good humor on which relationships thrive, and the motivation to maintain

245 
these relationships to rehearse baseline social resources like social safety and eﬀort-
discounting. 
Oxytocin feels good (and meaningful). Oxytocin feels subjectively calming, 
comforting and peaceful. It inhibits social danger to maintain the rewards of staying 
in this space. It reinforces the feeling through dopamine to enjoy someone’s company 
and make it motivating to pursue, as well as to get the well-being of turning down 
threat-perception. 
Oxytocin is a resource/psychosocial strength. Oxytocin facilitates states of trust 
and safety by creating the psychosocial resources to attain them. It motivates 
trustworthiness, openness, dynamism and generosity, which are socially attractive, and 
inhibits stress reactivity, which can socially repel others. Oxytocin creates the motivation 
to pursue and rehearse relationships to secure future security and safety. Oxytocin is a 
bio-energetic resource that confers psychosocial strengths which facilitate further 
relationship building. 
Oxytocin confers resilience. Oxytocin inhibits stress reactivity and calms the fear 
centers of the brain, while priming the body to share the resources of others which 
creates eﬀort discounting; i.e. makes the world feel more manageable in the face of 
stressors. 
The bio-energetic resource of a relationship with friends, allies and intimate 
relationships is about energetic resources, strengths, resilience and pleasure that makes 
life meaningful, while the world can injure these same pathways in ways that require 
understanding, validation, externalization, normalization and re-energizing. Identiﬁcation

246 
of the spheres of relationship – intimate, friend, ally and community – that can be 
satisﬁed to confer resources, meaning, energy, and resilience, allows one to be strategic 
in curating a social niche. At the same time, by understanding when such resources are 
damaged or cut-oﬀ, we can validate or justify the pain of compromised role-functioning 
for the purposes of healing. As an added level of control, this knowledge is useful for 
curating energizing experiences, as well as shaping one’s predictive model to provide 
greater anticipatory resources (i.e., increased connection and belonging). We can 
recenter the importance of relationship and belonging as a key therapeutic variable – 
the physiological energization of peace and comfort – while “hypervigilance” suﬀers 
from the perceived danger of social threats absent the social resources with which to 
counter them. Tools and strategies are needed that increase control at this important 
level. 
Serotonergic bio-energetic resources: esteem & respect. Serotonin is a 
neurotransmitter that moderates energy allocation in support of behavioral inhibition, 
emotional stability, self-regulation and defense-oriented motivation systems. There is a 
logic to the systems coordinated by serotonin functioning, and why they are also 
associated with social status, conﬁdence and self-esteem. 
First, Serotonin facilitates a cognitive “brake” that acts in conjunction with a 
“drive” system to create behavioral ﬂexibility: the ability to both pursue desired goals 
and avoid negative outcomes (see: behavioral inhibition system ; BIS). A cognitive brake 
is engaged automatically when there is an uncertainty regarding the relative risk of 
danger and reward, and this is a useful way to passively avoid danger by creating an

247 
automatic risk-avoidance system (Del Guidice, 2018; Gray & McNaughton, 2000). The 
brake operates in part by inhibiting emotion, which is why those who are high in 
serotonin are associated with emotional self-regulation and self-control, but at the 
personal cost of higher emotional inhibition and shyness. High serotonin captures 
behavioral inhibition, both voluntary (self-control) and involuntary (shyness). 
There are two versions of trait neuroticism corresponding to extreme diﬀerences 
in threat sensitivity, i.e. high and low basal serotonin. A highly attuned withdrawal 
system, for instance, is a passive avoidance system lowers the threshold for an individual 
to automatically inhibit their goals, interpretations and strategies in the face of 
uncertainty or error (DeYoung, 2015; Gray & McNaughton, 2000). Alternatively, a 
sensitive active defense system is associated with trait volatility, which more easily 
triggers a “response-ready” activation of the ﬁght-ﬂight-freeze-fawn system (FFFFS) in 
the face of conﬂict and adversity. These in turn correspond to the extreme high and low 
poles of serotonin functioning as geared toward passive avoidance (BIS) or being 
response-sensitive (FFFFS), and are heavily implicated in individual personality 
diﬀerences (Del Giudice, 2018; DeYoung, 2015). Of the two, the behavioral inhibition 
system (BIS) is the less well known. The BIS is a risk-averse approach to “avoidable 
danger” (Gray & McNaughton, 2000, p. 113) which is to say, “avoidable social danger” 
among members of a social species facing social stressors. The BIS works to generally 
promote a security motivation by upregulating anticipatory anxiety around scenarios 
that are seen as punishing (bad for goals) or threatening (cues for punishers; Del 
Giudice, 2018). In other words, the BIS works to generate fears of social rejection,

248 
status- or role-loss, humiliation, defeat, entrapment and so on, and it seems a prime 
culprit in fueling existential angst and worry combined with an overactive proﬁle of 
thought and imagination, and in high conﬂict or stress environments. All of these, in 
turn, are threats to positive goal-directedness, and speciﬁcally, a sense of hope as 
opportunity : a sense of possibility that one’s life path might realistically ﬁnd a 
meaningful, rewarding, and sustainable life, where the positives reasonably outweigh 
the prevalence of threats and punishers. Meanwhile, those with a less sensitive BIS may 
be less haunted by existential woes and a pessimistic outlook (less of a negativity bias 
toward the future), but more prone to situational moodiness, irritability and anger, but 
with a more generally positive outlook. Serotonin captures an anticipation, and 
avoidance, of risk, danger, threat and punishment. 
Finally, bringing these together, higher levels of serotonin are associated with 
greater emotional stability, self-control, inhibition and risk-aversion, as well as reduced 
time-discounting - i.e. a preference for delayed reward (Del Giudice, 2018). Lower levels 
of serotonin are associated with greater emotional instability, reduced self-regulation, 
impulsivity and risk-proneness, as well as higher time-discounting, i.e. a preference for 
immediate gratiﬁcation. It would be tempting to see this as a spectrum of pathology, but 
from a cybernetic perspective, these are adaptive proﬁles suited to diﬀerent 
environments: those that trade-oﬀ the need for goal persistence against goal ﬂexibility. 
Unstable environments with ﬂeeting opportunities and unpredictable risks favor a 
response-ready, risk-tolerant ﬂexibility at the cost of self-control, stability and reactivity. 
More stable social environments require delaying gratiﬁcation to build up embodied

249 
capital (socialization, training and knowledge suited for social roles) over time, and this 
recruits greater emotional self-regulation in service of cooperative goals (DeYoung, 
2015; Digman, 1997; Saucier et al., 2013), at the cost of higher emotional inhibition and 
risk-aversiveness (i.e. temperamental reservedness). In other words, serotonergic 
diﬀerences are implicated in the diﬀerences between fast and slow life history 
strategies (Del Giudice, 2018). The fast strategy uses less emotional stability – more 
emotional reactivity – as a trade-oﬀ for greater goal ﬂexibility and opportunism, as this 
creates ecological responsiveness at the cost of social self-control (DeYoung, 2015; 
Digman, 1997; Saucier et al., 2013). The slow strategy uses emotional stability to 
conserve existing goals, interpretations and strategies in support of goals across bigger 
time horizons while avoiding the risk of opportunism. Serotonin captures individual 
diﬀerences to preferentially relate either to the present moment (fast strategy), or to the 
past and future (slow strategy), depending on whether threats and punishers are 
received as more or less stable. 
Serotonin is often considered a neurotransmitter related to “feeling good” 
because it is associated with mood regulation, sleep, appetite, and overall well-being. 
However, much of this beneﬁt may come from the way serotonin deactivates the 
cognitive brakes when threats and punishers are taken to be well in hand; that is, to be 
manageable, predictable and controllable. When negative outcomes are predicted to be 
unavoidably bad, motivation can be “withdrawn,” which is to say, one’s cognitive brake 
inhibits motivation (DeYoung, 2015). When negative outcomes are uncertain relative to 
positive ones, uncertainty generates anxiety, inhibition and avoidance (Gray &

250 
McNaughton, 2000). Alternatively, the absence of threat – and by extension, the 
absence of threat-sensitivity – is associated with a stable, manageable mood. The 
question is: if one can never live a life free of threat, what can convince the brain that 
one’s stressors are in hand? A plausible mechanism is a form of control one gets from 
social esteem , which is itself a proxy for various kinds of social status (Mahadevan et al., 
2014) as social prestige, attention or dominance. 
Social status is calculated automatically from an algorithm that gathers signiﬁers 
of social esteem and rank from social feedback (see: hierometer ; Mahadevan et al., 
2014; Zink et al., 2008). Social status is processed automatically by the brain, and can 
up- or downregulate mood even when participants are manipulated so that social status 
carries no real social information. In a study by Zink et al. (2008), participants were told 
they were playing a game against bots, so social status diﬀerences were meaningless, 
and their scores were arbitrarily allocated to be doing better or worse on a scoreboard. 
Participants attended this data and EEGs revealed evidence of physiological 
consequences, depressed mood and aﬀect, and psychological pain centers being 
activated in the losing condition; the inverse was observed in the winning condition. 
This holds true across social hierarchies in monkeys, lobsters and humans, where higher 
serotonin levels are correlated with high status and self-esteem and conﬁdence, and low 
serotonin was correlated with low social status and esteem (Raleigh et al., 1984; Wright, 
1995). However, as with dopamine, low basal serotonin may instead motivate stronger 
esteem-seeking behavior, and so individual diﬀerences correspond to more (slow 
strategies) and less (fast strategies) stable serotonin levels.

251 
Serotonin levels thus ﬂuctuate based on social feedback about social status as a 
proxy for general threat exposure in several ways. First, one’s social status predicts the 
frequency and intensity of threats, social and otherwise, that people might be 
vulnerable to given their reputation, and depending on whether one is in a stable or 
unstable hierarchy; for instance, in a stable hierarchy, threats may decrease as one 
achieves higher rank, while in unstable hierarchies, bullying threats may decrease while 
status-challenging threats increase (Booth et al., 1989; 2006; Mazur & Booth, 1998). 
Serotonin captures the landscape of threat. Second, one’s social status can oﬀer a 
protective quality when status and reputation are a proxy for social resources that one 
can draw on to mitigate those threats; for instance, greater access to money or alliances 
to protect one’s station. Serotonin captures one’s resources to deal with threats. Finally, 
status is social feedback about our perceived competence and prestige, which in turn 
energizes conﬁdence as a resource to deal with threats either directly or indirectly; i.e. 
respect is a social signal that we have useful skills to directly deal with threats, or 
indirectly by providing a social contribution that can be exchanged for support to deal 
with threats (i.e., social capital ). Serotonin captures one’s perceived self-eﬃcacy. 
In summary, threats occur when people navigate social scenarios where role 
performance is evaluated or conﬂict outcomes are assessed, and a person can fail and 
lose station; when an individual succeeds despite these threats, serotonin is boosted 
as a “level up” or “win” signal to capture how the social landscape has changed in the 
way it makes the world seem less threatening and thus, more rewarding. Serotonin 
captures our esteem, conﬁdence and place in the prestige hierarchy as feedback about

252 
how threatening – or not threatening – the world may be given our station. 
As prestige exists on pyramid-like hierarchies, we can say that serotonin is 
capturing one’s vertical relationships in their respective groups (see: hierometer; 
Mahadevan et al., 2014) . However, there are multiple paths to vertical ascendance, and 
serotonin captures them all. For instance, one pathway is likely the “win-win” of 
prosocial prestige that comes from membership in, and contribution to, an 
interdependent community. We see this reﬂected in the functioning of oxytocin to 
prime the body to release serotonin (along with dopamine; Zak, 2012) as a threat and 
stress reducer, and the partial mediation of self-esteem from group belonging (see: 
sociometer theory ; Leary & Baumeister, 2000). Following an episode of bullying, for 
instance, a defeated animal that is immediately soothed and groomed shows far less 
risk of converting social defeat into a pathological state, and here, the phenomenon 
called social buﬀering likely reﬂects a signal that there has not been a catastrophic loss 
of status or ejection from the group altogether (Carnevali et al., 2020). However, there 
are at least two other kinds of relationship to vertical social dimensions and stress 
mitigation. One is an increase in personal control, conﬁdence and decisiveness related to 
victories in win-lose contests. The substrate devoted to the competitive games that 
ensures moves in status and prestige involves testosterone. Testosterone operates as a 
rough proxy to facilitate game-playing to promote win-lose social status in a zero-sum 
fashion: testosterone rises, and stress decreases, in those who win a competitive 
contest against an evenly matched opponent, while the inverse is true for the loser, who 
sees a rise in stress and a decrease in testosterone. This is called the winning eﬀect

253 
(Booth et al., 1989, 2006; Mazur & Booth, 1998) which brings about the bioenergetic 
resources to make subsequent wins, and motivation to pursue them, more likely. 
Serotonin captures one’s self-eﬃcacy to bring about a win , as critically, the winning 
eﬀect is not observed when the outcome is determined to be one of chance. In group 
competitions, not only does this phenomenon extend to whole teams that win as found 
in a variety of studies of sports competitions, it also holds for the fans of the winning 
team (Bernhardt et al., 1998). In this way, zero sum “wins” can extend to non-zero-sum 
teams when one team beats another in a zero-sum fashion. In women, this mechanism 
works much the same, with some nuanced diﬀerence: testosterone rises in a team of 
female soccer players but rises are arrayed based on the popularity of players on the 
team, with the most popular receiving the highest boost, which likely captures the self-
eﬃcacy of the group as a whole. Testosterone thus captures the stress relief of embodied 
conﬁdence when one bests another in a competitive game – including games to win the 
relative prestige from superior expertise in a prosocial domain (i.e., best teacher) – 
where self-eﬃcacy is captured as a decisive, calming and conﬁdent energy. However, it 
should be noted that diﬀerent kinds of “wins” are more or less sustainable. Wins 
through dominating others, or bullying, builds conﬂict and jeopardizes prosocial 
reputation, while wins through exploiting others does the same. Ultimately, the most 
sustainable source of conﬁdence and esteem, where skill-based wins align with freely 
given respect and esteem, are those where one plays a win-win role in a community, 
one that need not be zero-sum, and thus is also less threatening and more secure. 
While social esteem and conﬁdence can be built up through games for status,

254 
both prosocial and win-lose in nature, the mechanism of subconsciously and 
automatically seeking feedback about one’s social esteem as a proxy for conﬁdence and 
threat-stress amelioration is one that can backﬁre. Loss collapse might be a way to 
speak of scenarios characterized by excessive social losses, loss of hierarchical 
positioning or signiﬁcant defeats that create an internalized state of mental defeat, all of 
which compromise further game-playing and social positioning which prevent further 
wins. The bullying literature bears this out as one that drives uncontrollable perceptions 
of one’s inherent unattractiveness and un-intelligence, while others note the role of 
defeat in engendering an uncontrollable inner critic (Björkqvist, 2001; Gilbert, 1992b; 
2005a). All of these send stressors which in turn send status information that can be 
received and reﬂected disrespectfully, which reinforces the eﬀect of seeking to avoid 
status- and competition-priming scenarios, further putting wins out of reach. Serotonin 
captures an unsustainable dynamic wherein loss of social games and positions can feed 
back into further losses through loss collapse. 
Let us review the four ways in which serotonergic energy is a cognitive and social 
resource for sustaining positive aﬀect. 
Serotonin energizes behavior. Serotonin energizes conﬁdence and self-esteem 
toward games for prestige and dominance (testosterone), which is critical to playing 
those games and attaining those positions. When someone suﬀers losses as the inverse 
of the “winning eﬀect,” one is not only de-energized, they will look to avoid games for 
status or social scenarios where status and prowess are primed (Booth et al., 1989, 
2006; Mazur & Booth, 1998).

255 
Serotonin feels good (and meaningful). While serotonin is often framed as a 
“happiness” chemical, it is likely more associated with social feedback about social 
success of a “social win,” which confers raised status, more resources, fewer threats, and 
consolidated competencies with which to maintain what was gained. The subjective 
feeling of social esteem is one of social respect internalized as self-respect, and a sense 
that this confers social security, communal signiﬁcance and social deference to role-
based skills, expertise and leadership (DeYoung, 2013). Serotonin can capture one’s 
service to the community as a source of social security. 
Serotonin is a resource/psychosocial strength. When one wins or rises in social 
status, one is decisive, conﬁdent, calm, deliberate and focused, even as stress levels 
decline. When one suﬀers a loss, pain centers of the brain are activated, aﬀect is 
depressed, further competitive or status-primed scenarios are avoided. Serotonin is a 
bioenergetic resource associated with social wins – the “winning eﬀect” – that are not 
only necessary to get more wins, but that predict doing so. Serotonin makes gains in 
esteem through wins of competition or role-performance more likely, and helps 
consolidate the competencies of self-eﬃcacy. 
Serotonin confers resilience. When one has the positive aﬀect of an assuaged 
serotonergic system, one can inhibit stress and negative aﬀect – volatility, impulsivity, 
reactivity, and aggression – which then positions one to use more prosocial, long-term, 
sublimated coping strategies and embodied strengths. The “winning eﬀect” suggests 
this state is not only necessary to beget further wins, it predicts it, which by deﬁnition, 
creates a resilience to conﬂict or threats of loss.

256 
The bio-energetic resource of a relationship with status and respect is about 
energetic resources, strengths, resilience and pleasure that makes life meaningful, while 
the world can injure these same pathways in ways that require understanding, 
validation, externalization, normalization and re-energizing. Identiﬁcation of the classes 
of zero-sum, non-zero sum, and personal “wins” that can be satisﬁed to confer 
resources, meaning, energy, and resilience, allows one to be strategic in curating a social 
niche. At the same time, by understanding when such resources are damaged or cut-oﬀ, 
we can validate or justify the pain of compromised role-functioning for the purposes of 
healing. As an added level of control, this knowledge is useful for curating energizing 
experiences, as well as shaping one’s predictive model to provide greater anticipatory 
resources (i.e., increased conﬁdence and control). Helping to curate energetic resources 
can beneﬁt both positive mood and personal self-eﬃcacy, while understanding the 
vulnerable and unsettling psychological states that occur as normal responses to social 
threats can help to normalize them and stabilize spiral dynamics. Tools and strategies 
are needed that increase control at this important level. 
Biosocial Niche Injuries: De-energization, Pain, Liabilities and Vulnerability 
The costs of biosocial models come from social experiences that deny, injure or 
sever social resources, and open one to a variety of costs – de-energization, pain, 
vulnerability and psychosocial liabilities – that confer spiral dynamics. These costs are 
predictable, and exert their inﬂuence in the experiencing, and subconscious anticipation, 
of these classes of events. An important implication is that these may be etiologically 
neglected pathways that account for some of the most mysterious and intractable

257 
dimensions of mental ill-health. Importantly, the evolutionary mechanisms outlined 
herein are psychopathological because they sabotage conscious self-regulation, but can 
be ameliorated contextually and relationally. We will further explore the interaction of 
these mechanisms as niche dynamics in the next section . 
Entrapment: incentive disengagement, reverted escape, depressive realism and 
loss of hope. Because motivation and curiosity are connected to goal-directed behavior, 
conditions that inhibit goal-directed behavior are injurious to the psychological 
resources of hope, control and faith as they are connected to one’s expectation of a 
positive or secure future. Entrapment is a moderately signiﬁcant antecedent to 
depression that comes from a sense of being “stuck” in negative life circumstances 
despite fantasies of escape; entrapment is mediated by hopelessness -– a reduced 
motivation to act and pessimism about the future -– and a lack of cognitive control to 
aﬀect change (H. Choi & Shin, 2023; Gilbert & Allan, 1998; Gilbert & Irons, 2004; P. J. 
Taylor et al., 2011). Related challenges include traumatic stress of a catastrophic loss of 
control, or the anticipatory anxiety of predicted threats to goals and opportunities. 
There are a variety of interwoven phenomena that combine in a sense of 
entrapment, all of which have substantiating evidence that are beyond the scope of this 
review. In a study by Dixon and Fisch (1998), a chair was ﬁxed to the ﬂoor during an 
interview where subjects were asked stressful and challenging questions that resulted in 
arrested ﬂight : minimal facial expressions, averted eye gaze, and reduced environment 
scanning, similar to defense behaviors in other animals. In Seligman’s (1975) learned 
helplessness experiments, dogs were presented with uncontrollable aversive stimuli,

258 
which led to failure to pursue escape when the opportunity arose. The learned 
helplessness depression model for humans, based on the perceived uncontrollability of 
events, has been useful in predicting inﬂuences on low mood, and comparing the 
biological and psychological eﬀects between helplessness and depression (Gilbert & 
Allan, 2001). Resource allocation theory emphasizes that the brain normatively invests 
energy into those strategies and goals with the most plausible vectors of success, and 
de-energizing those options with little hope of payoﬀ; data suggests that changes in 
social circumstance can re-energize behavior when new options become plausible 
(Nesse, 2000; Nesse & Williams, 1996). Incentive disengagement theory aligns with 
resource allocation theory, in that depressive states are facilitative of a necessary 
disengagement from strategies that will not pay oﬀ to allow switching to more adaptive 
courses (Klinger, 1975; 1993); indeed, commitment to goals that are impossible to 
achieve is associated with worsening depression. Role commitments are a type of 
ongoing goal that pays oﬀ proportionately to one’s investment while being costly to 
change; sunk cost theory (Leahy, 1997; 2000) suggests that when rewards drop oﬀ in a 
bad career or relationship relative to expectations, one can feel stuck and become 
depressed. Finally, depressive realism is when people accurately perceive the barriers to 
escaping a negative situation such as an oppressive social environment, which then 
curtails the biopsychological resources necessary to overcome their circumstance (Alloy 
& Abramson, 1988; Hanna et al., 2000); depressive realism ﬂips cognitive behavioral 
assumptions by suggesting that suﬀerers are more realistic in appraising negative social 
situations relative to controls and it is their realism about their barriers that is

259 
demotivating; however, this can lead to cognitive distortions as the iterative eﬀects of 
low mood create progressively more unrealistic forms of pessimism and helplessness. 
All of the existing non-social theories of depression (for a review, see: Gilbert, 
2001a) can be accounted for as injuries to the balance of a cybernetic system that 
tethers psychological resources like motivation and control to a) anticipated positive 
outcomes or b) the avoidance of negative ones. However, while these models suggest 
that biological mechanisms arrest one’s ability for self-determination, the ultimate 
antecedents are non-biological - it is one’s relationship to their social world that injures 
a biological substrate. Dopamine functioning likely has an inbuilt Catch-22: the greater 
one’s barriers in life, the less resources one has to reduce those barriers. Consequently, 
one can reach invisible critical thresholds where one’s relationship to the social 
landscape of goals becomes precipitously unsustainable . The various non-social theories 
of depression capture the diﬀerent dynamics of motivational collapse as diﬀerent paths 
to breakdown between a person and their functional relationship with all goals that 
span time and space: being trapped in an aversive situation; the loss of motivating 
options; the need to facilitate disengagement from faulty goals; a commitment to 
impossible paths; being stuck in roles, relationships and scenarios that have become 
under-rewarding relative to the investment; and/or accurately perceiving one’s barriers 
to one’s thriving or escape. 
Indeed, depression in small amounts may be functional and adaptive: by 
facilitating the disengagement from goals that no longer serve us, or roles and 
relationships have become unrewarding, or when the costs of change are high,

260 
depression is a “letting the ﬁelds lie fallow” that helps create space to form new 
motivating visions and paths. Healthy depression is the need to analyze what is not 
working and form new, high-level goals that require discovering goal options, 
development of goal paths, and investment, all while motivational reserves are 
temporarily impaired by the lack of an organizing vision, slowing the process. 
This functional depression, however, sets the stage for a mechanism like 
motivational-control to backﬁre under a number of conditions, leading to the spiral 
dynamics of motivational collapse. For instance, when the presence of negative barriers 
or an absence of positive options generalize across multiple mentalities, punishers and 
threats can eclipse motivating hopes and rewards across goal-systems. This is likely a 
key mechanism of internalization in moving external barriers to an internalized state. 
The result is a ratio of eﬀort-to-reward that may become strained across life domains, 
and total collapse (i.e., clinical depression) can ensue. Motivational depression can occur 
from generalized barriers that self-organize into a self-reinforcing dynamic. Alternatively, 
when one sees collapse or ratio-strain across a few mentality domains, one may become 
more reliant on existing goals and a risk for addiction can appear. As some goals become 
less rewarding, and other goals are sought for motivational resources and become 
disproportionately reinforced as a result, major niche connections are lost and a single 
reward system becomes over-reinforced. This is a person looking for all of their 
motivational resources in the anticipation of a single niche type, which then becomes a 
motivational pathway to addiction. Addiction can self-organize from an imbalance of 
niche goals. Finally, when one sees a lack of opportunity in long-term goals relative to

261 
immediate gratiﬁcation, one can reinforce short-term thinking as a means to avoid 
feelings of long-term helplessness; as an entrenched bias toward being in the moment, 
this imbalance prevents one from working toward curating a long-term niche. 
All of these dynamics interact with neurotype factors. Neurodiverse people may 
be generally disposed toward immediate gratiﬁcation from reduced reward sensitivity, 
which can further bias one toward immediate stimulation and away from the long-term 
(however, autism can compensate for this with a motivation to avoid stressors that 
engenders long-term thinking). This can make long-term positioning diﬃcult to engage 
and work toward. ADHD in particular may be more susceptible to general niche 
imbalance across domains. Novelty-seeking can lead one toward diverse forms of 
unsustainable social situations particularly when one is outside a stable niche to curate 
novelty sustainably. The result may be moving from imbalanced situation to imbalanced 
situation, which reinforces short-term immediacy to the exclusion of long-term niche 
construction. As an interactive social determinant, capitalist economic factors only 
support neurodiverse contributors after they ﬁnd a monetizable contribution, which 
rewards those who are either already privileged, or those who ﬁnish their niche 
exploration and experimentation with enough time to position themselves for success 
while they still have early access to developmental supports. For the majority of 
neurodiverse people, who require a longer-developmental process to ﬁnd an 
idiosyncratic niche, this is insuﬃcient and unsustainable. This is a non-exhaustive list, 
but in general, neurodiverse niches are harder to attain support and resources for, and 
this may create high barriers that reinforce all forms of imbalance and risk for anxiety

262 
and depression. 
Let us review the four ways in which entrapment is a cognitive and social drag on 
sustaining positive aﬀect. 
Entrapment de-energizes behavior. The loss of dopaminergic motivation from the 
loss of pathways to change or escape, shuts oﬀ cognitive motivation, preventing the 
ability to position oneself in ways that could facilitate escape. In addition to avolition, 
the inability to be motivated, entrapment leads to anhedonia and the inability to feel 
pleasure which reduces reward anticipation (Gilbert & Allan, 1998). There is a lack of 
exploratory behavior, increased behavioral avoidance, and reduced social dominance. 
Entrapment is painful (and feels meaningless). Anhedonia and low mood are 
common and produce a range of subjective eﬀects, from events washing together 
without any emotional gradient to distinguish the good from the bad, as well as a lack of 
positive aﬀect with which to buﬀer negative outcomes, leading to baseline sadness and 
irritation. A sensitization of the FFFFS and a potential for dissociation may emerge from a 
catastrophic loss of control and a persistent sense of being overwhelmed. Nothing feels 
worth pursuing, enjoyment and purpose feel alien and out of reach. 
Entrapment saps resources/is a psychosocial liability. Entrapment leads to an 
internalized state of helplessness and hopelessness. This is mediated by a lack of 
cognitive control which can compromise self-eﬃcacy (H. Choi & Shin, 2023). A general 
de-energization of one’s aﬀect leads to a loss of motivation and social pleasure, which 
leads to performance issues in roles and relationships; for instance, there is a reduced 
threshold whereby the eﬀort-to-work ratio becomes imbalanced and motivation is lost

263 
(Gilbert & Allan, 1998). A lack of positive aﬀect is considered a social liability (Shackman 
et al., 2016). 
Entrapment confers vulnerability. The inability to motivate in the face of 
stressors leads to role and relationship failures that give rise to real world threats, while 
the loss of social performance can lead to loss of support in the face of those threats (J. 
T. Cacioppo & Patrick, 2008). Increased stress burns through neurotransmitters, and can 
further erode motivational resources (Gilbert, 1992b). A variety of restorative processes 
are disrupted, including normal sleep, appetite and weight changes, while activity in the 
amygdala register a loss of control as mood instability. 
Isolation: loneliness, alienation, and a thwarted need to belong. Because peace 
and comfort are connected to social connection and belonging (J. T. Cacioppo & Patrick, 
2008; Zak, 2012), experiences that leave one feeling isolated, alienated or rejected are 
injurious to the psychological resources of safety, trust and prosociality as they are 
connected to one’s expectation of relationships and community. Loneliness is “the 
aversive state that results from discrepancies between the relationships one has and 
those one desires" (J. T. Cacioppo & Patrick, 2008). Loneliness is a moderate predictor of 
depression as a form of alienation (J. T. Cacioppo & Patrick, 2008; Hari, 2018) that 
typically comes from that perceived isolation of having an insuﬃcient number of 
relationships that are satisfying, congruent and authentic. In this sense, isolation is not 
necessarily an absence of people, nor is it the absence of relationships, but a lack of 
secure relationships where there is perceived authenticity, depth and congruence (J. T. 
Cacioppo et al., 2009). Loneliness is mediated by social barriers to high-quality

264 
relationships, individual diﬀerences in vulnerability to isolation, one’s ability to self-
regulate the social and emotional challenges that follow, and the ability to manage the 
eﬀects on one’s cognitive representations and expectations about the social world (J. T. 
Cacioppo & Patrick, 2008). Related challenges include the traumatic stress of enduring 
loneliness, or the anticipatory anxiety of abandonment and rejection. 
There are a variety of interleaving mechanisms to loneliness that combine to 
create perceived isolation, which cannot be explored in depth here. Gilbert (2001a) 
reviewed the attachment theory of depression as occurring when individuals suﬀer 
major losses to ﬁgures of support and aﬀection. The experiments by Harlow et al. (1965) 
highlighted the signiﬁcance of such ﬁgures, as baby chimps presented with food or a 
terry cloth simulacrum of a care-giver, chose the caregiver. Bowlby’s (1969, 1973, 1980) 
work highlighted the protest-despair reaction, where initial protestations are designed 
to signal distress to motivate the mother’s return, while despair registers the failure of 
distress by deactivating the behavior, a useful “hunker down” response in a potentially 
dangerous environment. However, as is consistent with social baseline theory, the 
broader dynamics of social abandonment are germane. Brown and Harris (1978) found 
that lack of support and attachment losses were social antecedents to depression. John 
Cacioppo (J. T. Cacioppo & Patrick, 2008; J. T. Cacioppo et al., 2009; J. T. Cacioppo et al., 
2013; S. Cacioppo et al., 2015) has explored the multiple reinforcing “levels” to the 
loneliness phenomenon. First, individual factors include the degree to which one 
inherits a high or low need for social connection, and their sensitivity to social pain. 
Loneliness creates signiﬁcant social pain and stress, even as it attacks the ability to cope

265 
with the emotions and stressors of feeling isolated; the longer the loneliness persists, 
the more restorative functions of sleep and self-soothing are dysregulated. The 
fundamental solution to loneliness is the ability to entice people to make a connection, 
which requires an autonomous and cooperative act from another person, and this 
becomes degraded the longer one is lonely. The chronic stress of loneliness sends social 
signals that repulse social actors, and the resulting cognitive disruptions impair social 
performance. Social motivation and social pleasure ultimately collapse (oxytocin-primed 
dopamine activity is inhibited), and self-protective behaviors self-organize into a threat-
sensitive hypervigilance and paranoia which further isolates the individual. Social 
cognition self-organizes around unhappiness, pessimism and anticipation of threat, 
which can lead to unfair, defensive and reactive attributions of negative social 
motivations to others, which further burdens social connection and reciprocity. As the 
ability to regulate (and co-regulate) stress decreases, the perception of threats and 
stressors increases, and actual stressors - from exploitation of vulnerability to the lack of 
allies in troubling times - rise in an unsustainable spiral dynamic. 
Loneliness as a social cause of depression is related to the injury and withdrawal 
of positive support systems that co-regulate stress and restore health. In other words, 
loneliness is a depression from a lack of positive social factors rather than the presence 
of adverse factors. Loneliness injures relational feedback loops that tether psychological 
resources - safety and trust - to the presence of positive co-regulating relationships, and 
the absence of social threats. There are biological mechanisms involved in the 
depression of loneliness that inhibit rational thought, social insight, positive aﬀect and

266 
self-regulation, but these are ultimately accounted for by non-biological origins - social 
isolation or alienation are antecedents that etiologically impair biological substrates like 
oxytocin functioning. These biological mechanisms can be seen as having an inbuilt 
Catch-22 that predictably leads to undesired outcomes under fraught social conditions: 
the more one needs a cooperative, intimate partner to co-regulate stressors and 
threats, the harder it is to entice a prospective person to do so (J. T. Cacioppo & Patrick, 
2008). One can further extrapolate an invisible critical threshold where one’s 
relationship to the social landscape becomes precipitously unsustainable. We might call 
social collapse the tendency toward a spiral dynamic that occurs when the internalized 
consequences of negative social conditions make it harder to create or maintain the 
social networks that are needed to restore balance. These self-organizing liabilities 
include: a) the loss of the ability to self-regulate and self-soothe; b) the loss of social 
motivation and social aﬀect; c) the loss of social cognition and social reasoning; and d) 
the loss of the ability to manage stress and threat defenses. 
Much of the adverse consequences of loneliness result because social pain and 
its various eﬀects are adaptive at small scales: manageable social pain protects 
individuals from social isolation by motivating reconnection in small amounts in small 
time horizons (J. T. Cacioppo & Patrick, 2008). Healthy loneliness is the need to 
evaluate what is not working in one’s relationships and social networks and repair 
injuries therein by fostering social attention, motivation, generosity, gratitude, 
forgiveness, graciousness and trustworthiness, in part because a lack of social reserves 
increases the salience and value of social resources, engendering social sensitivity and

267 
attunement (J. T. Cacioppo & Patrick, 2008; Leary, 1999; 2004) . 
This functional negativity and social sensitivity, however, sets the stage for socially 
co-regulating psychological mechanisms to backﬁre under a number of conditions, and 
potentially, to the spiral dynamics of social collapse. For instance, when the presence of 
negative disruptions or the absence of positive social signals stacks across relationships 
and life domains, a general sense of isolation and alienation can self-organize and 
disconnection becomes internalized. A generalized feeling of social disconnection, self-
protection, lost social motivation and sense of social danger, can preoccupy one in their 
relationships with hypervigilance about further social threats, further impairing existing 
connections and resyncing. The inability to talk about, normalize, validate and center 
this dynamic within relationships may further impair the potential of communication to 
feel understood, or to harness social resources with which to problem-solve. 
Disconnection depression can occur from generalized barriers that self-organize into a 
self-reinforcing dynamic. Alternatively, when one feels they can only be themselves, or 
safe, within a certain kind of relationship, they may let certain types of relationship 
atrophy, neglecting important kinds of support and resources for the future. 
Alternatively, when one feels incongruent at an identity level with many of the 
communities around them, they may become isolated in a crowd, which is real isolation 
premised on invisible psychological variables. Relational imbalances may emerge from 
the dynamics of safety and threat. Finally, phenomena such as agoraphobia and 
paranoia may be uniquely understandable from within the iterated feedback loop of 
internalized isolation, as paranoia reflects an emerging state of vigilance to social threat as

268 
a switch to a solitary mode of survival, while agoraphobia is the self-organization of 
collapsed social motivation and heightened self-protection. Extreme forms of 
psychopathology are etiological endpoints of protracted self-organizing niche 
imbalances. 
All of these dynamics interact with neurotype factors. Neurodiverse people may 
generally be disposed toward social barriers of an invisible, psychological nature, leading 
to perceived disconnection, alienation, lack of social rewards, increased energetic 
demands from social performance, and risk of social punishment from norm-violations. 
This increases the barriers, costs and threats of social milieus relative to their rewards, 
which may engender a generalized loss of social safety, loss of social motivation, 
anticipated sense of threat and punishment, and diﬃculty with social positioning. Much 
of this is oﬀset by ideal social positioning in congruent communities, but the ability to do 
this successfully may be dependent on early access and development of such networks, 
lest self-organizing barriers impede the ability to identify and access these communities 
and relationships later in life. ASD may struggle to ﬁnd congruent communities early in 
life, which can lead to a failure to develop prosocial skills, reciprocity and sensitivities, 
though evidence suggests this is possible in congruent communities where norms allow 
people to connect in the ways they feel comfortable, around specialty knowledge and 
interests (D. Price, 2022). ADHD may struggle due to greater social sensitivities and 
threat-reactivity, coupled with chronic experiences of rejection, exclusion and feelings 
of being diﬀerent, which activate the spiral dynamics of social collapse more quickly and 
easily. For instance, rejection sensitive dysphoria (RSD; Beaton et al., 2022; Berenson et

269 
al., 2009; Bondü & Esser, 2015) sees a traumatic stress reaction lead to dysphoric states 
at a relatively low threshold. In both cases, the ability to identify paths to community 
and healthy relationships can be developmentally disrupted, and identity development 
may also be impaired. This non-exhaustive list shows that a mineﬁeld of social factors 
may generally impede niche-construction due to the diﬃculty of ﬁnding congruent 
supports and communities, and navigating hostile cultures that are normed and valued 
incompatibly leading to social punishment, all of which may present unsustainable 
developmental inﬂuences that can self-organize early in life. 
Let us review the four ways in which loneliness is a cognitive and social drag on 
sustaining positive aﬀect. 
Isolation de-energizes behavior. Loneliness de-energizes social behavior needed 
to synergize with others, which in turn is necessary to create bonds that facilitate 
openness, generosity and reciprocity, de-energizing those as well. Oxytocin primes the 
body for dopamine, a proxy for social motivation, which can collapse in the face of 
chronic loneliness (J. T. Cacioppo & Patrick, 2008; Zak, 2012); this is reinforced by a rise 
in stress, which induces self-protection and social avoidance. 
Isolation is painful (and feels meaningless). Loneliness is associated with social 
pain (J. T. Cacioppo & Patrick, 2008). Amygdala activation depressed mood leading to 
sadness, fear, irritability, and rumination. Pain thresholds are lowered. A lack of oxytocin 
disinhibits stress, sensitizes the FFFFS, and increases norepinephrine. Negative aﬀect 
prevents the enjoyment of social experiences, and hypervigilance ﬁxates on threatening 
content that generates widespread social fears and a “spreading” of threat-perceptions.

270 
The world feels disconnected, unsafe, and hollow. Overeating (sugary foods) and 
increased substance use are common coping strategies. 
Isolation saps resources/is a psychosocial liability. The inability to reciprocate 
social cues is a social liability that repels prospective partners; the inability to register 
trust and safety creates a stressed and vigilant preoccupation that others ﬁnd 
disconcerting. States that emerge from connection - openness, generosity and 
prosociality - are diﬃcult to access, even if they are typically considered personal values. 
Stress and fear cloud social cognition, misattribute social motives, and prevent 
constructive thinking and problem-solving. There is a loss of attentional control, goal-
persistence, and conﬁdence in social skills (J. T. Cacioppo & Patrick, 2008). People are 
more desperate, impulsive, defensive, punitive, and biased toward the negative, while 
being less generous. 
Isolation confers vulnerability. The inability to access states that de-escalate the 
stress response can induce a spiral dynamic that compounds as one a) perceives more 
stressors, b) copes with them less well, and c) induces more real stressors in an 
environment with diminishing support (Cacioppo & Patrick, 2008). Loneliness creates a 
pro-inﬂammatory state associated with a range of disturbed health factors, including 
increased risk of viruses. Cardiac health, blood pressure and sleep quality are impaired. 
Social defeat: humiliation, subjugation, and a thwarted need for status and 
respect. Because conﬁdence and self-esteem are connected to social status and 
competitive games (see: hierometer ; Mahadevan et al., 2016; Zink et al., 2008), 
conditions of humiliating loss or subjugation are injurious to the psychological resources

271 
of security, risk-taking, and decisiveness as they are connected to expectations of one’s 
respect and good standing. Social defeat is an experience of being dominated, 
humiliated or devalued following a hostile social interaction in a group setting, despite 
resistance, and particularly as it carries real or perceived injury to one’s social standing 
or positioning (Björkqvist, 2001; Hollis & Kabbaj, 2014; Oh, 2015; Sapolsky, 1994; Selten 
& Cantor-Graae, 2005). Mental defeat , as internalized social defeat, is a moderate 
predictor of depression from a feeling of powerlessness (Gilbert, 1992b; Gilbert & Allan, 
1998; 2001; Hari, 2018; Hollis & Kabbaj, 2014). A state of defeat involves perceived 
inferiority, unfavorable social comparisons, submissive behavior, loss of ambition, low 
self-esteem, and intrusive self-criticism typically following social losses or lost social 
station (Gilbert, 2001a). The phenomenon is mediated by social barriers to competitive 
performance (for instance, immigrants lacking support or increased competition in 
urban environments; Selten & Cantor-Graae, 2005), individual diﬀerences in status-
seeking (see: assertiveness aspect of extraversion ; DeYoung, 2015), one’s ability to self-
regulate the social and emotional challenges of defeat, and the ability to manage the 
eﬀects on one’s cognitive representations and expectations about their induced 
perceptions of inferiority and self-criticism (Gilbert, 1992b; 2001a; 2001b; Gilbert & 
Allan, 1998). Related challenges include the traumatic stress of multiple defeats (Hollis & 
Kabbaj, 2014), the vicarious defeat of watching another person be defeated (Carnevali et 
al., 2020), or the anticipatory anxiety of competitive and status-primed environments. 
There are a variety of levels to the phenomenon of social defeat that combine to 
create the experience of feeling subordinated against one’s will, which cannot be

272 
explored in depth here. Gilbert (2001a) reviewed the social rank theory of depression as 
similar to the attachment theory of depression, in that it occurs in a social context 
(intragroup conﬂict), has social consequences (submissive withdrawal and behavioral 
inhibition) and is mediated by communicated social information: who has gained or lost 
rank. A complimentary frame for defeat is as a form of conﬂict stress, where the 
communicated social information is about who is the victor or loser in a competition, 
typically where the loser’s submission signals fail to end aggression from the victor (see: 
arrested ﬂight and suppressed anger ; Björkqvist, 2001; Gilbert, 2001a; Gilbert & Allan, 
1998). In animals, defeat has been studied in the “resident intruder” paradigm, where 
an animal is let into the cage of another and allowed to dominate the latter in a period 
of non-lethal conﬂict; the resulting biopsychosocial consequences for the loser have 
been mapped onto the bullying literature in humans where there are striking parallels 
between human bullying and social defeat in macaques, baboons, rats and pigs 
(Björkqvist, 2001). A single defeat experience can result in profound bodily changes 
from elevated heart rate and blood pressure, stress-promoting adrenocorticotropin 
hormone and hyperthermia, other lingering eﬀects: changes to body temperature 
rhythms, retarded growth, sensitization to stressors more broadly, reduced 
testosterone and increased anxiety (Hollis & Kabbaj, 2014). Chronic defeat (4-10 days of 
defeat encounters) adds layers of marked biobehavioral changes: anhedonia, social 
avoidance, submissiveness, hyperphagia (insatiable hunger), reduced exploration, 
locomotion, and sexual behavior; changes to thermoregulation, immune system 
functioning, cardiac and circadian rhythms, serotonin metabolism and receptor binding,

273 
to name a few (Hollis & Kabbaj, 2014). Authors have noted that symptoms of defeat are 
a near match for major depressive disorder (Hollis & Kabbaj, 2014), and the subjective 
experience of defeat is a more powerful predictor of depression than hopelessness 
(Gilbert & Allan, 1998). In humans, a variety of cognitive, behavioral and social 
consequences commingle in people who feel defeated: loneliness, depression, high 
anxiety, reduced self-esteem, increased submissiveness, social withdrawal, unpopularity 
among peers, feelings of being a failure, feeling wrongfully unintelligent and ugly (i.e., 
potent self-criticism), poor academic achievement, a subjective feeling of 
maladjustment, and grave dissatisfaction with school and peer relations (Björkqvist, 
2001; Gilbert, 1992b). 
Social defeat as a social cause of depression is related to abuses of power, or loss 
of status and respect, in the face of futile defenses; this leads to dysregulated defenses, 
motivation, self-esteem, communication and help-seeking behavior (Gilbert, 2001a). In 
other words, defeat is a depression from the presence of adverse conditions (signals 
may include an absence of respect) rather than a lack of supportive factors, though 
defeat is made considerably worse in the absence of social support (see: social 
buﬀering; Björkqvist, 2001; Carnevali et al., 2020; Crockford et al., 2017). Internalized 
social defeat is mental defeat, which is typically the result of unbuﬀered, chronic social 
defeat experiences. Mental defeat is the injured ability to coregulate the vertical 
relationships in one’s life, which disrupts psychological resources like conﬁdence and 
self-esteem; it is both caused by an absence of healthy social conﬂict and protections on 
social positions, and prevents one from creating such conditions. The biological

274 
mechanisms involved in the depression of defeat inhibit rational thought, conﬂict 
insight, positive aﬀect and self-regulation, but these are ultimately accounted for by 
non-biological origins – domination or status-loss are antecedents that etiologically 
impair biological substrates like serotonin, testosterone, dopamine and cortisol 
functioning, among others (Blanchard, 2001; Booth et al., 1989; 2006; Hollis & Kabbaj, 
2014; Mazur & Booth, 1998; Raleigh et al., 1984, 1991; Sapolsky, 1989, 1990; Selten & 
Cantor-Graae, 2005; Wright, 1994). It is the inbuilt Catch-22 of these mechanisms that 
predictably leads to undesired outcomes under fraught social conditions: the more 
vulnerable one is, the more they need cooperative and fair conﬂict-resolution to co-
regulate their defenses and social status, yet the harder it is to entice fairness and 
respect (Björkqvist, 2001; Chance, 1980; 1984; Gilbert, 1992b; Sapolsky, 1994). One can 
further extrapolate an invisible critical threshold where one’s relationship to the social 
landscape becomes precipitously unsustainable. We might call status collapse the 
tendency toward a spiral dynamic that occurs when the internalized consequences of 
negative social conditions make it harder to create or maintain the social status and 
conﬂict management that is needed to restore balance. These self-organizing liabilities 
include: a) the loss of the ability to self-regulate and self-soothe; b) the loss of respect 
for self or others or status-based aﬀect; c) the loss of status cognition and reasoning; 
and d) the loss of the ability to manage stress and threat defenses. 
Much of the adverse consequences of defeat result because conﬁdence 
inhibition and its various eﬀects can be adaptive in speciﬁc scenarios. A manageable 
reduction in conﬁdence protects individuals from conﬂict escalation against aggressive

275 
high-status individuals by motivating submission and loss of ambition in the face of 
conﬂict, which signals a withdrawal and reconciliation in most aggressors; states of 
defeat further enable a defeated individual to co-exist in a social group with their 
aggressor (Gilbert, 1992b; 2001a; Gilbert & Allan, 1998). Healthy defeat is the need to 
evaluate what is not working in one’s goals, ambitions and conﬂicts and repair injuries 
therein by fostering deference, forgiveness, win-win cooperation, and respect, in part 
because a loss of conﬁdence and self-esteem increases the salience and value of 
mutualistic harmony, engendering conciliatory attitudes that repair relationships 
(Gilbert, 2001a; Gilbert & Allan, 1998) . 
This functional ego deﬂation and status sensitivity, however, sets the stage for 
psychological mechanisms that coregulate status and conﬂict to backﬁre under a 
number of conditions, creating a potential for spiral dynamics to terminate in status 
collapse. For instance, when multiple defeats, conﬂict asymmetries, and disrespectful 
dynamics unfold across domains in life, defeat and status loss can become internalized 
as general insecurity, social avoidance (of evaluative and threatening scenarios), threat-
sensitivity, low self-esteem, and incessant self-criticism, a likely path to depression 
(Gilbert, 1992b; 2001a; Gilbert & Allan, 1998; Hari, 2018; Hollis & Kabbaj, 2014). A 
generalized feeling of inferiority, self-protection, lost status motivation and ubiquitous 
status threats, can preoccupy individuals as they attempt to navigate vertical 
relationships while distracted by hypervigilance to further threat, impairing their status 
signaling, social processing and positional strategizing further. Often these issues resist 
social support by being diﬃcult to communicate about, normalize, validate or

276 
cooperatively center within relationships, which limits the cooperative resources one 
can bring to bear. Indeed, attempts to self-advocate explicitly around status-loss or 
perceived loss of respect will often be punished in group settings, reinforcing paranoia 
about social persecution and threat (Mirowski & Ross, 1983). A generalized lens vigilant 
to role and game-playing failures may come to preclude the ability to rehearse other 
social mentalities and enjoy aspects of life, which can be framed as a “mentality 
imbalance” (Gilbert 1992b; 2005a; 2005c; 2014). Status depression can occur from 
generalized barriers that self-organize into a self-reinforcing dynamic. Alternatively, 
when one feels they can only feel strong and competent in a certain kind of setting, role 
or game, they may avoid any other scenario where they feel evaluated for their 
performance (see: social evaluative threat ; Dickerson et al., 2009) which prevents 
ambitions for roles, games and status opportunities. Unmet needs for status and respect 
may lead individuals to inappropriately impose status games on social scenarios and 
lead to preoccupations with winning, saving face, self-righteousness, and superiority 
narratives; a general trend of resolving all conﬂicts as zero-sum power games can 
damage intimate partnerships. Powerlessness and conﬂict may be reinforced by the 
intrinsic dynamics of insecurity and threat. Finally, phenomena such as schizophrenia 
and psychosis may be a terminal endpoint of defeat and defeat-rich environments - 
prone to win-lose or lose-lose conﬂict - especially in developmentally sensitive periods. 
Urban environments have a 1.5-3x risk of schizophrenia, and those who face competitive 
disadvantage, such as migrants, show an increased risk that scales with the level of 
adversity, such as lower IQ, origins in a developing country, or being a 2nd generation

277 
immigrant (see: the social defeat hypothesis of schizophrenia; Selten & Cantor-Graae, 
2005). The lifetime number of psychotic experiences increases in a dose-response 
fashion in marginalized groups who face racial microaggressions that are either frequent 
or intense (Oh, 2015). Extreme forms of psychopathology are etiological endpoints of 
protracted self-organizing niche imbalances. 
All of these dynamics interact with neurotype factors. Neurodiverse stories center 
social exclusion, bullying, teasing, role and social failures that map onto defeat as a 
mechanism. Framed in this way, neurodiversity may present a general competitive 
barrier to social status and game-playing due to invisible, psychological variables that 
resist meaning-making. The result is chronic insecurity and inferiority, low self-esteem, 
conﬁdence-issues, vigilance to evaluative threat (Priscott & Allen, 2021), burnout 
(Raymaker et al., 2020), and exposure to Environments of chronic defeat through 
increased incidence of mismatch, social punishments and power imbalances (D. Price, 
2022). Evaluative or conﬂict-heavy milieus may engender a generalized sense of 
vulnerability to political games, with a myriad of consequences: an anticipated sense of 
evaluative threat and punishment, sensitivity to perceived conﬂict or defeat, reduced 
status ambition, and diﬃculty working toward advantageous social positions. Much of 
this can be oﬀset by curating ideal pathways in early development to ﬁnd congruent 
communities, but this is dependent on early access and development of such niches; if 
barriers self-organize early in life, they may be diﬃcult to surmount later on. 
In ASD, defeat exposure may compound a sensitivity toward inhibition and social 
skill barriers. A temperamental negativity bias may provide neurotic potential that is

278 
sensitive to the spiral dynamics of defeat, particularly to self-criticism and making 
negative motivational attributions to others, leading to the loss of a Belief in a Just 
World (Bertrams, 2022) and a potential to repel others (Shackman et al., 2016). Those 
with ASD are also vulnerable to abuses of power and exploitation such as being brought 
into controlling ideologies and cult-like social groups (D. Price, 2022). ADHD social and 
threat-reactivity may likewise be inherently sensitive to defeat dynamics. Chronic 
failures to meet social expectations and role obligations can compound generally with 
social losses and rejection for being “weird,” activating spiral dynamics more eﬃciently. 
For instance, rejection sensitive dysphoria (RSD; Beaton et al., 2022; Berenson et al., 
2019; Bondü & Esser, 2015), mentioned in the loneliness section, may simultaneously be 
both a rejection injury and a defeat injury when interpreted as a pattern of rejection 
due to low status, which may be why RSD creates such profound dysphoria so quickly. 
Across the neurodiverse spectrum, the ability to identify roles and paths to social 
status are inherently harder and rarer, creating a persistent social determinant of 
vulnerability to all who struggle to ﬁnd a niche. Innate neurodiverse dynamics also play 
a role. If reward insensitivity is indeed a general predictor of neurodiversity (clinical and 
non), then reduced reward sensitivity likely also reduces the drive toward status-seeking 
and the attendant willingness to play political games, which may make for a 
disadvantage when such games are imposed despite an unwillingness to play them. An 
increased justice-sensitivity (Bondü & Esser, 2015; Schäfer & Kraneburg, 2015) may also 
make for sensitivity to both defeat and vicarious defeat. The point of this non-
exhaustive list is to illustrate the potential mineﬁeld of factors that work as general

279 
barriers to niche-construction that translate a) more defeat exposure, and b) less defeat 
resilience, as long as c) one is outside the protective factors of an ideal niche. Here, an 
ideal niche includes the ability to hold status, prestige and respect, which promotes a 
prosocial reputation that ensures better treatment, reduced social threats and risks, 
more allies and supports, more access to resources to handle stressors, and more access 
to cognitive resources like self-respect to energize agency in life. These advantages of 
these positions may be diﬃcult to access when the diﬃculty of ﬁnding congruent roles, 
games and communities, and navigating hostile cultures where conﬂict is asymmetrical 
and normed against one’s preferred styles of conﬂict resolution, can lead to early 
subordination in relationships and career that are psychologically unsustainable. 
Let us review the four ways in which loneliness is a cognitive and social drag on 
sustaining positive aﬀect. 
Defeat de-energizes behavior. Defeat de-energizes game-playing behavior 
needed to perform roles and games next to others. Defeat is associated with anhedonia, 
the loss of social pleasure, which in turn leads to avolition, the loss of social motivation. 
Defeat is seen as a cognitive and aﬀective inhibitor, leading to “demobilization” - 
lingering eﬀects of defeat include social avoidance (for instance, rats exposed to chronic 
defeat will generally avoid all unfamiliar male rats; Hollis & Kabbaj, 2014), loss of 
ambition (individuals will avoid seeking resources that involve competing with others; 
Gilbert, 2001a), reduced overall mobility (defeated rats show reduced locomotion in 
forced swim tests; Hollis & Kabbaj, 2014). In humans, we may extend avoidance to all 
evaluative situations that can provoke social evaluative threat - the feeling of being

280 
judged with a threat of failure. This could include political games (social performance) 
and prestige games (role-based performance), or involve stereotype threats where one 
may lose status by conﬁrming negative stereotypes about a marginalized class (Priscott 
& Allen, 2021). 
Defeat is painful (and feels meaningless). Defeat is associated with social pain 
(Björkqvist, 2001; Booth et al., 1989; 2006; Gilbert, 1992b; 2001a; 2005b; Gilbert & 
Allan, 1998; Mazur & Booth, 1998; Sapolsky, 1994; 2017; Wilkinson & Pickett, 2011; Zink 
et al., 2008). The eﬀect of defeat on mood is to produce anxiety and a depressive 
phenotype as changes in serotonin metabolism, receptor binding, and amygdala 
activation are associated with negative aﬀect such as sadness, fear, irritability, 
rumination (Gilbert, 2001b; Gilbert & Allen, 1998; Hollis & Kabbaj, 2014). In addition to 
negative aﬀect, there is a loss of positive aﬀect with which to buﬀer negative 
emotionality. Exploratory and social motivations are low, while threat-sensitivity and 
avoidance are high. Anhedonia makes for a loss of positive aﬀect and an inability to 
experience pleasure. Defeat increases the perception of a threatening social 
environment, and anxiety is upregulated as an anticipatory vigilance. The FFFFS system is 
sensitized to stressors, and a sense of threat “spreads” to new stimuli more easily. Stress 
is promoted both acutely and chronically, leading to impairments in cognition and social 
deﬁcits that further play into one’s feeling of powerlessness; social status stressors 
disturb the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis and create a proinﬂammatory state that 
contributes to depression and cardiovascular disease (Dickerson & Kemeny, 2004). 
Stress compounds when social under-performance and vigilance to social evaluation

281 
creates a paranoia of persecution - that others will prey on one’s vulnerability - and 
evidence suggests they do (Björkqvist, 2001; Mirowsky & Ross, 1983; Sapolsky, 1994; 
2017). One feels inferior, submissive, weak, vulnerable, inadequate and unattractive. 
Overeating (sugary foods) and increased substance use are common coping strategies 
that exacerbate a feeling of a loss of control and unattractive behavior (Björkqvist, 2001; 
Hollis & Kabbaj, 2014). 
Defeat saps resources/is a psychosocial liability. Defeat creates a subjective 
sense of submissiveness and inferiority paired with pro-inﬂammatory glucocorticoids 
that create the inverse of the “winning eﬀect:” they work to sabotage subjective 
feelings of conﬁdence, decisiveness, aspiration, assertiveness, motor control and 
emotional well-being, which further impairs competitive and political performance. 
Whereas the “winning eﬀect” is associated with a rise in testosterone and a decrease in 
stress, a “losing eﬀect” would be the inverse, a decrease in testosterone and a rise in 
stress, impairing cognitive and social performance for subsequent games (Booth et al., 
1989; 2006; Mazur & Booth, 1998). Losses demotivate game-playing, induce avoidance 
of evaluative situations as self-protection, and sap bandwidth with emotional pain, all of 
which curtails subsequent political performance. Just as the winning eﬀect sees “wins” 
create the psychobehavioral condition to beget further wins, the “losing eﬀect” sees 
losses beget losses. Indeed, mood volatility, impulsivity, aggression and defense 
reactivity are consequences on mood, which can create antisocial behavior that 
produces more social friction, antagonism and even bullying. 
Defeat confers vulnerability. A single episode of defeat is all that is needed to

282 
sensitize a subsequent potential for defeat trauma, both as experienced by one’s self, or 
observed in another (Carnevali et al., 2020). Defeat creates a compounding of negative 
biopsychosocial consequences even as it erodes positive resources with which to deal 
with them. There is an increase in both acute and chronic stress, damage to stress-
ameliorating corticosterone pathways, a sensitization of the HPA axis that sees a lower 
threshold for subsequent activation and a “spreading” of perceived threat, an 
impairment to health promoting processes like sleep and diet. There is also a loss of 
positive aﬀect, the erosion of neurotransmitters from chronic stress, and a disruption of 
circumstances with which to create new positive game-playing feedback. This spiral 
dynamic compounds with a social dynamic - increased repulsion or abuse from the 
signals communicated and the impulsive, aggressive behavior that is produced. In sum, 
the inability to access states that de-escalate the stress response and promote stress-
protection induces a spiral dynamic that leads to perceiving more stressors, coping with 
them less, and progressively creating the stressors one fears while diminishing support 
(Mirowsky & Ross, 1983). Defeat creates a pro-inﬂammatory state associated with a 
range of disturbed health factors, including increased immunological, cardiac and sleep 
compromise, which also leads to unhealthy coping - drug use and overeating - which 
compound the physiological costs. 
Niche Dynamics: Agonic & Hedonic Environments, Spiral Dynamics and Culture 
The previous section dealt with what may be considered the foundation of a 
niche model, which can be summarized thusly: humans have evolved social mentalities 
to provide biopsychosocial resources to deal with the challenges of diﬀerent social

283 
dynamics; when mentalities are injured or backﬁre, it can be harder to reconnect to 
social resources. To understand how the other of Hari’s “connections” interact with 
niche dynamics, we must explore how social niches are not simply about individual 
factors, but about ways in which niches can be organized that cause depression, anxiety, 
and other forms of psychopathology. 
Contextual Factors: Agonic & Hedonic Environments, Positions, Intersection & 
Dynamics  
It has been suggested that social context is important to understanding the 
etiology and treatment of suﬀering, and that counseling theory needs to catch up in this 
regard (Gilbert, 2019; Ratts, 2008). Evidence suggests that social context is important to 
the development of depression (Gilbert, 1992a; 2000a; 2001b; 2004; 2005a; 2005c; 
2018; Gilbert & Allan, 1998; Hollis & Kabbaj, 2014; Sapolsky, 1994; 2017), social anxiety 
(Bruce, 2015; Brook & Schmidt, 2008; Gilbert, 2001; Trower & Gilbert, 1989), trauma 
(Bryant, 2016; Junger, 2016; Spence et al., 2019), psychosis (Oh, 2015), schizophrenia 
(Luhrmann, 2007; Selten & Cantor-Graae, 2005). A promising frame for understanding 
the evolution of certain mental disorders is by seeing how they can be adaptive in 
threatening social environments (Gilbert, 1992a; 1992b; Gilbert, 2001a; Gilbert & Allan, 
1998). 
For instance, in environments organized around power and threat, social anxiety 
helps us prioritize, evaluate and attend to conspeciﬁc threats (Bruce, 2015; Trower & 
Gilbert, 1989). Depression can lower the threshold for involuntary submission which 
helps to avoid violent subjugation and escalation, while also helping those who are

284 
defeated to coexist alongside the victor who bested them (Gilbert, 1992b; 2000a; 2005b; 
Nesse, 2000; J. S. Price & Sloman, 1987). In the face of bullying, apathetic demotivation 
likely performs a related function, by disengaging failing strategies that put one in 
conﬂict with others, and potentially prompting reevaluation of those strategies (Gilbert, 
2001a; 2004; 2005b). However, many of these mechanisms help individuals survive in 
groups where violence is the primary medium of social negotiation, and where extreme 
demobilization or threat vigilance is commensurate with the scale of threat, such as that 
found in domineering baboon troops and despotic human nation-states (Gilbert, 2018; 
Sapolsky, 1994; 2017). 
The same mechanisms may backﬁre when societies are more hedonic, based on 
safety, trust and egalitarianism, such as bonobo troops or modern democratic-socialist 
states. The mechanisms are still adaptive: dangerous violence-based environments of 
power and threat are present throughout the world, as the cyclical rise of fascism 
demonstrates; even when in hedonic environments, it is possible that agonic 
mechanisms may need to be redeployed at a later time. Yet when agonic mechanisms 
are triggered in hedonic environments, their consequences can be highly dysfunctional, 
or else, illustrate that someone may be reasonably reacting to a hidden agonic dynamic. 
For instance, agonic environments can result in hypervigilant threat sensitivity or 
involuntary inhibition and promote chronic stress that is toxic to higher cognitive 
abilities (i.e., prosociality, creativity and intelligence; Chance, 1988), which can interfere 
with hedonic responsibilities like social role development and prosocial coordination. A 
case study of twins raised apart in 1974 - one in a strict, religious American environment

285 
(agonic), and one in a supportive, cohesive Korean family (hedonic) - revealed that being 
raised in a hedonic environment after controlling for other factors, was associated with 
a 16-point gulf in IQ in favor of the hedonically-reared twin (Segal & Hur, 2022). When 
agonic mechanisms lead to cognitive impairment and role failures in hedonic systems, it 
can make for the withdrawal of social support, which is perhaps an analog to defeat in a 
hedonic setting, and additive to the pathogenic load. In a cruel irony, being a victim of 
agonic defeats begets hedonic defeats, preventing individuals from escaping agonic 
mode. 
Agonic & Hedonic environments: environments of toxicity or nurturing. In 
ethology and primatology, it has been observed that individual and group-level factors 
(biological, psychological, social and ecological) tend to reach homeostatic equilibrium 
along a spectrum of possible social outcomes that are either more egalitarian (i.e., 
“horizontal”) or more hierarchical (i.e., “vertical;” Chance, 1980; 1984; 1988; Kortmulder 
& Robbers, 2005; Thierry, 2013). At one extreme are baboons, who organize around 
power, threat and anxiety, a social order that is considered an agonic system; at the 
other are bonobos, who organize around playful bonding, reassurance and prestige, 
considered a hedonic system (Chance, 1980, 1984; 1988; Gilbert, 1989; 1992a; 
Kortmulder & Robbers, 2005; J. S. Price, 1992; Sapolsky, 1994; 2017). The two systems 
produce entirely diﬀerent ways of being that aﬀect every dimension of life, which is 
particularly relevant, as the cues for the agonic-hedonic spectrum may present itself 
more subtly in a modern world as political, economic and other signiﬁers. 
Evolution. Agonic groups are structured in relationships of dominance and

286 
submission, preparing individuals with an agonic mentality that is primarily oriented to 
mounting defenses against threats to social positioning (Bruce, 2015; Chance, 1988; 
Gilbert, 1989; 1992a; 2018; J. S. Price, 1992). Attention is focused on “positional” threat 
(i.e., threats from above or below); positioning is increased through violent challenges 
for dominance; and safety is only possible through extreme deference to those with 
higher rank; all a precondition to social survival. In contrast to the hierarchy and 
authoritarianism of agonic groups, hedonic groups are horizontal and egalitarian. 
Hedonic groups are structured for relational reciprocity in activities such as play, 
exploration and grooming. A hedonic mentality biologically prepares individuals for 
relational reciprocity and cooperative social roles; attention is open to exploration, 
prosociality and problem-solving; positioning is improved through investing in important 
relationships and prestige due to skills or attractiveness; safety is a sense of security in 
one’s robust relationships, allies and supportive social networks (Bruce, 2015; Chance, 
1988; Gilbert, 1989; 1992a; 2018; J. S. Price, 1992). While agonic groups tend to focus on 
maintaining social order and cohesion in the face of existential threat (such as food 
scarcity or war), hedonic groups seek to evolve and explore on a foundation of social 
harmony and cooperative interdependence. It is these extremes, and the gradations in 
between, that lead to the basic spectrum of antisocial self-interest and prosocial 
mutualism (Gilbert & Basran, 2019), with attendant implications: surviving vs thriving, 
power vs safety, threat vs meaning, utopian and dystopian. 
Some primates, such as chimpanzees, have the capacity for both agonic and 
hedonic dispositions (Chance, 1988), and humans have extended this unique and rare

287 
ability (Chance & Jolly, 1970). This ﬂexibility among non-human primates likely arose as 
a part of ﬁssion/fusion dynamics , where group dynamics could radically change for 
diﬀerent ecological needs; when foraging, the group would split up into loose 
cooperative bands and then re-fuse under tight-knit social hierarchies. A troop that 
reached its environmental carrying capacity, i.e. when food scarcity drives undue stress 
and conﬂict, saw a portion of the group splinter oﬀ into a new group to settle the next 
available niche. Such ﬁssion dynamics create natural social experiments by mixing 
gender group composition and creating more relaxed cooperative atmospheres without 
stressful power inequities, yielding advantages that attract new members (Heslop et al., 
2021). In human prehistory, this may have created a natural evolutionary laboratory to 
test the group-level plasticity of switching between agonic and hedonic modes under 
diﬀerent ecological conditions; for instance, many human groups seasonally reorganized 
when moving between farming and foraging (Graeber & Wengrow, 2021). The ability for 
a primate to switch between a “power and competition” mode and a “community and 
cooperation” mode transformed humans into “two-level man” (Haidt, 2013), with a new 
capacity to rapidly socially reorganize as part of their nature (Haidt, 2013). 
It is plausible that the ability to ﬂip between two modes is especially pronounced 
in humans, and key to their evolutionary success (Heslop et al., 2021); for instance, by 
reconﬁguring the social order to the diﬀerent demands of environmental threat or 
safety (Wright, 2009). Indeed, the adaptation helps by allowing social organization to 
reconﬁgure to the psychoemotional logic of diﬀerent niche demands, and only two 
species have been observed to occupy diverse ecological niches, rhesus macaques and

288 
humans (Belsky et al., 2009). One obvious target for application is in explaining, not just 
the cyclical rise of populism in diﬀerent parts of the world, but the responsiveness of 
large swaths of the population to such populism, fed by shifting perceptions of 
environments toward power and threat. 
It is likely that the story of subgroup evolution has been an important factor in 
human evolution, a force that has likely been underappreciated in the evolutionary 
literature because it seems counter-intuitive to consider social dynamics as a patterned 
selection pressure capable of shaping social and cognitive evolution (Heslop et al., 2018; 
2021). Namely, as cultural evolution increased the “surface area” of cooperation in 
society through rising social infrastructure, humans – who had uniquely retained access 
to their “better angels” through dark times – could then spend more time connecting to, 
and building oﬀ of, their prosociality in good times (Wright, 2000; 2009). Paradoxically, 
by holding onto the human capacity for a ruthless survival mode to endure the worst of 
times, humans also protected their better nature to allow it to re-emerge during the 
best of times; in other words, survival mode has allowed thriving mode to gradually 
ﬂourish in the broad arc of human cultural evolution (Wright, 2000; 2009). Indeed, some 
authors believe both inﬂuences are even important to individual development (Chance, 
1988), and it may be worth considering the function of receiving hedonic and agonic 
inﬂuences as an archetypal contribution from parents. 
However, while the ability to switch between agonic and hedonic modes may be 
adaptively ﬂexible at a species-level, it is at signiﬁcant cost to the well-being of 
individuals. While moving from hedonic to agonic mode is relatively easy, ﬂipping back

289 
may be pathogenic (J. S. Price, 1992). The greater project of mental health and well-
being may be one of humanity taking intentional control of its own “two-level” nature 
(Haidt, 2013). As summarized by Drew and Kriz (2012), evolutionary psychologist 
Cummins (2005, p. 693) characterized the agonic/hedonic divide thusly: ‘Darwinian 
processes have produced a complex network of cognitive, emotional and physiological 
systems that bias us toward producing this kind of social structure’ and ‘we are wired 
from high cognition right on down to our neuroendocrinology to detect minute changes 
in our status vis-a-vis others.’ 
Agonic mode and social dynamics. Agonic groups take their name from the 
Latin root for agony (Chance, 1988; Gilbert, 1989; 1992a; 1992b). Agonic groups 
form rigid hierarchies of social rank that originally served to constrain escalating 
violence among competitors in a group, but likely came to have other command 
and control functions in humans including some prosocial functions such as conﬂict 
resolution (de Waal, 1982; Gilbert & Basran, 2019). In primates, agonic groups are 
dominated by those that have resource-holding power (RHP), which is a physical 
and political prowess to win access to physical, social and sexual resources, often 
using ritualistic bullying and threat to test for rank security and maintain social 
standing through fear and stress (Chance, 1988). In unstable hierarchies, elevated 
cortisol is found throughout the hierarchy as those higher up must defend their 
rank, while those on the bottom are the victims of displacement aggression , where 
unbuﬀered social defeats are perpetuated down the social power gradient (Mazur 
& Booth, 2005; Sapolsky, 1994; 2017).

290 
Accordingly, agonic mode in humans is one where higher-level cognitive 
functions such as creativity, prosociality and intelligence are suppressed through chronic 
stress and the narrowing of attentional resources to positional threats, such as 
ingroup/outgroup dynamics and rank. Social anxiety becomes a state-based trait suited 
to a threatening social environment; groups are seen as being organized based on 
dominance and submission; attention is devoted to positional threat vigilance including 
seeing one’s actions through the perspectives of evaluators; defenses are marshaled to 
avoid catastrophic loss of standing (Bruce, 2015; Trower & Gilbert, 1989); threat feels 
unpredictable, paranoia tracks persecution, and control feels external (Mirowski & Ross, 
1983; Sapolsky, 1994; 2017). Depression may also be adaptive in inhibiting motivation 
for dangerous challenges for higher status, not contesting resources without a plan or 
with little chance of success, or avoiding major changes to unsatisfactory conditions 
when the alternatives might be worse (Gilbert, 1992b; 2005b; Nesse, 2000). 
Evidence suggests a relationship between modern agonic environments, such as 
environments that lack psychosocial safety or have authoritarian bosses, create a 
threefold increase in depression risk (Zadow et al., 2021). In organizations with steep 
power gradients, the same proﬁle of high stress, depression, anxiety and poor health is 
found in the lowest ranks that can be found in low-ranking baboons (Marmot, 2006; 
Sapolsky, 1994; 2017). In humans, cultural evolution has partially compensated for this 
instability by formalizing hierarchy to reduce uncertainty and status insecurity and 
increase rule clarity (Mrazek et al., 2013); in such a context, agonic mode may resemble 
a more traditional conservative disposition that values honor, deference and loyalty

291 
(Haidt, 2013; Mazur & Booth, 1998). Agonic groups emerge under conditions of stressful 
scarcity, existential threat, intergroup conﬂict and war, high numbers of [young] males, 
and pressures toward large group size (Chance, 1988; Gilbert, 1989; 1992a; 2019; Mazur 
& Booth, 1998; Mrazek et al., 2013; Sapolsky, 1994; 2017). Interestingly, high school 
environments – characterized by a sharp uptick of androgens, unstable hierarchies, a 
lack of cooperative goals, and pressures toward large groups size – are environments 
ripe for bullying: young males tend toward physical threats of violence, while young 
women harm one’s social reputation, and bullied victims share marked phenotypic 
similarities with other defeated animals (Björkqvist, 2001). 
Theirry (2013) cataloged linked social traits that are featured in the agonic mode 
of macaque societies: centrality of hierarchical steepness, centrality of top-ranking 
males, a high proportion of conﬂicts involving biting, the development of formal 
submission signals, preference for kin among females, rules of female rank inheritance, 
and a higher rate of male dispersal. These societies are less likely to have conﬂicts 
involving counter-aggression (ﬁghting back), cooperative behavior, conciliatory 
tendency, rate of aﬃliative contacts, permissive mothering, allomothering, immature 
interference in mating, cooperative patterning in social play, and coalitions between 
males. Thierry calls these “socially intolerant” societies, where a strong dominance 
hierarchy functionally inhibits more egalitarian non-kin social relations. 
Hedonic mode and social dynamics. Hedonic environments emerge under 
conditions of relaxed predation, food abundance, group ﬁssion, and general conditions 
that allow for loose interdependence (Chance, 1988; Gilbert, 1989; 1992a; 1992b; 2019;

292 
Mrazek et al., 2013). Hedonic social logic is organized around widespread cooperation 
toward mutual beneﬁt, often requiring long periods of social learning toward role 
expertise (Gilbert, 1989; 2019). Hierarchies are built around those who can solicit 
attention to their “attractive” qualities such as skill, talent and prestige, which oﬀer role 
models to scaﬀold learning. The ability to wield this prestige-as-attention is called social 
attention holding power (SAHP; Gilbert, 1989; 1992a; 1992b; 2019). Social roles require 
extended social learning to develop cognitive skills such as creativity, prosociality and 
intelligence, faculties that are easily clouded by stress, and thus require a social safety 
net to buﬀer against stressors and liberate attention (Chance, 1984; 1988; Gilbert, 1989; 
1992; J. S. Price, 1992). Group practices among primates reveal ritualized greetings, 
grooming and play which are signs of relational investment and reciprocity that 
suppress the stress of relational insecurity and rehearse psychological safety (Chance, 
1988; Gilbert, 1989; 1992a; J. S. Price, 1992), a similar function to the more acute tend-
and-befriend stress response found in humans (S. E. Taylor et al., 2000). 
Theirry (2013) showed when dominance hierarchies can relax and allow social 
networks to facilitate non-kin relationships, as with the hedonic macaque societies, the 
social traits of a hedonic mode can be characterized by cooperative behavior, a 
conciliatory tendency, a high rate of aﬃliative contact, conﬂicts involving counter-
aggression (ﬁghting back), a degree of mother permissiveness, increased allomothering, 
a cooperative patterning to social play, and coalitions between males. Features that are 
inhibited in socially tolerant societies are hierarchical steepness, less centrality of top-
ranking males, a reduced proportion of conﬂicts involving biting, less development of

293 
formal submission signals, less preference for kin among females, fewer rules of female 
rank inheritance, and a lower rate of male dispersal. 
While agonic groups are likely more pathogenic (J . S. Price, 1992), hedonic 
groups do have pathogenic channels that instead involve the absence of resources 
rather than the presence of a stressors. For instance, failing to maintain some basic level 
of prestige-as-social attention likely activates the same depression-as-low-rank found in 
agonic systems (Gilbert, 2001a; J. S. Price, 1992); loss of conﬁdants has been identiﬁed 
as a depression risk (Brown & Harris, 1978; Costello, 1982; Patten, 1991), as has 
loneliness in general (J. T. Cacioppo & Patrick, 2009). The recent signs of increased rates 
of depression and anxiety in younger social media users may partially reﬂect 
cyberbullying, but more frequently reﬂect the eﬀects of social comparison and a sense 
of relatively less “likes” as measures of captured social attention (Robinson et al., 2019). 
In this framework, we will call these hedonic injuries . 
In summary, a central adaptation of humans is their ability to ﬂexibly reconﬁgure 
their social networks (Christakis & Fowler, 2011) by radically reshaping the social fabric 
based on opposing forms of socioemotional logic called agonic mode and hedonic mode. 
This can be from factors that are intrinsic to a social group (leadership style, gender 
composition, religion) or extrinsic to the group (scarcity, war, existential threat; Chance, 
1988; Gilbert, 1989; 1992a), with some evidence suggesting that religion and political 
ideologies have been mediums for both sets of factors through much of modern human 
history (Haidt, 2013; Wright, 2009). Rapid sweeps of change toward or away from power 
and threat are not skin deep, but rest on changes to the balance of factors that activate

294 
embodied states of safety or threat in the brain, which roughly correspond to extreme 
activated states of the aﬃliative or antagonistic mentality (Gilbert, 1989; 1992a; 1992b; 
2019; Wright, 2000; 2009). The ability to switch rapidly from hedonic to agonic mode en 
masse can serve to turn humans into a social superorganism (Christakis & Fowler, 2011; 
D. S. Wilson, 2002), but it can also contribute to pathology as the move from agonic to 
hedonic is harder, involving deescalating physiological systems of threat regulation that 
tend to increase threat sensitivity, fear, and susceptibility to anxiety and depression in 
ways that make it diﬃcult to return to baseline (Gilbert & Basran, 2019; J. S. Price, 
1992). 
Agonic and hedonic environments have gone by diﬀerent names, including toxic 
and nurturing environments (Biglan et al., 2020), but could be framed in other ways as 
well: as environments of defeat and support; or win-lose (or lose-lose) and win-win 
environments. 
Modern ramiﬁcations. In modern environments, we can consider that agonic 
and hedonic environments likely exist on a spectrum based on a variety of factors such 
as environmental resources (Heslop et al., 2021), internal culture (Zadow et al., 2021), 
leadership qualities (Gilbert & Basran, 2019), economic incentives (Wilkinson & Pickett, 
2011) and more, and likely all environments have some hedonic and some agonic 
qualities. Some environments may have agonic qualities from creating the conditions for 
violence and conﬂict, while others coerce and manipulate, and others simply remove 
safety nets ( oppression by force versus oppression by deprivation ; Hanna et al., 2000). A 
study on the relationship of workplace psychosocial safety to depression risk evaluated

295 
several speciﬁc factors common to psychosocial threat that are theoretically congruent 
with modern agonic work environments: job strain (high psychological demands and low 
decision latitude), high job demands, low social support, low decision latitude, 
organizational injustice, eﬀort-reward imbalance and bullying (Zadow et al., 2021). In 
other words, modern agonism takes the form: a) an unequal distribution of psychosocial 
stressors (i.e., entrapment, abandonment and defeats) along a hierarchical gradient, b) 
the need to co-regulate these stressors with high-quality social relationships, and c) the 
unequal access to such relationships in a hierarchical gradient (Elstad, 1998). Thus, there 
are many paths to an environment that feels subconsciously “dangerous” and 
activating: a deprivation of hedonic supports and resources; the active agonic threats of 
bullying, conﬂict or unpredictable violence; or the passive threats of coercion, 
constrained autonomy, and lose-lose options. Thus, in a modern context, agonism does 
not need to be overtly hostile to activate a heightened risk for depression and anxiety. 
For instance, modern agonism may be connoted in diﬀerent marginalized groups 
through various forms of cultural shorthand such as “late-stage capitalism,” “patriarchy” 
of “white supremacy,” which connotate a toxic environment due to threats of subjective 
violence; in this case, it is their respective induction of a dysregulating agonic survival 
mode from regularly encountering social barriers that are predictable or uncertain, 
missing safety nets, and micro- and macroaggressions. 
Values, culture & social determinants of mental health: the meanings of 
diﬀerent modes of life. Agonic systems and hedonic systems can be expressed 
through the diﬀerent cultural value systems that organize social and institutional life

296 
(Drew & Kriz, 2012). Expressed in terms of Hofstede’s (2001) cultural dimensions and 
Hall’s (1983) work on time orientation, agonic values have been framed as being 
more collectivistic, which in turn has predictable subdimensions: high power distance 
(hierarchical relations), high uncertainty avoidance (high control to compensate for 
anxiety about the future), greater past-orientation, more feminine values (gender 
ﬂexibility; relationships and nurturing valued), and beﬁts a Confucianist/Taoist 
ideology. Hedonic values are more individualistic: low power distance (values in 
pluralism and equality), less uncertainty avoidance (open to the future), future-
orientation, more masculine (distinct gender roles; assertiveness and achievement 
valued) and beﬁts a Judeo-Christian ideology. However, a single spectrum may be 
inadequate to capture the moral and political nuance to meaning systems, which we 
will subsequently explore. 
Agonic and hedonic systems: a second dimension. Recall that the 
agonic/hedonic divide may map well onto ﬁssion/fusion dynamics , where fusion is any 
dynamic that sees social animals cohere (mating, defense, resource exploitation), and 
ﬁssion is any dynamic that sees groups disperse (resource foraging; high conﬂict). Agonic 
values can be seen as a fusion strategy, as it is promoted in ecologies with abundant 
resources, and where resource allocation becomes strongly hierarchical to coordinate 
resource exploitation and limit intragroup conﬂict (Drew & Kriz, 2012). Alternatively, 
strong social orders may also be built on moral tightness, which predicts many of the 
same qualities but emphasizes norm conformity as a coordination and security 
mechanism. Moral tightness may generally arise in environments with frequent

297 
ecological threats: territorial challenges, natural disaster prevalence, food scarcity, high 
population density, and heightened disease transmission, where such threats are then 
countered by cooperation, coordination and the systematic exploitation of shared 
resources (Gelfand et al., 2011; Mrazek et al., 2013). In contrast, hedonic values are 
promoted in areas of greater food scarcity, requiring food exploration (foraging) and 
egalitarian resource sharing (i.e., a ﬁssion strategy; Drew & Kriz, 2012). However, 
hedonic values may also reﬂect a general reduction in ecological threats, where a lower 
need for order, coordination or stringent social rules translates to a tolerance for 
individualistic strategies and diﬀerences (Mrazek et al., 2013). 
This basic ﬁssion/fusion divide maps well onto the complementary cognition 
framework (H. Taylor et al., 2022) which acknowledges one of the basic cognitive 
strategy divides is between resource exploitation (agonic) or cognitive exploration 
(hedonic), with this ethological research suggesting that such a divide may be reinforced 
at the group- and ecological-level (Drew & Kriz, 2012; Haidt, 2013; Mrazek et al., 2013). 
However, it may be worth parsing out some nuance therein. For instance, if agonic 
environments share the orientation to high power distance (i.e., acceptance of hierarchy 
as a central feature of social life), and hedonic systems are low power distance, there 
can be important diﬀerences in how and why they get there. 
In collectivistic countries, a strong “social fabric” oﬀsets hierarchy by coexisting 
with nurturing ingroups and low levels of status conﬂict due to the formalization of rank. 
Such societies coexist with relatively “feminine” values where relationships matter, and 
gender roles are less distinct (Hofstede, 2011). By contrast, “cultures of honor” (Mazur

298 
& Booth, 1998; Nisbett, 1993; Sapolsky, 2017) may generally be composed of any group, 
often shaped by self-organizing young men outside of the social controls of a community, 
where perceived insult is met with reactive aggression to save face and deal with 
threats. They are reminiscent of the agonic baboons organized around displacement 
aggression (Sapolsky, 1994; 2004), and in humans, include cultures of the American 
South, inner city gangs, the nomadic pastoralists of the desert, and seem to shape the 
socioeconomic culture of being low SES (Sapolsky, 2017); i.e. the culture appears 
through combinations of both scarcity and threat. These diﬀerences have been studied 
as unstable versus stable hierarchies (Knight & Mehta, 2016; Marmot & Sapolsky, 2014; 
Sapolsky, 1993), but they may also broadly correspond to functioning as dominance 
hierarchies versus prestige hierarchies (see also: eminence; Brand & Mesoudi, 2019; Del 
Giudice, 2018; Gilbert & Basran, 2019; Henrich & Gil-White, 2001; Sapolsky, 2017). In 
honor cultures, the logic of survival seems to shape a strong hierarchy around masculine 
values of assertiveness and achievement, often in response to scarce, harsh, war-torn or 
conﬂict-prone environments (Mazur & Booth, 1998; Sapolsky, 2017). However, a similar 
distinction may be made in hedonic environments. There is likely a diﬀerence between 
hedonic nomads (C. Chen et al., 1999), anarchists, counter-culturalists, vagabonds, 
bohemians and frontiersmen, versus the socialist democracies of northern Europe, as 
unstable and stable hedonic environments. The two paths to agonic and hedonic ways 
of life, then, may represent the need to overlay agonic and hedonic values with a focus 
on survival and self-interest, or mutualism and interdependence, i.e. tightness vs 
looseness (Mrazek et al., 2013), or stable vs unstable (Knight & Mehta, 2016; Marmot &

299 
Sapolsky, 2014; Sapolsky, 1993; 2017). We will refer to this as agonic individualism, 
agonic collectivism, hedonic individualism, and hedonic collectivism. 
An ecological tapestry. As a tentative four-way model of ecological types, these 
ecosystems oﬀer a range of inﬂuences on mental health. All such inﬂuences are set 
against the backdrop of exponential social change and globalization, which complexiﬁes 
our understanding of the agonic/hedonic divide from the relatively neat study of 
diﬀerent primate groups in natural laboratory conditions. Among pluralist countries like 
the US, for instance, the general trend of modernity may be observed as globalization 
increasingly “shrinks the world” (mixing cultures and lifestyles while lowering barriers to 
their cooperation; Wright, 2001), while making the world “bigger” (pressuring narrow 
ingroup identities while rapidly expanding the possible subcultures with which one can 
identify). Most of social life is spent in varying institutional environments – work, school, 
community, friends, family - where diﬀerent sub-identities are eﬀectively exposed to a 
range of sub-niche ecologies. Agonic and hedonic dynamics may exist as a nested mix 
that vary by level (network, community, region, state, country) and region, wherein 
someone could theoretically live in an agonic state, in a hedonic country, a nice 
neighborhood in a bad city, have a good job in an economically-deprived part of town, 
and be in good friend group in a toxic company. This may be said to frame the material 
social conditions of ideological environments that self-organize along diﬀerent 
demographic conditions: for instance, in the United States, major divides appear 
between rural and urban, cultural subregions (South, Midwest, New England, Paciﬁc 
Northwest, etc.) and coastal areas relative to the domestic interior. Institutions,

300 
companies and social organizations likewise promote diﬀerent values environments, as 
was the premise of Hofstede (1984; 1991; 2011) who did his work categorizing cultural 
dimensions mostly with and for an international business community. In these contexts, 
one may be able to make bold claims. For instance, the United States, once a frontier 
country of hedonic individualism – self-reliance and self-determination - and champion 
of pluralistic values, has been increasingly dominated by corporate ecosystems that 
most resemble agonic collectivism - cooperative hierarchy - as the dominant values 
shaping most of day-to-day life, and that this may go some way to explaining the 
variance in how people interpret their American culture within radically diﬀerent 
material social conditions. Against this backdrop, let us consider a non-exhaustive list of 
four ways these ecosystems shape biopsychosocial well-being. 
Internalizing “junk values.” The paradoxical nature of modern pluralism is that it 
promotes a range of ecologies, including those opposed to the high-level values of 
pluralism. Consider the United States, considered the most individualistic country in the 
world according to Hofstede’s cultural dimensions (Hofstede, 2001; 2011; Oyserman et 
al., 2002), with values of low power distance, low uncertainty avoidance, a masculine 
orientation, and a Judeo-Christian orientation (Drew & Kriz, 2012). However, there is 
some discrepancy between the values espoused and how they are lived; European 
Americans are neither the most individualistic or least collectivistic in practice 
(Oyserman et al., 2002). Despite values in hedonic individualism (equality and pluralism; 
Mrazek et al., 2013), capitalist economics dominate most day-to- day life, and range from 
agonic collectivism - formalized rank, high power distance, feminine values (supportive

301 
teams) - to agonic individualism: competitive materialism, self-interested status-seeking, 
acceptance of unfair inequalities and social exploitation, and a marginalization of 
community (Hari, 2018; Junger, 2016; Oyserman et al., 2002). Most prominently, 
institutionalized proﬁt-motives and high-power distance lead to a large number of low-
ranking workers facing modern agonism as a coercion to work under threatening 
conditions. That is, workers are forced to work under threat of homelessness with few 
social safety nets, forcing them to endure stagnant low wages, high inﬂation, 
unaﬀordable housing and child care, few worker protections, inaccessible healthcare 
and little paid time oﬀ. This class of workers feel that they cannot escape such 
conditions (see: low social mobility; Wilkinson & Pickett, 2011), face socioeconomic 
conditions where agonic individualism thrives as a culture of survival (see agonism and 
SES; Sapolsky, 2017), and a feeling of being dominated through exploitation, as the 
dominant class has absorbed all of the accrued value, with the richest 1% gaining almost 
twice the world’s wealth in the last two years (Christensen, 2023; Hari, 2018; Junger, 
2016). However, agonic individualism has a broader inﬂuence on American culture as 
well. Capitalist economics promote individualistic competition in an unstable system 
(non-formalized rank), and so produces profound social stratiﬁcation with narratives 
that justify inequality in ways explicitly opposed to the national values of pluralism and 
equality. The result is a social environment of status insecurity and uncertainty, toxic 
social comparison (see: social media and depression), little social trust, high rates of 
mental illness and addiction, and few communal safety nets, among other related social 
problems (Hari, 2018; Junger, 2016; Marmot & Sapolsky, 2014; Wilkinson & Pickett,

302 
2011). 
What is most notable is that workers who face these conditions show evidence 
of internalizing agonic individualism and recapitulating an agonic worldview and lifestyle 
because stressful environments produce adaptive strategies suited to navigating them 
(Biglan et al., 2020; Ellis et al., 2012). When people internalize a strong overlay of agonic 
individualistic values that promote self-interest, conﬂict and status-seeking, regardless 
of their more intrinsic neurotype needs and motivations, they internalize what Hari 
(2018) called “junk values.” Such values are more likely to be endorsed by people who 
have lived in threatening life circumstances as a capture of agonic survivalism, even 
though having this worldview is more distressing and threatening to maintain (Biglan et 
al., 2020). These values also reinforce extrinsic motivators (materialism as “keeping up 
with the Joneses”) and steer people away from the intrinsic motivations that provide an 
evidence-based path to meaningful well-being, and lead to endorsing higher levels of 
negative emotionality on a day-to-day basis (Hari, 2018). 
This dynamic has been well-captured by M. Larsen et al. (2023), whose multilevel 
model of well-being captures well-being on two levels - individual happiness and 
collective meaning. Happiness is considered self-oriented, transient and inherently 
unsustainable; meaning is group-oriented (an “altruistic contribution”), enduring and 
more sustainable. However, meaning is a luxury of the rare healthy social systems that 
create a systemic abundance of “altruistic opportunity:” the proliferation of roles that 
enjoy meaningful work to better the community. Altruistic opportunity is less common 
in agonic systems that skew toward competition for individual happiness, and more

303 
common in hedonic systems that oﬀer both win-win meaning and win-lose happiness. 
Nordic countries are examples of societies that create more win-win “surface area” to 
support altruistic opportunity, tipping the balance toward system-wide cooperation in 
ways that are sustainable, and less conﬂict-oriented, individually and collectively. 
Intrinsic values tend to foster such societies, thereby contributing to the “moral 
commons” on which civilization is built, and create altruistic contributions in doing so. 
Societies and cultures that curtail this opportunity eﬀectively deny access to meaning as 
a “niche organizer.” 
Values conﬂict as lose-lose dynamics. Attempts to internalize multiple value 
systems in conﬂict may also be bad for mental health. Consider an American 
conservative in the American south, who would have been part of an evangelical, 
“establishment” political caucus just two decades ago. In a modern ideological climate, 
there would be pressures to conform to hedonic individualistic values at the national 
level (“freedom” and “individual rights”), agonic individual values at the political level 
(i.e. Trumpian populism; capitalism) and agonic collectivist values at the cultural level 
(southern evangelical culture). For those who must iterate these dynamics across 
heterogeneous identities and environments, the result may be an internal lose-lose 
dynamic of always facing the threat of ideological punishment and conﬂict, without 
reprieve. Indeed, evidence suggests that 2nd generation immigrants are at higher risk of 
schizophrenia due to persistent social defeat, likely because they are attempting to live 
up to two incompatible values systems and ecologies, that of their adopted and native 
heritages (Selten & Cantor-Graae, 2005).

304 
Values environments as high-level punishers and reinforcers. There is a danger for 
people to become depressed in environments that feel oppressive to their values or 
punishing to their way of being. Here, we consider the demographic factors of 
ideological environments and the alignment with diﬀerent neurotypes as creating a 
potential for mismatch. Neurotype strategies correspond to high level moral values 
(Haidt, 2013), as well as characteristic values related to their life strategy such as 
creativity, achievement, intelligence, and fairness, to name a few. Social environments 
likely reward and punish along values-based dimensions, using values to frame 
ambiguous social information among people playing diﬀerent roles in a system. For 
instance, a person who holds values in individualism, adaptability and creativity by 
nature, may struggle in a corporate environment that rewards duty, obedience and 
loyalty. An imbalance of punishers to rewards is likely an “environment of defeat,” an 
agonic environment by nature of an imbalance of agonic punishers to hedonic resources 
and buﬀers. By way of example, agonic collectivistic environments have aphorisms to 
this eﬀect, such as “the nail that sticks up will be pounded down,” and evidence suggests 
a novelty-seeking temperament gene allele was selected out of the local population, 
plausibly due to the incompatibility of an individualistic temperament with a local 
collectivistic ecology (Chang et al., 1996). One can alternatively frame a values mismatch 
as an absence of high-level reinforcers for values-driven behavior, i.e. the sense of a lack 
of niches with a sense of moral purpose. For example, a person who embodies 
progressive values but lives in a conservative society, may feel there is no meaningful 
path toward social change in a society that celebrates the status quo and conserves

305 
power structures. If the status quo negatively impacts one’s well-being, and that person 
has perspicacity (Hanna et al., 2000) into this dynamic the oppressive social reality as 
entrapping, this may also be acutely maddening (see: gaslighting) particularly if their 
distress itself would be taken as a sign of “mental illness.” Thus, values mismatch can 
lead to internalized distress through alienation, entrapment and subjugation at the level 
of a values mismatch as high-level patterns of excess punishment and inadequate 
reward. 
Social conditions for inner agonic dimensions. A ﬁnal intrinsic dynamic of agonic 
and hedonic divide is that humans are in a perpetual tension: between their prosocial 
impulse toward group-level interdependence and meaningful cooperation as a non-
zero-sum (win-win) dynamic; and their individual self-interest to compete in the sexual 
marketplace for mating opportunities as an inherently zero-sum (win-lose) prospect 
(though this is only one particularly prominent example of such tension; Barker et al., 
2012). Sexual competitiveness brings out agonic individualism in young men in 
particular, with risky, aggressive and antisocial dimensions (Ellis et al., 2012; M. Wilson & 
Daly, 1985), and a potent inﬂuence on groups of young men that self-organize into 
agonic individualism outside of prosocial inﬂuences (Mazur & Booth, 1998). Hudson and 
den Boer (2004) tracked countries with an increasingly imbalanced male-to-female ratio 
in countries such as China and India and found young men without romantic prospects 
routinely pose a threat to domestic peace and stability, are an antecedent to 
international violence, and jeopardize the future of democracy. A study by Brooks et al. 
(2022) corroborated this link by geolocating 4 million tweets by online incels who

306 
espouse “involuntary celibacy” and promote misogyny and violence. They found that 
the tweets were tracked to local mating markets with male-biased sex ratios, high 
competition for few single women, pronounced income inequality, and reduced gender 
gaps in income. A study by Luberti et al. (2022) reversed this ﬁnding: young men who 
were experimentally manipulated to receive negative feedback about their video dating 
proﬁle could be induced to have low positive aﬀect and reduced support for casual sex, 
but also greater general support for right wing [agonic] political positions, such as 
resistance to raising the minimum wage or expanding healthcare. Paradoxically, then, 
individual violence is naturally constrained by social conditions like hedonic collectivism, 
found most prominently in the Nordic countries, which better employ “reverse 
dominance hierarchies” as social controls that prevent excess hierarchy (Wilkinson & 
Pickett, 2011; D. S. Wilson et al., 2023). This approach sustainably and equitably 
distributes “individual prosperity and altruistic opportunity” (M. Larsen et al., 2023) to 
prevent the “toxic” social conditions that radicalize young men and contribute to 
political populism. 
In conclusion, values- or ideological-environments are shaped by material social 
and cultural conditions to create agonic (individualistic or collectivistic) or hedonic 
(individualistic or collectivistic) environments. Such environments shape many of the 
niche environments we spend our waking hours in across our many social identities. 
When these hidden ecosystems constrain social mobility, social trust and social status 
opportunities, they prove toxic to our biopsychosocial mental health (Hari, 2018; 
Marmot & Sapolsky, 2014; Sapolsky, 2017; Wilkinson & Pickett, 2011). Toxic social

307 
conditions: a) promote life history “fast” strategies that are suited to stressful social 
conditions but challenge prosocial development (Biglan et al., 2020), b) promote 
antagonistic mentalities that can be hateful, judgmental, and self-critical and create 
further conﬂict and stress (Gilbert, 1992b; 2005c), and c) make it diﬃcult to switch back 
to hedonic mode after spending too much time in the physiologically deregulating 
agonic mode (J. S. Price, 1992). Most paradoxical is that people who are locked in an 
agonic mode and live in agonic cultural conditions, are more likely to embody and 
espouse such worldviews despite not beneﬁting from them, making it diﬃcult to break 
out of a vicious cycle both personally, and socially, as observers are less likely to be 
attracted to their cause. Still, hedonic collectivism seems like the likely long-term 
sustainable solution both for the aﬄicted, and those who must coexist with them (M. 
Larsen et al., 2023; D. S. Wilson et al., 2023). 
Key Mechanisms: Positions, Intersections, Traumatic Stress, Spirals & Self-regulation 
Social Positions. The impact and deleteriousness of “environments of injury” 
come from a number of factors that can exacerbate their impact in the social landscape. 
For instance, as has been partially explored, social positions can mitigate or magnify the 
eﬀects of injuries as better social positioning. In general, one seeks to be away from the 
edge of a social network (J. T. Cacioppo & Patrick, 2009; Christakis & Fowler, 2011; Zak, 
2007), higher up a social hierarchy (Gilbert, 2001a; 2001b; Hari, 2018; Marmot, 2006; 
Marmot et al., 1984; 1991; Sapolsky, 1994; 2004) and “closer” (in time and space) to 
attainable goals (Alloy & Abramson, 1988; H. Choi & Shin, 2023; Erickson et al., 1975; 
Gilbert, 1992b; 2005a; Hanna et al., 2000; Mirowsky & Ross, 1983). Better social

308 
positions mean more resilience factors (for instance, from high quality relationships) 
and social resources with which to deal with injuries, and often means fewer potential 
injuries from better positions (Elstad, 1998); worse social positions suﬀer from “the 
inequitable distribution of psychosocial injuries” and may translate to having fewer 
resilience factors with which to deal with them (i.e., being overworked, undernourished 
and having no sleep, while facing toxic relationship conditions). 
Social dynamics are paralleled in embodied pathways for better and worse. Social 
“wins” may release neurotransmitters that act as psychological resources, while “losses” 
release cortisol and erode resources. For instance, Gilbert (1989; 1992b) talked of the 
way chronic social stressors from threats and conﬂict may release neurotransmitters to 
mount mental resources, but this can burn through them over time, leaving one 
physiologically depleted. This may go some way to accounting for a critical link between 
social phenomena and embodied consequences that drive biologically-reductive 
theories of mental illness (Moncrieﬀ et al., 2022). At a psychological level, awareness of 
poor positions – for instance, as an intuition of one’s highly constrained options – may 
magnify the impact of injuries by accurately modeling the gravity of one’s barriers and 
lack of control (Alloy & Abramson, 1984; Griﬃths et al., 2014; Hanna et al., 2000; 
Mirowsky & Ross, 1983). This may mean that therapy works in part by creating a 
microculture where the social positions are all positive – the client is elevated to the 
primary focus in the dyadic social network, hierarchy and goals of the system. 
Intersections. All people have numerous intersectional identities , meaning that 
we all play multiple identity roles across the social world, with each positioned

309 
diﬀerently in diﬀerent environments. Some of those identities may be well positioned in 
more hedonic environments (mother in a positive family environment; community 
member in a good neighborhood), while others may be poorly positioned in more agonic 
environments (employee in a toxic work environment; citizen in an unequal country). As 
we naturally switch between social roles and identities, with their diﬀerent proﬁles of 
stress or support, the embodied consequences accumulate as an allostatic load – stress 
“wear and tear” – in a single embodied form. Consequently, social disadvantage is a 
magniﬁer often because it yields more disempowered identities that interact in unique 
ways within the individual (Crenshaw, 1989). Framed ecologically, marginalized people 
have more disadvantaged identities (race, class, ability, etc.) that have more exposure to 
agonic environments, with fewer hedonic positions and environments with which to 
buﬀer them, creating a skewed ratio of positive resources to negative stressors and 
injuries (see: distribution of resources and stressors; Elstad, 1998). This may further act 
to make some identities act as a drag on other identities in a “poor-get-poorer” dynamic. 
Alternatively, those who have multiple well-positioned identities may experience fewer 
defeats and have multiple resilient identities with which to buﬀer the less resilient ones, 
in a “rich-get-richer” dynamic colloquially termed privilege. 
Social Threats can Traumatize. There is increasingly evidence that Criterion A, 
which holds that trauma is deﬁned by a “exposure to actual or threatened death, 
serious injury, or sexual violence” (American Psychiatric Association, 2013, p. 271, 
Criterion A) may misframe what makes an experience inherently traumatic (Bjornsson et 
al., 2020; Bryant, 2016; Charuvastra & Cloitre, 2009; Junger, 2016; S. E. Larsen & Pacella,

310 
2016; Oh, 2015; Spence et al., 2019). The DSM-5 removed the emotional criterion of 
“intense fear, helplessness, or horror” (American Psychiatric Association, 1994, p. 467, 
Criterion A2) from the DSM-IV, and while this subsequently curtailed the number of 
events classiﬁed as clinically traumatic, the prevalence of PTSD has remained eﬀectively 
the same (Elhai et al., 2012; Kilpatrick et al., 2013). The existing deﬁnition of PTSD 
emphasizes the role of a threat to life (Bjornsson et al., 2020; Weathers & Keane, 2007), 
meaning that trauma should scale in intensity and impact the closer one perceives an 
event took them to actual death. However, this is often not the case with sexual 
violence (Bjornsson et al., 2020) or racial trauma (Cenat, 2023; Williams et al., 2018), 
and indeed, a number of studies have shown that people can have post-traumatic stress 
symptoms and not meet Criterion A (Bjornsson et al., 2020). A meta-analysis of 22 
studies by S. E. Larsen and Pacella (2016) revealed that experiences where post-
traumatic stress symptoms were associated with Criterion A had only a slightly larger 
eﬀect size than those with symptoms that did not have a qualifying Criterion A 
experience. Another study by S. E. Larsen and Berenbaum (2017) found the eﬀect size 
between the two paths to symptoms to be similar. S. D. Gold et al. (2005) divided 454 
college undergraduates between two groups – those who faced a traumatic experience 
that was consistent with Criterion A and those who faced an experience that was 
inconsistent with Criterion A. They found that there were substantially more who 
experienced an inconsistent traumatic event, and that those who did had 
symptomatology that was typically of signiﬁcantly greater severity. 
Judith Herman (1992, p. 377), renowned for her work on complex trauma, has

311 
argued that the state of being traumatized can come from experiences of a more 
abstract and social nature, such as social conditions of being “under a state of captivity, 
unable to ﬂee, and under the control of the perpetrator.” Of particular signiﬁcance, she 
wrote, was a state of “coercive control,” where it mattered little if the victim was held 
physically captive, or if they were entrapped by “a combination of physical, economic, 
social and psychological means:” “The psychological impact of subordination to coercive 
control may have many common features, whether that subordination occurs within the 
public sphere of politics or within the supposedly private (but equally political) sphere of 
sexual and domestic relations” (Herman, 1992, p. 378). However, Herman’s etiological 
factors are quite tangible when considering the biggest threats and stressors to social 
animals. Entrapment (loss of control and inability to escape) and defeat (coercive 
subjugation), as well as alienation (disrupted attachments) are all injuries and 
experiences that threaten one’s “social survival”: one’s ability to curate the esteem, 
belonging, support, security and resources in a social ecology (Baumeister & Leary, 
1995; Coan & Sbarra, 2015; Gilbert, 1992b; Spence et al., 2019). Inversely, we know that 
social factors are bound up in PTSD risk because social factors confer resilience while 
their absence confers vulnerability; i.e. compassionate and care-eliciting relationships 
regulate threat systems (Gilbert, 2014). 
Studies have borne out such themes to be more distressing than Criterion A 
experiences (Spence et al., 2019), such as a study of trauma in political prisoners that 
showed subjective patterns in who does and does not become traumatized: enduring 
mental defeat, loss of control, and alienation from attachments was predictive of greater

312 
PTSD, while individuals were protected if they could maintain a sense of control and 
political or ideological commitments (Ehlers et al., 2000). Contextual approaches echoed 
similar themes, acknowledging that negative life events (as sub-traumatic events that do 
not constitute a “threat to life”) can nevertheless be related to the risk of PTSD when 
they involve acts of humiliation, rejection or entrapment (Spence et al., 2019). 
Junger (2016) framed similar ﬁndings through a contextual social animal lens, 
exploring trauma and recovery against the backdrop of combat across a number of 
global conﬂict zones as far back as colonial America. He found trauma resilience comes 
from meaningful social bonds that confer resilience to social threats. Consider a few 
enlightening ﬁndings. First, war is not hell for many: high unit cohesion is a powerful 
resilience factor to the violence of combat because it lowers competitive individuality 
and creates the ideal conditions of mutual reliance to form a deep and meaningful 
“brotherhood of pain,” even in the face of high casualty rates. Trauma treatment can be 
diﬃcult because many soldiers want to keep aspects of the experience. Second, citing 
case studies from Israel, Sri Lanka, World War II and the Balkans, one paradoxically faces 
a higher risk of developing trauma when they cannot partake in a shared and 
meaningful struggle as they cannot access the resilience factors of trauma bonds. For 
instance, rear-guard troops and drone pilots see a threefold increase in the rate of 
trauma diagnoses as front-line troops, even when controlling for misdiagnosis. Similarly, 
those who are disadvantaged in their ability to form such bonds include people who’ve 
faced early life traumas, which impairs their ability to form deep and enduring 
relationships, and they likewise suﬀer higher rates of combat-related trauma because

313 
they cannot access the resilience of trauma bonds for diﬀerent reasons. Fourth, the 
skyrocketing rates of trauma diagnoses in modern military conﬂicts and in the US in 
particular (relative to other countries), may not reﬂect not greater adversity – these 
conﬂicts are relatively “safer” than the conditions in historical conﬂicts – as much as the 
conditions of social resilience for troops, which may be poorer. Finally, societies 
compound trauma risk when they handle social reentry poorly. Veterans are alienated 
through misplaced hero worship while negligent policies fail to provide material beneﬁts 
and psychological dignities such as meaningful work; moreover, the reintegration 
process replaces the raw tribal communalism of military combat with a society of 
narrow transactional self-interest: 
What people miss presumably isn’t danger or loss but the unity that these things 
often engender. There are obvious stresses on a person in a group, but there 
may be even greater stresses on a person in isolation, so during disasters there is 
a net gain in well-being. Most primates, including humans, are intensely social, 
and there are very few instances of lone primates surviving in the wild. A modern 
soldier returning from combat—or a survivor of Sarajevo—goes from the kind of 
close-knit group that humans evolved for, back into a society where most people 
work outside the home, children are educated by strangers, families are isolated 
from wider communities, and personal gain almost completely eclipses collective 
good. Even if he or she is part of a family, that is not the same as belonging to a 
group that shares resources and experiences almost everything collectively. 
Whatever the technological advances of modern society—and they’re nearly

314 
miraculous—the individualized lifestyles that those technologies spawn seem to 
be deeply brutalizing to the human spirit. (pp. 92-93) 
A “social ecology of PTSD” presents a consilience of evidence from social 
neuroscience, social cognition, epidemiology, developmental psychology and other 
academic programs, suggesting a paradoxical shift in how we understand trauma and 
recovery (Charuvastra & Cloitre, 2009). For a social species, protective factors against 
traumatic stress come from meaningful social conditions such as relationships built on 
mutual reliance, social purpose and a sense of importance – and so social animals are 
also the most traumatized when these factors are threatened or lost (Bryant, 2016; 
Charuvastra & Cloitre, 2009; Junger, 2016). The perspective emphasizes trauma risk and 
recovery as social phenomena, and explains paradoxical observations about trauma and 
recovery. For instance, the social deterioration model of trauma holds that trauma 
shatters one’s ability to feel supported and disrupts social support systems; as 
individuals reduce expectations of support, they hurt their support relationships, which 
worsens their traumatic stress response and prolongs recovery (Barrera, 1988; Bryant, 
2016; Wheaton, 1985). A longitudinal study found intense PTSD at 2 years predicted lost 
social support networks at 5 years (King et al., 2006). A study by Kaniasty and Norris 
(1993) showed high levels of support at 6 months following a natural disaster predicted 
decreased PTSD symptoms at 12 months, and similarly, support at 12 to 18 months 
predicted decreased PTSD symptoms; however, high levels of PTSD symptoms also 
predicted decreased support. At the heart of the trauma complex, then, is the way 
trauma paradoxically damages the social resources needed to deal with the trauma, all

315 
because social animals coregulate threat, stress and emotion primarily with other social 
animals (J. T. Cacioppo & Patrick, 2013; Coan & Sbarra, 2015; Junger, 2016). 
Trauma as social threat also explains why the classes of event that are most 
likely to traumatize, either as single-episode and complex traumas, are events caused by 
other people, i.e. “events of human intent” (Charuvastra & Cloitre, 2009). Traumas of 
human intent carry a high traumatizing risk: for men, rape (65%), combat exposure 
(38.8%), childhood neglect (23.9%), and childhood physical abuse (22.3%); for women, 
rape (46%), childhood physical abuse (48.5%), being threatened with a weapon (32.6%), 
and sexual molestation (26.5%; Kessler et al., 1994; 2005; Kessler & Merikangas, 2004). 
Meanwhile, traumas of a non-social nature have about a 10% probability of PTSD, about 
half the risk of the next most impactful social trauma. 
The social animal view of trauma means seeing trauma as less about the power 
of speciﬁc events, and more about the nature of social threats . That is, social trauma risk 
is not simply shifting to interpersonal events, but about the embedded social meaning of 
profound humiliations, entrapments and rejections. Such social insults are deeply 
overwhelming because they threaten one’s social standing, resources and resilience, i.e. 
the social capital that is as important to one’s survival as physical survival, for 
evolutionary reasons (Baumeister & Leary, 1995; Benight et al., 2018; Bjornsson et al., 
2000). Bjornsson et al. (2020) explored social anxiety disorder (SAD) as a risk factor for 
PTSD because social anxiety may itself be an evolutionary response to social threats, as 
it is anticipated fear of social humiliation, rejection or criticism, typically due to an 
overwhelming past experience of that nature. The study compared a control group of

316 
people with OCD (n=19), or no disorder (n=60), with people who had a diagnosis of 
social anxiety disorder (SAD; n=60), where most had had a signiﬁcant social trauma 
revealed by interview: 63.3% of the control group, 78.9% of the clinical control group 
(OCD), and 81.7% of the SAD group. Social trauma included bullying, teasing, 
mental/physical and sexual violence/harassment, anxiety-provoking remarks, rejection, 
social mishaps, and outsider status. While most victims reported signiﬁcant impairment 
and emotional distress from their experience, it was the one third (32.7%) of SAD 
respondents that developed an acute trauma reaction. The authors concluded that 
extreme social threats could both create the conditions for social anxiety as a 
psychological vigilance to further threats, which further primed the body to be 
vulnerable to experiences of acute social threat, making PTSD and SAD act as if they 
were a single self-reinforcing condition. 
In summary, a social animal/social ecology view of trauma sees resilience as 
more than atomized individual factors, but a social gestalt of belonging and purpose in 
“something bigger,” ala a social superorganism. This places the emphasis on trauma not 
on the nature of a singular event, but on the psychosocial context where a) evolved 
social psychology regulates resilience and vulnerability to threat (Charuvastra & Cloitre, 
2008; Coan & Sbarra, 2015) and b) attacks to one’s social survival include the social 
violence of acts of subjugation, marginalization or disenfranchisement which damage 
one’s psychosocial threat resilience, in part because a self-organizing sense of social 
danger damages the trust necessary to maintain protective relationships (Bjornsson et 
al., 2019; Bryant, 2016; Dickerson et al., 2009). This view challenges the signiﬁcance of

317 
criterion A (“a threat to life”) as central to PTSD, as criterion A cannot theoretically 
accommodate the trauma-like proﬁles of drone pilots who never experience real danger 
(Junger, 2016); the phenomenon of race-based traumatic stress that might accrue 
through persistent microaggressions as microinsults, microassaults and 
microinvalidations (Carter, 2007; Harrison & Tanner, 2018); the evidence that life events 
involving public humiliation, ridicule or rejection are more distressing than criterion A 
experiences (Spence et al., 2019); or trauma-like proﬁles among those who live on the 
periphery of a social network, where a similar diagnostic proﬁle – hypervigilance to 
social threat, increased salience to social cues, conﬁrmation bias toward perceived 
social danger, and a negative memory bias to social information - can arise simply from 
being on the social fringe (J. T. Cacioppo et al., 2013). Many people live alongside threats 
to life daily, but the collapse of interpersonal safety sabotages the neural pathways that 
keeps one’s embodied threat perception on a leash (J. T. Cacioppo & Patrick, 2009; J. T. 
Cacioppo et al., 2013). Consequently, it can be traumatic to attack one’s social survival 
because one is attacking an individual’s sense that they are safe within an ingroup 
where subjective safety and threat insensitivity are tied to one’s security in the group, 
and danger is less about objective events, and more how dangerous events can feel if 
one feels they are outside the protective context of normal social living (J. T. Cacioppo 
et al., 2013; Gilbert, 1989; 1992b; Hari, 2018; Junger, 2016; Sapolsky, 2017). Many paths 
to traumatic vigilance occur through the gradual loss of control and self-regulation, and 
the rise of a complex trauma as persistent, unbuﬀered social stressors (Bjornsson et al., 
2019; Herman, 1992). Some of the most stressful events humans face are social in nature

318 
(see: social evaluative threat ) which is stress that arises from social scrutiny in scenarios 
such as test-taking and public speaking (Gramer & Saria, 2007). Thus, triggers of 
catastrophic loss of social positioning likely make for high levels of traumatic threat, 
which doesn’t always require the insidious eﬀects of traumatic stress to be grounded in 
objective danger, but importantly, always constitute social violence toward one’s social 
survival (Carter, 2007; Oh, 2015; Rosenberg, 1999). 
By implication, the social ecology/animal view of trauma extends conceptual 
legitimacy to traumatic disruptions of safety, security and opportunity, which make it 
increasingly hard to access embodied resource states of safety, conﬁdence and hope, 
which can help explain why inﬁdelity and other social disruptions are involved in trauma 
risk (Spence et al., 2019). This is true at individual levels, but also at societal levels, as we 
see from the nature of agonic and hedonic environments: some environmental 
conditions promote safety, esteem and freedom at a deep normative level (hedonic 
environments), while some environments promote power and threat at the normative 
level (agonic environments) and thus normalize traumatic insecurity to social positions. 
Trauma-like features are in many ways features of agonic “mode,” which helps navigate 
environments of injury with vigilant sensitivity to cues of power and threat, by tracking 
vectors of social and positional danger, and by preparing ﬁght-ﬂight behavior to the 
exclusion of intelligence, prosociality and creativity (Chance, 1980; 1984; 1988). Hedonic 
mode is thus a double-edged sword: it is critical to the mental foundation of higher 
cognitive faculties, but it is easily undercut by an agonic mode that becomes harder and 
harder to dislodge each time it is activated, spreading a sense of associated social

319 
danger around every corner, and equating safety with a vulnerability to lurking agonic 
threat. 
Balance of Stressors and Resources. Modern environments need not be overtly 
agonistic to trigger agonic mode because as traumatic stress illustrates, both stressors 
and the loss of psychosocial resources carry trauma risk, so it may be that the subjective 
ratio of stressors to energetic resources is suﬃcient to signify threat. The perception of 
whether an environment feels dangerous may simply be an internal calculation of 
whether stress feels acute or chronic, and whether stressors feel manageable within 
one’s existing mental and social resources. Given that excess stress over-utilizes 
neurotransmitters and can “burn through” them under chronic duress (Gilbert, 1992b), it 
is likely that the subjective qualia of feeling “stressed out” is eﬀectively synonymous 
with an inability to feel one’s subjective energetic resources which in turn ampliﬁes 
perceived stress in their absence. A similar mechanism has been implicated in 
neurodiverse burnout, where there is an overproliferation of stressors and lack of 
support, which fails to provide enough energy to meet social expectations (Raymaker et 
al., 2020); i.e. burnout is about a lack of social energy as resources. Therefore, any path 
that takes one to an insuﬃcient ratio of stressors to resources–- either due to too many 
stressors or too few resources–- may sensitize agonic mode in the body. Indeed, life 
history research points to a critical developmental window in childhood where excess 
stressors and inadequate supports may provide the central environmental contribution 
to creating fast strategies, ﬂipping the epigenetic switch that moves one away from 
“slow and steady wins the race,” and toward “live fast and die young” (Biglan et al.,

320 
2020). Simply put, then, any overproliferation of stressors and attenuation of social 
resources may be suﬃcient to trigger acute stress reactivity, sensitivity to social threat 
and the cognitive shifts toward impaired intelligence, prosociality and creativity 
(Chance, 1984; 1988). By extension, social conditions that are particularly toxic to social 
animals include any environments skewed toward over-stress and under-support, 
including: the anticipation of losing control, uncertainty, eﬀort-to-reward imbalances 
(see: structural inconsistency ), entrapment (see: low social mobility), status insecurity, 
unstable hierarchies, social comparison across hierarchical gradients, lack of support 
(see: lack of safety nets), lack of high-quality and authentic relationships, lack of social 
trust and cohesion, punitive social policies, and so on (Booth et al., 1989; 2006; J. T. 
Cacioppo & Patrick, 2008; J. T. Cacioppo et al., 2013; S. Cacioppo et al., 2015; H. Choi & 
Shin, 2023; Elstad, 1998; Leary & Baumeister, 2000; Leary, 1999; 2004; Marmot et al., 
1984; 1991; Marmot, 2006; 2015; Mazur & Booth, 1998; Sapolsky, 1994; 2017; 
Seligman, 1975; Wilkinson & Pickett, 2011; Zink et al., 2008). 
Unsustainability: Self-regulatory Resilience and Compensatory Mechanisms. 
Feedback about social survival comes from each mentality system as automatic and 
preconscious data ( J. T. Cacioppo & Patrick, 2009; J. T. Cacioppo et al., 2009; Gilbert, 
1992b; Kirkpatrick & Ellis, 2001; Mahadevan et al., 2016; Zink et al., 2008), where it 
aﬀects a variety of biological regulators in the brain: neurotransmitters, neurohormones 
and neuropeptide pathways including serotonin (McGuire et al, 1983; Watanabe & 
Yamamoto, 2015), oxytocin and vasopressin (J. T. Cacioppo & Patrick, 2009; J. T. 
Cacioppo et al., 2009; Sapolsky, 2017; Zak, 2012) testosterone (Mazur & Booth, 2005;

321 
Sapolsky, 2017) dopamine (DeYoung et al., 2011; Sapolsky, 2004; 2017), norepinephrine 
(Sapolsky, 1998; 2017) and others. Rather than these pathways pointing to debunked 
theories of chemical imbalances (Baughman, 2006; Moncrief et al., 2023), evidence 
suggests these biological regulators capture a variety of social dynamics related to social 
survival, and facilitate important subjective shifts in psychological well-being to convey 
their adaptive information (J. T. Cacioppo & Patrick, 2013; Sapolsky, 2017; Selten & 
Cantor-Graae, 2005; Zak, 2008). Rather than reﬂect intrinsic deﬁcits, such mechanisms 
likely provide a path for social adversity to aﬀect mental health by driving subjective, 
cognitive, aﬀective and behavioral changes in ways that are outside one’s ability to self-
regulate them, contributing a robust path to diagnosable psychological conditions. 
For instance, social defeat experiences involve changes to dopamine, serotonin, 
testosterone and other neurotransmitter pathways, which leads to a variety of 
cognitive, behavioral and aﬀective changes. When internalized defeat becomes mental 
defeat, a predictable loss of aﬀective regulation including the subjective assessment of 
one’s own personal failure, inadequate intelligence, poor academic achievement, and 
perceived unattractiveness, regardless of how objectively false that assessment may be 
(Björkqvist, 2001). Experiences of loneliness are likewise mediated by physiological and 
neurotransmitter changes, and lead to paranoid vigilance and mistrust of others in 
extremis, leading one to make unfair and malicious social attributions about the intent 
of others (J. T. Cacioppo & Patrick, 2008; J. T. Cacioppo et al., 2013). Realistic 
perceptions of social entrapment can lead to a negativity bias and cognitive pessimism 
called depressive realism, as well as uncontrollable avolition (Alloy & Abramson, 1988;

322 
Hanna et al., 2000), likely by impacting on the dopamine pathways and removing the 
default human optimism bias (Sharot et al., 2012). These phenomena are hallmarks of 
diagnostic “symptoms” familiar to clinical evaluation, yet each is in fact a predictable 
social animal phenomenon: impaired cognitive and aﬀective self-regulation is the 
expected outcome of adverse niche dynamics including isolation, entrapment and 
subjugation. 
Biosocial pathways that predictably involve a loss of self-control or self-regulation 
extend to a range of phenomena: the inability to regulate one’s nervous system 
activation (Björkqvist, 2001; J. T. Cacioppo & Patrick, 2008; J. T. Cacioppo et al., 2009), 
the inability to control social approach behavior or general motivation, and an increase 
of involuntary behavioral inhibition (Björkqvist, 2001; J. T. Cacioppo & Patrick, 2008; J. T. 
Cacioppo et al., 2009; Gilbert, 1989, 1992b; Sapolsky, 1994; 2004; 2017), an increase in 
negative health outcomes such as cardiac, sleep and inﬂammatory dysregulation and 
sensitization of biochemical pathways (Björkqvist, 2001; J. T. Cacioppo & Patrick, 2009; J. 
T. Cacioppo et al., 2009; Sapolsky, 1994; 2004; 2017), the telegraphing of repulsive 
social signals (J. T. Cacioppo & Patrick, 2009), the tendency to lose social positions (S. 
Cacioppo & Patrick 2015; Sapolsky, 2017), and an increase in adverse social experiences 
from positional vulnerability as a result (J. T. Cacioppo & Patrick, 2009; Elstad, 1998). 
The loss of embodied self-regulation, typically considered a sign of mental illness, is a 
predictable consequence of positional vulnerability to social adversity (Björkqvist, 2001; 
J. T. Cacioppo & Patrick, 2009; J. T. Cacioppo et al., 2009; Elstad, 1998; Gilbert, 1989, 
1992b; Hari, 2018; Sapolsky, 1994; 2004; 2017), and highlights how the gain of group-

323 
level adaptive advantages such as interdependence, cohesion and coordination can 
involve powerful receptivity to social signals that can, at the extreme, involve the 
potential loss of physiological self-control when negative social inﬂuences aﬀect 
sensitive biopsychosocial pathways. 
Much of this can ﬁt an adapted model of self-regulatory strength or self-
regulatory resilience (Bauer & Baumeister, 2011; Baumeister, 2016) where self-
regulation is seen as a ﬁnite, energetic resource that can be lost and thereby lead to 
overeating, crime, abuse, gambling, prejudice, addiction and more. Inversely, self-
regulatory resilience may be increased by ﬁlling one’s “mental gas tank” which includes 
any experiences that may be restorative or energizing to a social animal. While a full 
social animal account is beyond the scope of this section, one might adopt a categorical 
view that corresponds to the various social mentalities (Gilbert, 1992b; 2000b; 2005a; 
2005c; 2017; 2019) and the types of social resources one might access as part of social 
coregulation (Coan & Sbarra, 2015): social connection and intimacy (J. T. Cacioppo & 
Patrick, 2008; J. T. Cacioppo et al. 2013; S. Cacioppo et al., 2015), competitive or 
cooperative achievement (Gilbert, 1992b; 2000b; Griﬃths et al., 2014; Hollis & Kabbaj 
2014; Mazur & Booth, 2005), fulﬁlling social expectations and personal goals (Coan & 
Sbarra, 2015), and satisfying needs for curiosity and fun (see: cognitive novelty). That 
is, self-regulation is improved by access to social resources that in turn help to access 
empowering psychological states that are energizing/motivating, feel good, confer 
resilience, and embolden psychosocial strengths. This has been framed as recovery 
capital within self-regulation shift theory (Benight et al., 2018).

324 
Self-regulatory resilience may help explain other psychological phenomena as 
well. It is plausible that social mentalities are tasked with solving both real social 
dilemmas and boosting psychological resources and strengths, and therefore must often 
make tradeoﬀs against both goals. For instance, Ratnayake (2022) pointed out that CBT 
overstates the relevance of reasoning to optimal mental health, in part because normal 
people exhibit a delusional optimism bias, while those who are particularly realistic 
about the world may gain depressive features because of it, i.e. depressive realism. Here 
we consider that ﬁndings like this make sense as trade-oﬀs between perceptual and 
cognitive accuracy on the one hand, and the need for social mentalities to adopt 
mindsets that boost psychosocial resources like motivation and resilience, even if they 
are unrealistic in doing so. In other words, cognitive and perceptual biases may be 
employed to bend reality in ways that empower energetic reserves and sacriﬁce truth 
when resources are deemed to be more important. Interestingly, pronounced 
irrationality may not be a feature of mental illness, per se; rather, those who are 
severely psychologically under-resourced may be irrationally attempting to boost 
desperately needed psychological resources, but when a lack of psychological realism 
makes it harder to solve real world problems, this may nevertheless contribute to a 
downward spiral. 
Each social mentality has a version of sacriﬁcing perceptual accuracy strategically 
to boost psychosocial resources. For instance, social connections release neuropeptides 
designed to facilitate cooperation by motivating social trust and cooperation (J. T. 
Cacioppo & Patrick, 2008; Zak, 2012); however, central in this eﬀort is the need to

325 
override rational assessments of the potential dangers of cooperation, such as defection 
(Zak, 2012). In Prisoner’s Dilemma experiments, which mimic real-life scenarios where 
cooperation toward a goal is the most adaptive option, the obstacle to both parties 
cooperating with one another is reasonable fear that the other party will defect or 
freeload on one’s eﬀorts. The release of the neuropeptide oxytocin in aﬃliative 
scenarios does not eliminate that risk of cooperation , but it does increase perceived 
feelings of safety, trust, generosity and relational motivation, all of which suppress fear, 
stress and anxiety associated, making cooperation more likely, particularly if the 
cooperator is a known member of an ingroup (Declerck et al., 2014). Thus, oxytocin 
motivates a cognitive bias toward trust (Kosfeld et al., 2005) and generosity (Zak et al., 
2007) to ingroups (Sapolsky, 2017) by oﬀering the self-regulatory strength of social 
connection as a reward, even at the expense of rationality. 
Defeated rivals exhibit involuntary behavioral inhibition following a social defeat. 
This evolved response serves the social group at large by allowing rivals to live in close 
social quarters after conﬂict without endless cycles of escalation and violence, while 
allowing the loser to avoid further harm by appeasing the aggressor with submissive 
behaviors (Gilbert, 1992b; 2000a; Griﬃths et al., 2014; Hollis & Kabbaj, 2014); however, 
this mechanism comes at great cost to the loser, eﬀecting submission through 
automatic involuntary self-inhibition, self-criticism and defeat-driven anxiety and 
depression. This dynamic is similar to the theorized mechanisms of internalized 
oppression and systems justiﬁcation , where one may readily believe themselves inferior 
by accepting an ideological belief system that is not aligned with their interests, in order

326 
to coexist among a group without signiﬁcant resistance (Jost & Hunyady, 2002). More 
generally, it can motivate a bias to see one’s self or one’s group as superior, a form of 
attribution bias (Haidt, 2013; Sapolsky, 2017; Wright, 1994) to boost levels of self-
conﬁdence as a resource. Again, a group function is promoted through cognitive biases 
by rewarding outcomes with self-regulatory strength - the ability to maintain a sense of 
conﬁdence and control while minimizing stress through the “palliative functions of 
ideology” (Jost & Hunyady, 2002). 
Finally, shared social beliefs and myths structure goals and expectations (the 
acquisitional mentality) by creating a practical reality based on useful ﬁctions that 
motivate coordinated action (D. S. Wilson, 2002). Ideological myths and beliefs likely 
evolved to sacriﬁce truth to facilitate ingroup cohesion and coordination as part of their 
core function (Henrich, 2016). One aspect of this function may be to boost shared 
psychological resources like hope and faith in service of curating motivation and control 
as social resources even if optimism borders on delusion when disproportionately 
attending to the positive (McGuire-Snieckus, 2014; Ratnayake, 2022; Sharot et al., 
2012). The obvious cost is that analytical rationalism became subservient to useful 
ﬁctions and myths throughout history (Henrich, 2016; Ratnayake, 2022), as realistic 
information about the future could be seen as threatening and undesirable if negative 
expectations about the future curtailed motivational resources in the present. 
Dopamine has been shown to naturally moderate belief formation to be skewed toward 
the positive to facilitate an optimism bias for this reason (Sharot et al., 2012), but the 
obvious costs of hope, faith and control in service of self-regulatory strength, is that

327 
realism is seen as having a zero-sum relationship with the truth that negatively impacts 
on well-being even when assessment of risks are reasonably warranted. 
Multilevel spiral dynamics. When individuals lose self-regulatory control, either 
through internalized states of defeat, alienation or entrapment, or through the loss of 
ideologies that tether one to the psychosocial resources of the group, they ﬁnd 
themselves witnessing themselves acting in ways that violate their values, beliefs and 
self-image. They may be impulsive, defensive, easily triggered, avoidant, labile, prone to 
magical thinking or likewise losing their ability to control their own behavior, aﬀect and 
cognition. They also lose the ability to act in their own long-term self-interest, prosocial 
self-interest, and status self-interest, all critical for long-term social success. The 
narratives we place on this tend to reinforce a loss of control, hope and normalcy, which 
likely makes things worse (MacDuﬃe & Strauman, 2017a; 2017b). However, the loss of 
self-regulatory resilience is a predictable consequence of social animal biosocial 
mechanisms and spiral dynamics. 
Spiral dynamics arise because they lose-lose conditions align biologically, 
psychologically, and socially in a poor-get-poorer dynamic. The loss of psychosocial 
resources, energy, strengths and resilience can position people in worse ways going 
forward creating a “losing” eﬀect, which can lead to further injuries and positions, 
ultimately leading to self-reinforcing states of suﬀering, pain, disorder and dysfunction. 
Motivational collapse, social collapse and status collapse (see: biosocial injuries) are 
individual spiral dynamics with aﬀective, cognitive and behavioral dimensions. Even 
sociocultural political dynamics likely play on these dynamics, and include low social

328 
mobility, economic inequality, and punitive public policies can scapegoat vulnerable 
groups with regressive taxes, reduced safety nets, imposed austerity and harsh 
sentencing (Marmot, 2006; Marmot et al., 1984; 1991; Wilkinson & Pickett, 2011). 
Obversely, there is an evolutionary Catch-22 that people who are suﬀering act in 
ways that beget further social injury. The loss of self-regulatory control makes for 
increasing impulsivity, irritability, aggression, reactivity, negativity biases, aggression, 
defensiveness, apathy, avolition, role failures and more. This behavior leads to further 
social punishment, mistreatment, and positional injuries, which in turn registers as new 
layers of entrapment, defeat and isolation to suﬀerers. Framed diﬀerently, people who 
are poorly resourced and positioned bring out the worst in those around them, and 
common people will seem to act as coordinated perpetrators to worsen the social 
positions of mental health suﬀerers despite no such coordination. For instance, autistic 
people face uncoordinated social punishment for their pragmatic language problems, 
reinforcing their loss of belief in a just world (Bertrams, 2022). Mirowski and Ross (1983) 
described microdynamic studies that highlight the unintentional synergy of individuals 
and groups in facilitating social spiral dynamics. Among vulnerable populations in 
Brownsville, Texas, along the US and Mexico border, people who were positionally 
vulnerable and routinely victimized came to feel rightly persecuted. The cost of rising 
threat-sensitivity was suspicion about further persecution and a loss of trust in group-
settings. Trust is a social resource, however, necessary to help one another meet 
cooperative goals (see: biosocial resources ), and persecuted people who lose trust will 
be further punished by failing to meet social and occupational expectations, which leads

329 
to lost social status. When vulnerable individuals who lose status face worsening social 
treatment, they intuitively seek to communicate to others about it, imploring social 
groups to make the implicit social rules into explicit social rules (i.e., “why am I being 
treated this way?”). However, such a dynamic only leads to further group punishment as 
the remaining group colludes to exclude the disempowered member, which cyclically 
reinforces their perceived lack of trust, safety, and paranoia. 
Given that biopsychosocial interactions can take on a downward spiral dynamic, 
we can infer the existence of a range of factors that contribute to resilience and 
vulnerability and may be more or less sustainable. Such variables would include the 
balance of one’s resources and injuries, one’s positions and identities, whether one was 
in environments of injury or support, and one’s life strategies and ideal niche proximity. 
Sustainability may be a less stigmatizing, but equally descriptive metaphor for framing 
mental health and well-being in an evolutionary frame. It includes a variety of 
connotations including the normality and predictability of collapse under extreme 
circumstances, the need to manage it to maintain sustainability, and a need to attend to 
what is sustainable and what is not, among other potential insights. Furthermore, it 
follows that clinical disorders may simply be embodied expressions of unsustainable 
dynamics, and therefore be a form of feedback that has itself become unsustainable. 
Niche dynamics and clinical disorders. Though non-exhaustive, niche dynamics 
account for biopsychosocial spiral dynamics that align in to create pathological states of 
embodied collapse. In doing so, they plausibly account for the main etiological pathways 
to clinical defense disorders (Del Giudice, 2018; DeYoung, 2015) as social injuries that

330 
sensitize neurotic defense potential in ways that worsen social prognosis and embodied 
well-being (Shackman et al., 2016). As with the evidence of social stressors and 
traumatic stress, evidence of [social] negative life events that predispose one toward 
depression go back at least as far as Brown and Harris (1978), validating the everyday 
importance of social buﬀering - lack of a conﬁdant is one of the “vulnerability factors” - 
having subsequent evidence to corroborate them (Patten, 1991). Depression can arise 
whenever approach motivation collapses in the face of assessed certainty about one’s 
inability to escape negative circumstances, while anxiety results from a more uncertain 
risk-reward proﬁle (DeYoung, 2015); both are also inherently present in defeat and 
loneliness pathways, which add other layers of depressogenic stress and inhibition and 
may extend to any circumstance that confers humiliation and rejection, such as 
unemployment (Brown & Harris, 1978; J. T. Cacioppo & Patrick, 2008; Gilbert, 1989; 
1992b; 2001a). Psychosis, beﬁtting the social defeat model of schizophrenia (Selten & 
Cantor-Graae, 2005), can also be framed as a defense disorder in that higher exposure 
to social defeats, both as frequency and magnitude, predict lifetime prevalence of 
psychotic episodes in non-schizophrenic people in a dose-response fashion (Oh, 2015). 
Paranoia can be framed as a traumatic disruption of safety that can be induced from the 
loss of social resources as with profound loneliness (J. T. Cacioppo & Patrick, 2008). 
Acute stress disorders can arise from suﬃciently social stressors particularly in a context 
of vulnerability through previous exposure to the social dangers of such stressors 
(Bjornsson et al., 2019; Bryant, 2016). 
It should be no wonder that many rightly think that etiological lines are blurry

331 
and lead to unnecessarily high rates of diagnostic comorbidity (Suris, 2016), as many of 
the social pathways to depression - entrapment, isolation and subjugation - self-
organize as plausible positional outcomes from general spiral dynamics. In other words, 
status collapse, motivational collapse and social collapse implicate one another along 
suﬃcient time horizons. The predisposing injuries may even share many of the same 
dynamics. For instance, depression from entrapment and defeat are independently 
depressogenic, but experiences of defeat also have an entrapping dynamic to them, 
called reverted escape (Gilbert, 2001a; Gilbert et al., 2004, Gilbert & Allan, 1994), while 
most social entrapment is inherently oppressive or socially coerced (Hanna et al., 2000; 
Herman, 1992); meanwhile, status loss involves a loss of social support and resources, 
while a loss of social resources may invariably impact on one’s social status. Said 
another way, all of these may be the body's way of registering either permanent social 
demobilization in an agonic system, or the inability to access a hedonic one. For this 
reason, it is plausible that one’s general well-being is most accurately assessed by one’s 
access to social resources, and ability to avoid social stressors, which is best captured as 
a more or less sustainable relationship to one’s overall social niche. 
Biosocial Niche Summary 
A niche perspective illustrates that real world social dynamics can be more or 
less unsustainable for human beings and their social survival, and this is not captured 
rationally, but by embodied and evolved psychological mechanisms with various 
subjective expressions. The evolved psychological mechanisms capture our social 
survival by adjusting perceived well-being through threat perception, a sense of self-

332 
esteem and self-respect, a sense of safety and control, access to psychological 
resources, access to higher cognitive capacities such as intelligence, prosociality and 
creativity, existential woes about our social security, the perceived manageability of 
social stressors, and more. The fact that these feedback mechanisms evolved to capture 
our entry into dangerous social environments, at least for some of our intersectional 
identities, means they supersede human rationality, and this paradoxically makes them 
seem irrational when they come out as impressionistic social fears and stresses without 
a clear objective origin. This in turn has historically allowed such fears to be not just 
dismissed, but helps them contribute to the perception of mental health suﬀerers as 
unreliable narrators, an epistemic injustice; moreover, attempts to communicate about 
positional social insults and injuries is often met with social punishment. Nevertheless, 
evolved pathways to track feedback about our social niche oﬀer us data about well-
being, some of which is under individual control, some of which is under social control, 
including unsustainable dynamics that are oppressive either intentionally or 
unintentionally (Hari, 2018). A niche view of mental health likely means that many of 
our current assumptions about human suﬀering and thriving are backwards, that mental 
health problems are not individual problems “in [one’s] head” but social problems 
pushed down onto individuals that compound many existing injustices. 
Let us brieﬂy summarize the relationship of Hari’s (2018) model to a niche model: 
Disconnection from meaningful work. Meaningful work dictates the role we 
play in a social superorganism, and whether that role ﬁts our life strategy and moral 
values, or not. Congruence with ourselves and our environments are necessary to

333 
access meaningful community, prestige hierarchies, and values-aligned goals. Agonic 
environments can be exploitative and stratiﬁed, and deprive people from control, 
autonomy, predictability or social resources with which to deal with their threats. 
Suﬃcient mismatches of any degree likely feel agonic. 
Disconnection from other people. Horizontal relationships create networks of 
attachments - friends, allies, romantic partners - that help co-regulate social threats and 
oﬀer psychosocial resources like safety, trust and cooperation. Injuries like rejection and 
alienation can lead to loneliness as an unsustainable state of lost hedonic resources and 
ampliﬁed social threat. 
Disconnection from meaningful values. Values are high-level patterns of reward 
and punishment that can be aligned or misaligned to those around them. One’s 
personal values emerge from their life strategy diversity (creativity, prosociality, 
intelligence), moral diversity (conservative, progressive, etc.), and characteristic 
adaptations. These dispositions can be rewarded or punished based on their ﬁt with the 
values of the prevailing sociomoral environments based on their agonic or hedonic 
nature and the kinds of roles one can play. One can be mismatched with these 
environments, internalize ill-ﬁtting values, fail to live up to incompatible values systems, 
and get stuck in agonic competitions. 
Disconnection from childhood trauma. Social threat is more powerful than 
previously believed, being capable of damaging social positions that create greater 
access to psychosocial injuries, with fewer relationships with which to deal with them. A 
poor balance of psychosocial resources to social stressors may be suﬃcient to activate a

334 
trauma-like proﬁle which further damages the relationships needed to regulate 
stressors. When this happens early in childhood, one may become locked into an agonic 
world that is diﬃcult to escape, physiologically, perceptually and ideologically. 
Disconnection from status and respect. Vertical relationships encapsulate both 
dominance hierarchies of power and threat, and prestige hierarchies of prosocial 
contribution and skill. Social defeats as humiliations and subjugation may dysregulate 
our ability to partake in these prestige games, and make one feel stuck in an agonic 
world of power and threat. 
Disconnection from the natural world. Not explored here. This category is 
diﬀerent by virtue of being non-social and non-agentive, and could fall within an 
extended umbrella that considers all other critical non-social dimensions to niche 
health. Such a taxonomy might include exercise, diet, sleep hygiene and daily structure 
(see: social rhythm; Levenson et al., 2015). Furthermore, connection to the natural 
world should itself be teased from data suggesting that environmental enrichment is 
buﬀering (Lehmann & Herkenham, 2011), and might then include anything from 
opportunities for restorative stimulation, to environmental beauty and comfort. 
Disconnection from a hopeful or secure future. Human goal-directedness is a 
cybernetic relationship with space and time. The agentive brain is devoted to building a 
model of the world held in memory, which is used to predict the future and manage 
motivational resources. A tradeoﬀ between cognitive realism and subjective motivation 
means anticipated entrapment can damage hope and faith as sources of goal-directed 
energy, and even skew individuals toward magical thinking for short-term motivational

335 
boosts, lest they develop the cognitive pessimism of depressive realism. 
The real role of genes and brain changes. Neuroplasticity debunks reductive 
brain-based narratives, while genes that sensitize one to their social environment for 
good or for ill implicate a broader range of neurodiverse factors. That includes 
individualized factors of who gets sick and why, as expressions of diﬀerences of life 
strategy, cognition, morality and sensitivity that lead to diﬀerent proﬁles of social 
challenges and trade-oﬀs. 
Therapeutic Mechanisms in Social Animals: Social Buﬀering and Hedonic Microcultures 
Human beings’ have a “social nature” with a profound ability for relationships to 
harm and heal, a power that underpins talk therapy as a “social cure” (Wampold & Imel, 
2015). The brain is socially optimized, comfortably managing between 100-230 (~150) 
relationships, not coincidentally the number found in tribal bands before tensions split 
the group in a ﬁssion/fusion dynamic (Dunbar, 1992). Humans meet their every 
challenge and need in concert with other people thanks to communication, 
organization, collaboration, and culture, which is thought to provide a unique adaptive 
advantage over other social animals, enabling humans to be the only species to 
transcend niches and dominate the planet as a whole (Christakis & Fowler, 2011; Haidt, 
2016; Henrich, 2016; D. S. Wilson, 2002; 2008; 2019; Wright, 2001). Sophisticated 
mechanisms facilitate deep intersubjectivity as an interdependent adaptive strategy, 
from representational brains that model the social world (Hawkins & Blakeslee, 2005), 
to mirror neurons that map others feeling states onto our own (Kilner & Lemon, 2013), 
neuropeptides like oxytocin that facilitate trust and safety and belonging while calming

336 
stress, fear and anxiety (Heinrichs et al., 2003; Kosfeld et al., 2005; Marazziti & 
Dell’Osso, 2008; Zak, 2012); neurotransmitters and hormones that respond to social 
positioning (Björkqvist, 2001; J. T. Cacioppo et al., 2009; Mazur & Booth, 2005; Sapolsky, 
1994; 2017; Wright, 1998); evaluative mechanisms that size up one’s degree of 
belonging or esteem in a group (see: sociometer ; hierometer ; Leary, 2004; Leary & 
Baumeister, 2000; Leary & Downs, 1995; Mahadevan et al., 2016), and social needs that 
tie well-being to social feedback (Hari, 2018; Sapolsky, 2017), to name only some. While 
evidence-based practice tends to emphasize speciﬁc ingredients in therapy as the 
mechanism of change, common factors proponents that these eﬀects make up just 7% 
of clinical outcomes, while 20-40% of outcomes are due to the real relationship, possibly 
because of the signiﬁcance of social factors to general human functioning (Wampold & 
Imel, 2015). 
Understanding the evolved basis of therapy is important because there is a deep 
evolutionary logic for why relationships injure and how they heal. First, social resources 
are simultaneously both indispensable and a luxury. Humans coregulate psychosocial 
threats through relationships because this motivates people to come together to face 
shared challenges as a central conceit of social evolution (Henrich, 2016; Haidt, 2013; D. 
S. Wilson, 2002; Wright, 2001). Social stressors are directly “buﬀered” by such 
relationships, mitigating the stress response immediately after an acute social injury 
(Crockford et al, 2017; Kikusui et al., 2006); this makes it intuitive to face stressors by 
seeking trusted allies (see: the tend-and-befriend stress response; H. Taylor et al., 2000). 
Yet social resources are not superﬂuous to one’s individual resources, they are a

337 
necessary and assumed part of one’s individual baseline (Coan & Sbarra, 2015); losing 
access to them may be intrinsically unsustainable. Psychosocial resources keep one’s 
acute threat response on a leash, making social interdependence necessary to inhibit 
the sympathetic nervous system, and keep stress, anxiety and fear conditioning from 
amplifying and spreading to a highly reactive, overwhelming and disabling state 
(Bjornsson et al., 2020; Bryant, 2016; J. T. Cacioppo & Patrick, 2008). Thus, people have 
evolved to regulate threats physiologically by receiving social attention, social feedback 
and social reassurance, all of which calm fear, stress, arousal and distress at an embodied 
level (J. T. Cacioppo & Patrick, 2008; Crockford et al., 2017; Sapolsky, 1994; 2017), and 
yet, people can lose access to their fundamental ability to coregulate. One’s relationship 
to their relational resources can therefore be more or less psychologically sustainable. 
A second key dimension to why relational healing is critical is that social survival 
is as evolutionarily real as one’s physical survival and the two are directly linked (Leary, 
1999; 2004). The power of social threats to our well-being have been signiﬁcantly 
underestimated, as the magnitude, frequency and exposure to such threats can be 
psychologically unsustainable (Björkqvist, 2001; Bjornsson et al., 2020; Oh, 2015; 
Sapolsky, 2017). Coregulating, managing and solving social stressors is incredibly 
important to social survival, yet some positional and political dilemmas can create a 
Catch-22 wherein attempts to communicate about them can make one’s predicament 
worse (Mirowsky & Ross, 1983); a politically-neutral, third party and safe support is 
required. Because social threats pose a cumulative, existential and physiological toll 
(Björkqvist, 2001; J. T. Cacioppo & Patrick, 2008; Elstad, 1998; Sapolsky, 2017), one may

338 
also lose self-regulatory resilience because of it, inviting further social mistreatment and 
injury, and further damage to social positions and resources, and amplifying social 
threat vectors in a vicious cycle. Spiral dynamics challenge one’s ability to ﬁnd social 
resources: people who can understand their complex problems, coregulate and buﬀer 
the stressors involved, or energize their resources against the problems. Thus, stressors 
can be naturally unsustainable because of their spiral dynamic toward exponential 
dysregulation. Regardless, the combination of resource and stressor dynamics make 
something clear: in contrast to connotations of therapy being “complaining,” a client is 
very much doing something evolutionarily real when they attempt to buﬀer their 
stressors, energize their resources, alleviate inhibiting mental states, clarify thinking, 
unburden emotions, create allies, build social energy, and motivate action. 
Much of the relational power of therapy can be seen as a form of social 
buﬀering. Social buﬀering is the use of physical, psychological and social support in 
social animals, from attention, grooming, aﬀection, assurance, sympathy, empathy, 
understanding and trusted touch (Crockford et al., 2017; Kikusui et al., 2006). At the 
physiological level, buﬀering reﬂects a social causal chain wherein a variety of inputs 
(such as mirror neurons) register a social connection, which then activates the rest and 
digest system, calms the amygdala and HPA axis, and releases oxytocin. The release of 
oxytocin registers a meaningful and subjective phenomenological change by promoting 
a state of safety, trust and openness and reducing stress, fear and anxiety; this is 
energizing, feels good, promotes psychosocial strengths like openness and generosity 
(Zak et al., 2007), and increases psychosocial resilience to injuries (Lehmann &

339 
Herkenham, 2011). Oxytocin is related to feelings of ingroup belonging (Sapolsky, 2017) 
which may have evolved in relation to outgroup challengers that would have been 
hostile in an evolutionary environment. Encountering challengers among friends meant 
two things: the rise of cortisol at impending conﬂict, and the ameliorating eﬀect of 
oxytocin from being among trusted allies, which helped to coordinate a strategic 
response (Crockford et al., 2017). The natural coupling of social stressors with social 
soothers shows a corollary of this mechanism that is highly relevant to therapy today–- 
when encountering stressors in isolation, people naturally seek out the reassuring social 
connection of trusted allies and partners to calm the stress-response with socially-
induced oxytocin, a phenomenon called tend-and-befriend that exists alongside ﬁght-
ﬂight (S. E. Taylor et al., 2000) .  
At a psychosocial level, social buﬀering from a supportive individual may be 
critical in countering feelings of shame, subjugation or defeat down a social ladder. 
Following social defeats, where a person feels knocked down the social ladder and 
subjugated against their will often by a capricious higher status bully (see: displacement 
aggression ; Björkqvist, 2001; Sapolsky, 1994; 2017), supportive contact by other social 
animals - grooming, touch, supportive care and general social contact - has been shown 
to prevent the conversion of social defeat to mental defeat. This includes physiologically 
calming the range of associated physiological markers like vigilance, submissiveness, 
anxiety and PTSD-like symptoms (Kikusui et al., 2006; Lehmann & Herkenham, 2011), 
and also holds true for vicarious defeat, i.e. the distress of watching a conspeciﬁc face 
defeat (Carnevali et al., 2020). A likely mechanism to oﬀset the threat to social status

340 
that comes from competitive or hierarchical defeat is being reassured of one’s relational 
value as a community member worthy of supportive investment. 
The power of horizontal relationships to directly counter the injuries of vertical 
relationships is particularly important to social animals like primates and humans, where 
two poles of social organization exist: an agonic world shaped by power and threat 
(agonic being from the root word for agony), and signifying a toxic survivalist mentality; 
the other a hedonic world of aﬃliation and cooperation, that supports hedonic thriving 
(Chance, 1980; 1984). These social dimensions are in many ways in direct opposition; 
CFT, for instance, takes its core theoretical mechanism to be the need to re-balance an 
over-exercised competitive mentality by compensating with a more supportive 
empathic mentality, as it is thought that whichever mentality is more dominant will also 
shape how one relates to one’s self (Gilbert, 2005a; 2005c; 2014; 2017). Stress may be 
an important physiological proxy for understanding which of the two forms of social 
logic is at play, and the importance of care and support may be critical to turning oﬀ the 
agonic lens that the social world is one of fear, domination and power. After all, agonic 
mode dictates that one must be vigilant to signs of social status and ingroup positioning 
as clues to social survival, and dread rules the day (Chance, 1980; 1984; Gilbert, 1989; 
1992a; 1992b). 
Appraising the dynamics of social buﬀering against the social dynamics of 
hedonic and agonic forms of social living, one can sense a larger meaning in therapeutic 
relationship-building. Among clients who are undersupported, neglected or isolated 
clients, or those who face abuse, bullying or invisibility, hedonic relationships oﬀer a

341 
critical gateway to a psychosocially coregulated hedonic world. Shifting one out of 
agonic mode requires social signals such as respectful active listening to facilitate the 
internalization of support, safety, value, respect and belief in one’s abilities. Clients who 
are socially positioned so as to spend long enough in agonic worlds may become 
suﬃciently activated that they physiologically never leave them, a central nervous 
system activation that sensitizes ﬁght-ﬂight-freeze-fawn response and inhibits higher 
cognitive and social skills to orient to a social world of power and threat (feelings of 
depression, anxiety, low self-worth, etc.). In order to promote feeling the social logic of 
hedonic mode, which lays down a foundation of safety and trust to free up cognitive 
resources like intelligence, creativity and prosociality, clients must compellingly believe 
they are a part of a social world where the logic is supportive, trustworthy, aligned to 
one’s developmental goals, and what we might think of as meaning-oriented (Chance, 
1980; 1984). A therapeutic relationship may not just be access to such a world, it may be 
a critical opportunity to spend time absorbing its logic, skills, comforts and process. 
Therapy may fundamentally embody a process-oriented negotiation across these 
diﬀerent worlds. One model for understanding the potential for therapeutic change is to 
see therapy as creating a hedonic microculture to mitigate the eﬀects of spending too 
much time in agonic microcultures, as people who hold multiple marginalized 
intersectional identities often do. Agonic environments set up a developmental Catch-22 
where people must project an image of imperturbability and strength to avoid status 
challenges, which requires emotional suppression and masking one’s authentic internal 
experience, even to themselves. These pressures may exert an emotional lose-lose in

342 
agonic cultures wherein feelings of vulnerability are met with an automatic shielding 
and avoidance of help-seeking behavior as a survival response. Hedonic cultures, 
however, see exploring vulnerability, growth, self-awareness and shared understanding 
as mutually beneﬁcial in improving the eﬀectiveness of long-term relationships, and 
thus vulnerability can aﬀord to be met with authenticity, safety and courage. Hedonic 
therapy, therefore, might be said to allow people to internalize a win-win feedback loop 
of empowering understanding, awareness, sensitivity and control, while agonic worlds 
lead people to internalize lose-lose situations to leave them helpless, alone and 
defeated, unable to process their experience in order to gain the tools to escape it. 
When client’s resist vulnerability in therapy, it may be because vulnerability is 
associated with agonic danger, coupled with the safety that hedonic safety is a luxury 
they cannot aﬀord to indulge. 
Social buﬀering is likely a multilevel phenomenon for humans that takes its power 
from all of these biological, psychological and social dimensions, with multiple 
substrates/pathways to aﬃrm ingroup positioning and light up interpersonal 
neurobiology. However, while this understanding helps to understand the therapeutic 
encounter, a critical part of the eﬃcacy of buﬀering is engaging a real client who exists 
in a world beyond the therapeutic encounter. It is in understanding the client’s lived 
experience in their multiple social ecologies that is critical for buﬀering to work. The 
depth with which a therapist can convincingly enter the realism of their client’s social 
situation may reﬂect the depth of experienced social buﬀering, possibly as a measure of 
the therapist’s ability to travel with a person into the darkness of their situation. In this

343 
way, social buﬀering is related not just to active listening and demonstrated 
understanding, but to ally with a client on their journey into their world to help process 
the meaning of their experience. In this regard, a key aspect of buﬀering may be the 
ability to model someone’s context and the evolutionary psychology of their interaction 
with it relevant to mental health, including the potentials for stressors/injuries, sources 
of mental resources to re-moralize, and ultimately, to sidestep epistemically unjust 
dangers that reinforce many of the pitfalls outlined above. 
Part IV: ADHD & ASD 
Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) as Neurodiversity 
ADHD Primer 
ADHD is characterized by clinically signiﬁcant features of inattentiveness, 
hyperactivity and impulsivity (subtypes include inattentive, hyperactive/impulsive and 
combined). Hyperactivity includes restlessness, ﬁdgeting, turn-taking, and interrupting 
others. Inattention includes the inability to sustain attention or focus, distractibility, 
wandering thoughts, forgetfulness, and disorganization of tasks, activities and spaces. 
There is moderate correlation between these symptom clusters, and they are 
continuously distributed in the population (Del Giudice, 2018). Though these symptoms 
are deﬁnitional to the syndrome, others have suggested these are superﬁcial to the deep 
functional dimensions of ADHD, which include diﬃculties self-inhibiting, diﬃculties with 
self-regulation, and problems of executive functioning, such as motivation, planning and 
task-execution (Barkley, 2003; M. S. Gold et al., 2014). Impairments to self-regulation at 
the interface of motivation include aspects of the behavioral approach system (BAS)

344 
that are less dependent on rewards (high sensation-seeking or novelty-seeking) and 
reduced deployment of the behavioral inhibition systems (BIS), as well as excessive 
irritability and negative emotionality (Heym et al., 2015; Rabinovitz et al., 2016). There 
may be a subtype of ADHD characterized by low intelligence, that generates inattentive 
features as a consequence of cognitive deﬁcits, but ADHD can be diagnosed in highly 
intelligent people (Milioni et al., 2014). There is a separate subtype for “concentration 
deﬁcit disorder” or “sluggish cognitive tempo” characterized by troubles staying alert, 
apathy, mind-wandering, drowsiness, slowness and lack of initiative that is associated 
with withdrawal, anxiety and depression, and may be more related to a pathway in the 
brain attributable to physiological arousal levels, which is diﬀerent than motivational 
pathways (Barkley, 2015; Bauermeister et al., 2012; Becker & Langberg, 2013; Marshall 
et al., 2014; Nigg, 2016; Tamm et al., 2016). 
ADHD aﬀects 5% of children in the US (Mills et al., 2018), and is highly heritable 
(70-80%) that can include common allelic variants and rarer mutations. Males are more 
likely to be diagnosed at a 2:1 ratio, with women expressing more inattentive subtypes, 
although the diﬀerent presentation may also contribute to underdiagnosis or 
misdiagnosis in women (M. S. Gold et al., 2014; Quinn & Madhoo, 2014). Common 
comorbidities of ADHD are autism, schizophrenia spectrum disorders, bipolar disorders, 
eating disorders, antisocial personality disorder and conduct disorder, substance abuse, 
personality disorders (predominantly borderline personality disorder, obsessive-
compulsive personality disorder and narcissistic personality disorder), as well as social 
injury/defensive-related disorders of depression, generalized anxiety disorder, social

345 
anxiety disorder, and obsessive-compulsive disorder. 
From a life history strategy perspective, ADHD can span both of the cognitive 
niches, including an ADHD slow subtype that is comorbid with ASD and OCD, and an 
ADHD fast subtype that can be comorbid with the rest of the psychosis spectrum, 
including SSDs and BP. Regarding the latter, early ADHD predicts later onset SSDs and 
BD and close relatives of ADHD are at higher risk for psychosis (Brody, 2001; M. H. Chen 
et al., 2015). ADHD predicts a number of fast spectrum traits including risk-taking, early 
and promiscuous sociosexuality, early reproduction and early mortality, although these 
are likely to be comorbid with conduct disorders (Olazagasti et al., 2013; Sarver et al., 
2014). Given that the FSD predicts diﬀerent ADHD subtypes, there are likely to be 
diﬀerent sub-personality proﬁles (Perroud et al., 2016); associations that have not been 
isolated to subtype include extraversion, sensation-seeking, high time discounting, 
disorganized attachment in childhood, and romantic insecurity (Demurie et al., 2012; Lo 
et al., 2017). 
ADHD: Personality and Evolution 
There is evidence that ADHD is associated with subclinical traits common to an 
underlying temperament found in families of those with ADHD. Traits like those in ADHD 
are shared by those in the family of origin at both clinical and subclinical levels, and the 
diﬀerence between those who have clinical features and those who do not is often one 
of degree, with no clear pathological divide between them (Oller, 2019). Consequently, 
Oller (2019) considered the overall distribution of traits including those the clinical 
expression to represent a “normal neurodiversity,” as there are no “symptoms” that are

346 
fundamentally unique outside of these normally distributed traits. By implication, to 
understand a diagnosis like ADHD, it may be valuable to understand the underlying trait 
logic of the temperament it is built upon, including the clear adaptive dimensions. There 
is strong precedent to evaluate ADHD as an expression of an adaptive proﬁle, where the 
challenges of the diagnosis may be “joined at the hip” with the adaptive strengths, and 
to the extent that ADHD increases the expression of these traits generally, ADHD may 
simply magnify both the strengths and challenges together. 
People with ADHD score higher on tests of novelty-seeking even when 
controlling for impulsivity (Donfrancesco et al., 2015). Temperamental characteristics 
include novelty-seeking, high activity and impulsivity, reduced inhibitory control, lower 
self-directedness and task-persistence, lower attentional focusing, and low 
conscientiousness or eﬀortful control, low agreeableness and increased potential for 
hostility, and increased negative reactivity (Chauhan et al., 2022). In these correlations 
are a few trade-oﬀs including greater responsiveness (impulsivity, reduced inhibitory 
control) at the expense of proactivity (reduced self-directedness, conscientiousness and 
attentional control), with both positive (novelty-seeking) and negative (hostility, low 
agreeableness) dimensions. A study by Bouvard et al. (2012) conﬁrmed ADHD as being 
related to the behavioral activation system (BAS): ADHD involved higher activity, 
emotionality and extraversion, but was not involved with socializability or shyness, 
which are loaded on the behavioral inhibition system (BIS). 
These traits are consistent with the adaptive proﬁles derived by DeYoung (2015), 
who showed all temperaments to be composed of just two interacting meta-traits,

347 
stability and plasticity, with traits as downstream parameters (i.e., for instance, with the 
ADHD temperament, the trait implications include being “high” plasticity and “low” 
stability). With regard to meta-trait stability, ADHD is part of a temperament that is less 
“stable” in its goal directedness, which can include trade-oﬀs involving emotional 
volatility and lack of [social] self-control (DeYoung, 2015). As an adaptive strategy, this 
emboldens a ﬂuidity of response to environmental threats, with the potential for 
downsides connected to adaptability as a strength. For instance, hyper-responding can 
be destabilizing and lead to over-activated defenses (i.e., higher neurotic potential). This 
supports the view of ADHD as a “fast strategy” (Del Giudice, 2018), a strategy that 
thrives in less predictable environments where invisible threats may loom around each 
corner and require the swift mobilization of defenses. 
The ADHD temperament includes another dimension of responsiveness, which is 
the optimistic view of the unknown as full of opportunity and information (high 
openness to experience/intellect; DeYoung, 2015). A disposition toward risk-taking 
opportunism and curiosity allows one to capitalize on ﬂeeting opportunities in 
unpredictable environments, and may require taking costly risks (impulsivity) or using 
time that could be spent exploiting resources to instead seek out information that may 
or may not prove useful (novelty-seeking). These trade-oﬀs are associated with meta-
trait plasticity, and ADHD represents a highly plastic approach, where a loss of goal-
directed eﬃcacy (the “exploitation” strategy) is in service to greater creativity/ﬂexibility 
of responses, interpretations and strategies (the “exploration” strategy). The costs can 
involve a loss of decisional and task eﬃcacy, reduced delayed-gratiﬁcation (time-

348 
discounting), and higher barriers to long-term motivation (low self-directedness and 
conscientiousness). These trade-oﬀs are presumably only costly in some environments. 
For instance, in ecosystems that undergo change, abandoning strategies that stop 
working is key to adaptability (J. Williams & Taylor, 2006); and in the case of scarce 
environments, where no one strategy may work for all scenarios, individuals may need 
to constantly switch strategies to, for instance, persistently search for foraging 
opportunities (Costa et al, 2014). 
DeYoung (2015) characterized both aspects of these meta-traits as recognizable 
archetypes. He characterizes high plasticity thusly: “The exploratory tendency 
associated with Plasticity should produce the kind of active engagement with novel and 
interesting phenomena that others tend to ﬁnd dynamic and that is likely to lead to 
personal growth.” He also summarizes high meta-trait Stability, which it should be noted 
is the opposite character to the one possessed in ADHD: “the self-control or self-
regulation associated with Stability should make children easier to socialize and may 
also be strengthened by socialization.” Thus, the temperament strategy connected with 
ADHD is one that favors adaptive responsiveness as a reactivity to ecological threat, and 
a curiosity and opportunism supporting exploration. Both dimensions would be best 
deployed in environments that align with the trade-oﬀs favorably, thereby minimizing 
the costs and leveraging the strengths. 
While the previous adaptive trade-oﬀs of the ADHD temperament may be 
associated with the temperament as a “life history strategy” (Del Giudice, 2018), there is 
another relatively late ecological consideration that has its own adaptive logic. The

349 
exponential complexiﬁcation of social evolution and social living would have created 
robust social ecologies with their own adaptive niche considerations (Del Giudice, 2018). 
Multilevel selection logic suggests that the underlying adaptive traits may have been co-
opted to fulﬁll diﬀerent prestige roles deﬁned by their social contributions with respect 
to the group, which is to say, to bend one’s adaptive strengths to a social niche as a kind 
of “social niche specialization” (Hunt & Jaeggi, 2022). With ADHD, the combination of 
being “fast” and “plastic” are ideal as a social specialty, with qualities that harness social 
learning and social adaptability. For instance, the “seducer/creative” life history proﬁle 
characterized by Del Giudice (2018) is high in trait “mentalizing,” including heightened 
abilities in theory of mind, and verbal and aesthetic creativity. At the intersection of 
social intuition and imaginative potential are a variety of social roles including teachers, 
story-tellers, creatives, artistic performers (actors and dance), social healers, social 
communicators (journalists) and spiritual leadership (Del Giudice, 2018; Hunt & Jaeggi, 
2022). Here, the sensitivity to social information would be what characterizes openness 
to experience and the intellectualism associated with the humanities (rather than 
openness to intellect, which is associated with the sciences), while social threat 
sensitivity may underpin a vulnerability toward rejection sensitive dysphoria and justice 
sensitivity (as a kind of moral injury; Bondü & Esser, 2015; Schäfer & Kraneburg, 2015). 
Based on these functional proﬁles, we would theoretically expect ADHD to exhibit 
brain characteristics that conform to, or even support, neurocognitive mechanisms that 
functionally support the adaptive proﬁles of social specialization. We would expect a 
low setting in the behavioral approach system (BAS) including reduced dopaminergic

350 
activity, and a low setting in the behavioral inhibition system (BIS) as a potential for 
reduced serotonergic activity. We may even expect ADHD subtypes to conform to 
diﬀerent subtypes of ADHD based on whether one’s temperament phenotype is 
characterized more by high “fast strategy” responsiveness (impulsive type), or high 
dispositional exploration (inattentive type), or both. Indeed, the evidence does show 
these things, and conforms to them well enough to question whether ADHD research 
may be assuming that “disorder” is the proper epistemic footing. While ADHD studies 
bring tremendous technical rigor, most of the mechanisms illuminated within a given 
study do not show evidence of dysfunction per se, but assume its existence based on 
the connotation of the ADHD construct. As we explore, consider that these same 
mechanisms could also map to adaptive trade-oﬀs as a way of accounting for their costs 
alongside strengths. 
Three Dimensions to an Integrated View of the ADHD Brain 
The Low Dopamine Hypothesis. Midbrain dopamine neurons are known to 
encode the “exploration-exploitation” trade-oﬀ in the brain (DeYoung, 2015; Humphries 
et al., 2012; Keeler et al., 2014; Natsheh & Shiﬂett, 2018), a dilemma between 
maximally exploiting a given strategy regardless of the quality of that strategy, versus 
seeking out new information for better strategies at the cost of losing valuable time. 
Dopamine neurons do this in part with two circuits that modify one another: a D1 
dopamine pathway that helps determine the salience of a stimulus by making sensory 
inputs “loud” to the brain’s attention circuits (when a stimulus proves to be more 
interesting or rewarding than expected); and the D2 circuit that “muﬄes” the D1 circuit

351 
under certain conditions, speciﬁcally when baseline D2 dopamine is high. Together 
these circuits, largely in the midbrain anatomy of the striatum and basal ganglia, help to 
“prepare and select” actions for the brain (Keeler et al., 2014). First, D1 neurons 
“prepare” the brain to act by conjuring an array of competing behavioral options to a) 
exploit a known reward like food or sex, or b) to explore a source of “cognitive novelty” 
for a more uncertain payoﬀ. Both drive “phasic” dopamine bursts in diﬀerent ways: the 
exploitation of known rewards is associated with the dopaminergic “salience” of 
reinforcement learning, while the exploration of “cognitive novelty” is an evolved 
motivation to seek out information to update mental models; this is curiosity, and it is 
triggered by a “bonus” dopamine signal when any stimuli or experience that deﬁes 
subconscious predictions, called a prediction error (Sethi et al., 2018). The D2 circuit 
then takes these unalike options and “selects” a winning behavior by inhibiting the least 
favorable options served up by the D1 circuit: goals that are too much work, too much 
risk, or are not exciting enough. 
Interestingly, the mechanism to weight either exploration or exploitation over the 
other involves the amount of dopamine in the D2 circuit. Excess dopamine inhibits many 
options in the D1 circuit and favors obvious behavioral choices, optimizing for an 
exploitation strategy. Alternatively, less dopamine in the D2 circuit under-inhibits the D1 
circuit. Not only are several behavioral options served up to the brain at the same time, 
the D1 phasic bursts are bigger, favoring cognitive novelty with their “bonus” dopamine, 
and optimizing for an exploration strategy. Consequently, low dopamine in the D2 circuit 
moderates the exploration-exploitation trade-oﬀ, by inducing “behavioral ﬂexibility:”

352 
the brain is oﬀered more behavioral options with more novel approaches. In other 
words, low D2 dopamine is not inherently pathological, it is a state underpinning a 
functional trade-oﬀ: with more novel options comes more ﬂexibility and complexity, but 
complexity also impedes eﬃcacy. Low dopamine is indeed implicated in implicit learning 
(in contrast to explicit learning ), where non-conscious, intuitive processes use pattern 
recognition to model complex phenomena, in contrast to explicit learning, which is 
more deliberative, linear, conscious and rule-governed (Udden et al., 2010). Exploitation 
optimizes immediate decision-making, while exploration sacriﬁces eﬃcacy for the 
potential to model complexity, or grow optimization strategies over time. 
Most authors assume that the exploitation-exploration trade-oﬀ is functional, 
with many further assuming that evolution has sought to optimize an intrapsychic 
balance between exploitation and exploration lest the trade-oﬀs select against 
individuals too far in any one direction. However, other interesting details push back on 
that hypothesis. First, the D2 pathway is likely set to some degree by the average level of 
reward in the environment. In other words, a low average of rewards in an environment 
reduces dopamine in the D2 pathway to functionally under-inhibit the D1 pathway, 
thereby increasing trait novelty-seeking as a way for the brain to say “in this 
environment, it is worth the opportunity costs of exploration because resources are 
scarce” (Costa et al., 2014; Humphries et al., 2014). This is familiar as the experience of 
being under-stimulated where boredom induces a restlessness to explore for greener 
pastures. Here, low dopamine induces novelty-seeking as a necessary option based on 
ecology.

353 
Secondly, the concept of complementary cognition speculates that a 
neurocognitive division of labor at the population level is eﬀectively a second way of 
resolving the exploration-exploitation trade-oﬀ across individual personalities (H. Taylor 
et al., 2022). Multilevel selection pressures at the group-level could select for individuals 
to specialize in certain social roles and niches, in the same way we see personality to 
operate among other social animals as social niche specializations (Bergmüller & 
Taborsky, 2010). Resolving the exploration- exploitation trade-oﬀ at the social, rather 
than psychological level, may relax individual selection pressures and support the 
evolution of cognitive specialists (H. Taylor et al., 2022). Individuals who consistently 
optimize for exploration over exploitation, for instance, may gain emergent skills from 
the D1 system serving up more information and novelty more frequently, generating 
more complex mental models, and creating the potential for strategies that reﬁne 
opportunism, creativity and growth across the lifespan. However, what we see with 
ADHD may be that forcing a heritable strategy does not ensure social success; the trade-
oﬀ for cognitive specialists is likely that they are a “high-risk, high-reward” strategy (Del 
Giudice, 2018), as they likely depend even more on the rare social niches that can make 
use of the unique strengths of cognitive specialists. 
Genetic evidence suggests some preliminary evidence about the role of genes, 
low dopamine and ADHD explorer strategies. The DRD4.7r dopamine gene allele that 
has been implicated in ADHD codes for “ineﬃcient dopamine receptors,” and generally 
aligns with evidence of low dopamine in ADHD (M. S. Gold et al., 2014), and yet, this 
only aligns with known mechanisms to induce an exploration strategy (Sethi et al.,

354 
2018). While low dopamine has been assumed to be a marker of psychopathology due 
to largely disproven chemical imbalance assumptions, viewing the allele as instead 
facilitating a sometimes-costly trade-oﬀ can nevertheless center the associations of 
ADHD and candidate genes with novelty-seeking, creativity, and migratory lifestyles (C. 
Chen et al., 1999; Mayseless et al., 2013). Indeed, the DRD4.7r gene allele shows 
evidence of positive selection, suggesting that it has been historically selected for, not 
against (Ding et al., 2001). These ﬁndings integrate into a picture of low dopamine as a 
functionally encoding of the explorer side of the exploration-exploitation trade-oﬀ, 
speciﬁcally by inducing trait novelty-seeking which is known to be temperamentally 
associated with ADHD (Chauhan et al., 2022; Costa et al., 2014; Donfrancesco et al., 
2015). 
The default mode network and big picture thinking. Shifting to a systems 
neuroscience perspective, the default mode interference hypothesis (Sonuga-Barke & 
Castellanos, 2007) can build on the implications of the low dopamine hypothesis to 
validate how an explorer strategy may come to specialize in the social, creative and 
imaginative “mentalizing” cognitive niche. The brain can be organized into several major 
networks that are functional, interconnected, and span many individual anatomical 
structures. Evidence suggests that patterns of connections between these networks may 
be implicated as biomarkers for neurodiverse diagnoses like ADHD and ASD. For 
instance, the task-directed networks (TD; see also: task-positive networks ) of the brain 
are oriented toward goals outside the bounds of the organism (see: exteroception). 
These networks suppress a network called the default mode network (DMN) in normal

355 
operation, but with ADHD there is an incomplete suppression of the DMN by TD 
networks (Silbertstein et al., 2016). This is the phenomenon wherein people with ADHD 
become distracted in the middle of tasks and “wander away” in their thoughts, which 
has been assumed to be a marker of “abnormal” psychology and dysfunction. 
Alternatively, however, it is just novelty-seeking (and a low boredom threshold) turned 
inward and perhaps functionally so. 
The functioning of the DMN has been largely mysterious until quite recently; the 
network was initially ignored and incorrectly dismissed as a simple cognitive “default 
mode” that people returned to when they were not doing something more meaningful 
like pursuing a goal (Buckner, 2012). However, researchers have since discovered that a 
DMN is present in numerous social species and is thought to be a critical network active 
in a range of social and learning functions. The DMN a) processes stimulus-independent 
(“mind-wandering”) thoughts, b) is involved in self-referential thoughts (introspection), 
c) recalls the autobiographical past to mentally simulate possible futures (imagination), 
d) is involved in narrative comprehension (meaning-making), and e) other aspects of 
creative and holistic cognition: scene construction, associationist thinking, and semantic 
and verbal memory (Buckner, 2012; Buckner et al., 2008; Carrol, 2020; Manning & 
Steﬀens, 2016; Spreng, 2012). This has led the DMN to be considered the “mentalizing 
network,” “theory-of-mind network,” the “memory network” (due to its role in 
remembering the autobiographical past), and the “prospective network” (for its role in 
mentally simulating the future based on the past; Barret, 2017). The DMN is also a 
“major hub in high-level prediction-error representations,” and thus is heavily involved in

356 
processing cognitive novelty to update mental models (Brandman et al., 2021) 
It has generally been framed that the suppression of the DMN in the brain helps 
to support task-positive networks (i.e. goal-directed pursuits), but scholars have since 
realized that it is fallacious to think of the DMN as “task negative.” More than a simple 
cognitive “default,” the DMN is functional. The DMN promotes cognitive ﬂexibility by 
coordinating a dynamic relationship between internally- and externally-changing 
environments over time (Spreng, 2012). This includes the ability to reference 
autobiographical memory to simulate possible solutions to complex problems (Buckner, 
2012; Buckner et al., 2008), infer complex mental states of others (Manning & Steﬀens, 
2016), and a variety of applications for embodied simulation (moral reﬂection, narrative 
comprehension, counterfactual thinking, intentional ﬁctional constructs, among others; 
Carrol, 2020). Carrol (2020) went so far as to tout the DMN as critical to the evolution of 
humans’ highest, and most creative capacities. He suggests that the connectivity of the 
DMN, which spans multiple neural networks and domains, sees the network function as 
“the crown of cognition” and “the brain’s most comprehensive network for the 
integration of information.” Carrol summarizes thusly: “by constructing 
autobiographical memory as an emotionally modulated narrative, projecting the self 
into future scenarios, considering multiple alternative scenarios valanced by emotion 
and moral value, and simulating the mental lives of other people, the DMN creates 
subjectively meaningful models of the self and its relations with the world.” Said 
diﬀerently, the DMN is adaptive: it takes the brains’ holistic function as a prediction 
machine (Clark, 2016; Hawkins & Blakeslee, 2005) and shapes a meaningful and

357 
subjective story that can have multiple diﬀerent paths through the world model, 
allowing for many adaptive possibilities with which to deploy action and motivation. 
DMN intrusions on TD networks may suggest ADHD weights this adaptive 
narrative function more strongly in a for-better-or-for-worse fashion. Indeed, the same 
brain linkages are found at subclinical levels in those who do not have ADHD but share 
ADHD traits, suggesting the brain diﬀerences in question are general personality trade-
oﬀs that are normally distributed (of which ADHD is only an extreme value). This 
validates the dimensional approach to ADHD as consistent with a “normal 
neurodiversity” perspective (Hilger & Fiebach, 2019), while predicating the epistemic 
footing of ADHD to be based on an adaptive trade-oﬀ with ampliﬁed strengths and 
challenges. 
The salience network and the social brain. Network analysis largely conforms to 
other intuitive expectations with respect to ADHD. For instance, the dorsal attention 
network (dATN) - involved in goal-directed attention switching - is largely hypo-
connected (under-connected) to the DMN; less intuitive is that the ventral attention 
network (vATN), also called the “salience network” (SN), is hyper-connected (over-
connected) to the DMN in ADHD (J. Choi et al., 2013; Guo et al., 2020; Hilger & Fiebach, 
2019). This could be easily framed as another trade-oﬀ: the ADHD brain is more 
detached from goal-directed eﬃcacy, but more streamlined for the “integrat[ation of] 
social, emotional and cognitive information,” which facilitates “communication, social 
behavior and self-awareness” (Menon, 2015). For instance, the salience network 
includes anatomical regions such as the anterior cingulate cortex, which processes

358 
prediction errors as cognitive novelty, and has been described as “an integrative hub for 
social interactions,” involved in decision-making, empathy and sociality (Lavin et al., 
2013). The salience network also incorporates the anterior insula, which creates a 
cogent sense of social awareness called the “global emotional moment,” a phenomenon 
that integrates subjective emotions, sense data and bodily states as an intuitive sensory-
emotional gestalt, distorting the linear perception of time as a byproduct (Craig, 2009). 
In other words, the tight coupling of the DMN and SN indicates hypermentalizing 
cognition , the most social aspects of a largely social brain , used to model, predict and 
interact with other agents, guide one’s own introspection and meta-cognition, foster 
creativity and imagination, and inspire through spiritual leadership (Burns, 2004; 2007; 
2009; Del Giudice, 2018; Price & Stevens, 1998; 1999; Stevens & Price, 2000). 
Integration. The most parsimonious way to view these disparate elements is to 
view them as interrelated in service to an adaptive proﬁle that trades strengths and 
challenges against one another. Low dopamine, which functionally induces cognitive 
exploration, is likely also implicated in implicit learning (Udden et al., 2010). Implicit 
learning is associated with openness to experience and mentalizing, while explicit 
learning is associated with openness to intellect, and mechanistic cognition (DeYoung, 
2015; Kaufman et al., 2010). Implicit learning automatically takes in patterns from 
sensory experience to help in behavioral and interpretive ﬂexibility, and creative and 
ideational production. 
Low dopamine may also trigger the daydreaming of inattentive ADHD by 
orienting novelty-seeking toward an internal (introspective) source of stimulation rather

359 
than external (exteroception). This DMN hyperactivation would not be ancillary to 
implicit learning, but would likely help process, synthesize, visualize, and interrogate the 
information drawn in by implicit learning; i.e. mind-wandering as a creative and 
ideational process. The intrusiveness of the default mode network may be functional in 
prioritizing the processing and internalizing of pattern-recognition for those individuals 
who are temperamentally locked into explorer mode: they must not only take in a 
stream of complex data about the world, they must also manage its cognitive 
integration. Here the brain is eﬀectively motivated to manage the salience (i.e. 
“meaning”) of complex patterns of information, which is useful for developing creativity, 
ideation, imagination and empathy through the “crown of cognition” (Carrol, 2020). This 
would track with ADHD as “big picture,” “holistic,” or “top-down” thinking in diametric 
opposition to the “bottom-up” mechanistic thinking of ASD, a view consistent with the 
diametrical model of autism and psychosis (Crespi & Badcock, 2008) as opposing 
specializations in the cognitive niches (Del Giudice, 2018). 
Finally, recent updates to the default mode interference hypothesis in ADHD 
center the hyperconnection between the salience network and the DMN in addition to 
the hypoconnection of the DMN and central executive network (J. Choi et al., 2013; 
Hilger & Fiebach, 2019). The tight relationship with the DMN and the SN in ADHD 
suggests that big picture, mentalizing cognition is uniquely oriented toward social 
salience, which is to say, information with social and emotional meaning: narrative, art, 
culture, media, humanities, politics, social sciences, and so on, in contrast to the data 
and logic of mechanistic thinking. This would align with ADHD as a specialist of the social

360 
brain: increased social and emotional salience, a predilection toward sensory 
information (novelty-seeking as channeled through openness to experience is also 
“sensation-seeking”), and the time-distorting, sensory-integration qualities of the “global 
emotional moment” as they support implicit learning and distort perceived time (Craig, 
2009). 
Strengths. Together, these qualities suggest ADHD may be suited toward a) the 
rapid inference of complex information in a “response-ready” adaptive style,” b) curating 
patterns of information toward social and creative applications, including insight, 
introspection, meaning-making, narrative comprehension, simulating the future, 
opportunism, humanistic inquiry, and emotional intelligence, and c) specialization in 
social and creative roles involving verbal and aesthetic creativity, theory-of-mind, 
ideation and imagination, which may involve roles in teaching, artistic performance, 
spiritual leadership, social healing, communication and more. In terms of contributions 
to the moral commons, those with ADHD may be considered a subset of “social” 
explorers who expand human cultural knowledge about: realms of the psychic interior, 
sociality, culture, society, art, philosophy, social progress and the sustainability of 
human social living. In a developmental vacuum these raw potentials may resemble 
meaningless preoccupations until they are given order and purpose to some end; 
strengths may not appear as strengths outside of the natural context of a purposeful 
subcultural enterprise where interests become instruments to a social end. Having an 
imagination to link interests and instruments is what lacks, as well attribution of the 
problem: the lack of alignment one may have with the “life organizing” properties of

361 
meaning and purpose found in a biosocial niche. When like-minded people are aligned, 
however, contributions like these may be responsible for a branch of cultural evolution 
concerned with making change toward ever more sustainable, ethical and meaningful 
forms of social living at higher and higher scales, which is arguably the “logic” of 
progressive values at a deep, evolutionary level (Haidt, 2013). 
ADHD is associated with heightened trait novelty-seeking (Donfrancesco et al., 
2015), openness to experience (van Dijk et al., 2017), creativity (Boot et al., 2020; 
Hoogman et al., 2020), idea-generation, dispositional optimism (Dimitriu, 2022), 
youthfulness (Armstrong, 2010) and self-transcendence (i.e., religiosity, a sense of 
interconnectedness and/or, spirituality), but is lower than controls on self-directedness 
and harm avoidance (Perroud et al., 2016). This aligns with the FSD classiﬁcation of 
ADHD as a fast strategy (there is also a slow strategy subtype, and another as a 
byproduct of low general intelligence; Del Giudice, 2018). 
ADHD is not purely a deﬁcit of attention, but a roaming and homing attentional 
style capable of hyperfocus when topics activating curiosity and passion are primed 
(Armstrong, 2010). A roaming and homing attention style is capable of great hyperfocus 
when curiosity and passionate topics are engaged, suggests that ADHD may be more of a 
sensitivity to ﬂow states , where one feels utterly self-absorbed in a task with minimal 
self-referential thinking, heightened focus, peak performance and a sense of joy and 
well-being (Csikszentmihalyi, 1990; 2014; van der Linden, 2021). The dual-edged nature 
of social sensitivity may contribute to people-pleasing and rejection sensitivity, but it is 
also a chameleonic ﬂexibility, social openness, and depth of empathy and introspection.

362 
Similarly, the justice-sensitivity of ADHD is related to a sensitivity to causing moral 
injury, and makes for a strong ethical motivation (Bondü & Esser, 2015; Schäfer & 
Kraneburg, 2015) to universally apply a progressive standard of human rights (Haidt, 
2013). 
It is perhaps no wonder that ADHD and its traits, a mentalizing specialization and 
one half of the cognitive niche specialties overall, has strong overlap with “giftedness” 
through its hyper-curiosity, creativity, ideation and pattern-recognition. Budding and 
Chidekel (2012) noted that scholars sometimes attempt to explain away the high 
incidence of ADHD in gifted students to retain the bright lines between constructs 
associated with ideal learners and those associated with learning deﬁcits. They ﬁnd 
these attempts “frustrating,” because such attempts ignore many brain-behavior 
correlations that naturally break down the existence of these constructs as 
fundamentally separate and opposed, and note a variety of data in support of this claim. 
For instance, there is a parallel between ADHD and gifted children having the same four 
executive functioning diﬃculties: when to act, when not to, when to persist in an action, 
and when to stop. ADHD and gifted children also shared similar developmental patterns 
with respect to a delayed timeline for the cortical thickening of the prefrontal cortex, a 
process that naturally occurs throughout adolescence, but happens more slowly in both 
ADHD and gifted populations. A trade-oﬀ approach may be able to reconcile these and 
other overlaps as moderated by a third variable: developmental access to a supportive 
and values-aligned niche as a precondition to guiding a predilection for creativity, 
novelty, ideation, fast learning, adaptability, social interest, humanistic inquiry, futurism,

363 
and progressivism by balancing the challenges with extra support, guidance, 
directionality, developmental scaﬀolding, environmental richness, opportunity, respect, 
positive positioning, and more. These dimensions oﬀer the critical buﬀer between the 
spiral dynamics of an unsustainable ratio of social threats and stressors to resilience 
factors, of which this population is inherently sensitive to. 
Challenges. The costs of ADHD are also perhaps better understood as over-
expressions of strengths, and expand the clinical context to mismatch, lack of 
developmental scaﬀolding, and those who may face the same challenges at a trait-level 
while being subclinical for ADHD as a diagnosis. For instance, a heritable biological drive 
to curate imagination, creativity and empathic theory-of-mind narrows viable social 
roles to a subset of sometimes rare, risky and under-valued niches. Modern day social 
specialists may be found in the humanities, social services and social inﬂuencing spaces, 
among others. These can be diﬃcult niches to enter for diﬀerent reasons, yet not taking 
these risks may leave the lose-lose potential for chronic mismatch. Failure states can 
just as likely stem from an inability to attain the luck, patronage, support and guidance 
needed to develop ones’ strengths and positioning appropriately (see: ADHD as a high-
risk strategy; Del Giudice, 2018). 
Those with ADHD may commonly have better or worse communication than 
others in the population. They are dispositionally more likely to have high verbal and 
aesthetic creativity, yet face the inherent challenge of communicating knowledge gained 
through implicit learning: complex, holistic, introspective, emotional, ideational and 
pattern-based information that may not conform to popular narratives and stereotypes.

364 
Such information may be uniquely diﬃcult to justify or legitimize, particularly in 
mismatched political environments which do not value social observation or critical 
discourse. Indeed, while Del Giudice (2018) highlighted the role of fast, slow and 
byproduct subtypes of ADHD in explaining both high and low intelligence found among 
subtypes, another confounder may be the diﬃculty of capturing the products of implicit 
learning as a kind of creative, narrative, emotional or integrative intelligence. The ADHD 
tendency to explore multiple interests and inﬂuences into many divergent perspectives 
and models may also intrinsically resist explication as inputs crosscut many ideologies 
and resist easy worldview integration. If this translates to a potential loss of authority or 
cognitive legitimacy, it may leave one particularly vulnerable to social insults. 
On the topic of social injuries, many evolutionary theories converge on the 
unique challenge faced by a high-mentalizing strategy (associated with psychosis and 
ADHD) to face mismatch, environmental insult and diagnostic risk. Social specialists may 
be challenged by modern day individualism and the loss of close relationships as 
disrupting the communalistic values that support social roles and oﬀer them a path to 
status and prestige (J. S. Price & Stevens, 1998, 1999; Stevens & Price, 2000). The 
vulnerable developmental window of the maturing social brain may be more susceptible 
and sensitive to “environmental insults” such as the “toxic” societal manifestation of 
“chronic stress, urbanization, economic inequality, and migration” (Burns, 2004, 2007, 
2009). Paradoxically, then, social specialists frame a unique trade-oﬀ with respect to the 
social insults of a niche model: while increased salience to social feedback may be 
critical in fostering adaptive social ﬂexibility, it also leaves one sensitive to negative

365 
feedback as social injuries. Social injuries may also hit harder as a “cognitive specialist” if 
one is more likely to be positionally vulnerable with a narrower range of viable social 
niches. This combination of factors may go some way to framing the evolutionary 
etiology of vulnerabilities to rejection sensitive dysphoria and justice sensitivity. The idea 
of imagination as both “valuable and vulnerable” (Carrol, 2020) may highlight the 
unique risk of ADHD as a strategy. 
A variety of challenges ﬂow from the relationship of strengths and challenges in 
regard to social sensitivity in a for-better or for-worse fashion. For instance, social 
chameleonic tendencies found in ADHD performers and actors may lead to identity 
diﬀusion when attempting to adapt to too many competing social groups, identities and 
inﬂuences. Social alienation may result from the need to consistently mask in 
homogenous social worlds, and create a strain against unmet needs to feel understood 
for stress-relief. There may be an acutely introspected sense of being diﬀerent. One may 
become aware of their high needs for autonomy and stimulation, their many diverse 
interests without a clear intersection, hypermentalization as a source of cognitive 
diﬀerence, and these and more may create a potential to feel disconnected, masked 
and under-valued. It is worth highlighting that social diﬀerence itself creates a perceived 
imbalance of social rewards and punishers, i.e. the agonism of niche mismatch. There 
may also be a diﬃculty among ADHDers that are adaptively oriented to the present to 
curate a long-term sense of direction and purpose, particularly in social environments 
that can lack viable social niches for specialists. The tendency for these and other factors 
to align with intrinsic spiral dynamics may generate a disposition toward anxiety,

366 
depression, psychosis or trauma, when they accumulate in ways that feel out of control. 
Summary. A clinical portrait suggests that the subclinical traits for ADHD include 
the S/C function of heightened exploration, a tendency toward imagination (default-
mode network experiments with futuristic scenarios based on past experience), and 
empathic mentalizing (DMN theory-of-mind about the social and emotional states of 
others), which may become over-expressed or environmentally mismatched, or both (to 
the extent that strong expressions of a strategy may be appropriate in rarer, more 
extreme niches). Within the cognitive niches, ADHD is a generalist , with potential 
strengths in model-level integration, mental simulation (imagination), holistic thought, 
adaptive ﬂexibility, introspection, and social sensitivity. Alternatively, the S/P ADHD 
subtype may express reduced task-ﬂexibility and behavioral switching, autistic-like traits 
(including reduced mentalizing) and perfectionism (Del Giudice, 2018), which may 
combine both the strengths and challenges of ADHD with those of ASD. Challenges here 
include the diﬃculty of insuﬃcient basal stimulation in mismatched environments, 
which may lead to maladaptive coping through excessive novelty-seeking; struggles with 
community and identity across the lifespan (chameleonic challenges); time-blindness 
and motivational deﬁcits in meeting imposed deadlines and goals; and similar challenges 
of organizing across long time horizons (time discounting) that may interfere with 
positioning toward a career, a sense of purpose, and meaning in a congruent niche, 
which may interfere with long-term satisfaction. 
Niche Construction 
This section will not be comprehensive, but it will consider the framework of

367 
ADHD as an evolved strategy (to survive in a social niche, and as a moral and cognitive 
contribution) to shift how to think about treatment and support. A shift does not 
preclude seeing ADHD as a potential source of impairment, distress, empathy, or 
support, including medical framing therein. Some evolutionary perspectives may even 
build in such notions, as traits may be overexpressed or “cliﬀ-edged” in their adaptive 
ﬁtness (Del Giudice, 2018), suggesting that subclinical traits of ADHD may be functional 
in moderation, but dysfunctional in extremis. However, the general view espoused 
herein is that extreme traits increase both the strengths and the costs as moderated by 
relation to a supportive developmental niche. This includes a critical etiological role for 
ADHD being mismatched throughout development due to unaccommodating, 
unsupportive or threatening social environments, and this may mediate any problematic 
relationship between organic traits and a problematic relationship with one’s self or 
one’s environment. ADHD as a fast strategy implies a likely role for developmental 
injuries (such as high stress family environments leading to poor attachment) as a 
mediating role in steering a personality style toward its more dysfunctional potentials 
(Del Giudice, 2018). However, what a broad range of evolutionary frames uniquely add 
is the potential for ADHD to be connected to a viable social strategy, and this can go 
some way toward fostering alignment of diagnosed individuals (or those with subclinical 
traits) to those niches and subniches that support social success and balance. For 
example, it may be that ADHD as an extreme expression of a functional strategy (i.e., 
extreme creativity alongside extreme instability) is uniquely suited to niches and roles 
that are likewise extreme (for instance, Salvador Dali was a product of a niche that

368 
allowed him to be not just successful, but an authentically eccentric version of himself). 
The primary beneﬁt of ADHD as an embodied relationship to a functional 
strategy is the ability to entrain on the strategy to provide high-level insight into what 
works and what does not. This may help in orienting individuals to the roles, functions 
and niches that maximize positive factors (strengths, needs, goals and values) while 
oﬀsetting costly trade-oﬀs and injuries. This is called niche construction (Armstrong, 
2010), and it is an eﬀective way to consider solving the challenges of ADHD at multiple 
levels, including fostering alignment between biological, individual and social factors. 
ADHD may beneﬁt from niche construction that seeks to optimize a) the degree and 
nature of structure; b) the level of stimulation in support of ﬂow states, c) the ability to 
build self-regulatory resilience, d) a social culture that can protect from threats and 
tolerate challenges of motivation, time perception and other idiosyncrasies, e) work 
roles that align with cognitive strengths and motivations, and f) a moral environment 
with “altruistic opportunity” to convert strengths into meaningful contributions in 
values-aligned healthy communities. 
In terms of niche construction for those with ADHD, the “recipe” for an optimal 
biosocial niche is slightly diﬀerent than those with other temperaments. Structure is 
important for ADHD. Particularly, the need for structure that supports accountability 
and deadlines to oﬀset time blindness (i.e., a loss of accurate time perception related to 
constant updating of working memory as a diﬃculty of keeping a single goal in mind; 
and a potential inﬂuence of the “global emotional moment”) and time discounting (the 
struggle to signiﬁcantly delay reward gratiﬁcation), both of which can lead to the stress

369 
of challenges to self-eﬃcacy and the need to use deadlines as stress motivators. Barkley 
(2018; Nigg & Barkley, 2014) called this intention deﬁcit disorder, and highlighted that 
knowledge is intact, but acting on it is impaired, making ADHD a performance disorder. 
However, a strong need for structure must be counter-balanced against an equally 
strong need for autonomy and novelty, which can resist structure. Reward insensitivity 
and high novelty- and sensation-seeking promote a need for meaningful exploration, 
stimulation and responsiveness that lends itself to unstructured autonomy. Reward 
insensitivity also requires larger, more immediate rewards to achieve suﬃcient 
stimulation in order to energize behavior and sustain task-directedness (Poulton, 2015). 
The use of novelty and reward to sustain motivation can require a variety of strategies 
for short term bursts of stimulation such as (highly curated) social media or games to 
build up energy for mental eﬀort needed to sustain deeper hyperfocus periods. 
Strategies to build ﬂexible structure are needed that can provide the beneﬁts of both. 
Autonomy may mean a) pursuing improvised stimulation as it supports motivation, b) 
looking forward to novelty and reward as a source of motivation to avoid the sense of 
entrapment in a repetitive (boring) schedule, and c) supporting an idiosyncratic, semi-
improvised and creative process toward tasks. Together, the salience of structure means 
optimizing for rule-governed systems of organization and scheduling where they can be 
most eﬀective, and ﬂexibility where they can support periodic stimulation, autonomy 
and creativity to energize engagement with systems. 
The optimization of structure is also necessary in considering the importance of 
ﬂow states. Being aligned to challenges, roles and niches that oﬀer a sense of ﬂow - for

370 
instance, work that sustainably aligns with one’s strengths, creativity, improvisation, 
stimulation and need for reward - provides feedback that optimizes motivational, 
cognitive and behavioral feedback to remain in the ﬂow state. The result of periods of 
ﬂow that transcend days or weeks or more can sometimes carry over to other domains 
of life that might otherwise fall to inertia and entropy, such as struggles to get out of 
bed or sustain task-directedness. Sustained ﬂow states lead to an improvement in 
motivation to energize discipline and organization to avoid such traps. In a word, this 
can deﬁne an ADHD in part by its ability to optimize one’s life for ﬂow states as a goal, 
with the amount of life synergy providing an organizing principle for other challenges 
such as motivation to get out of bed or avoid excessive social media stimulation. It also 
prioritizes the importance of designing systems to sustain ﬂow - organizational and 
behavioral systems such as physical organization of spaces or planning can be framed as 
tools to attain and sustain ﬂow, and can take on rewarding properties when linked as 
such. 
Within one’s niche, the central challenges from an ADHD perspective are 
managing ratio strain (work-reward imbalance) and time blindness/discounting, often 
through self-regulatory strength (Bauer & Baumeister, 2011; Poulton, 2015) which can 
be communicated via a “gas tank” model of mental resources. Ratio strain, a 
behavioral term for the demotivating eﬀects of a reward that requires too much work 
to attain relative to the motivational energy provided by the anticipation of that 
reward, resulting in motivational collapse before the behavior can begin. This is a 
general phenomenon that ADHDers are sensitive to through reduced reward activity

371 
(Poulton, 2015). This creates motivational deﬁcits (i.e., willpower) that require creative 
use of rewards and novelty to ﬁll one’s “mental gas tank” in order to raise “self-
regulatory” resilience and decrease the distractions of subconscious need. The less 
novelty, or further out the time delay to an expected reward, the higher the need for 
mental energy, and negative coping may involve falling into high stimulus activities to 
seek a “recharge” (i.e., the superstimuli like social media and smartphone use). When 
this motivational collapse puts one’s goals further and further from achievement, it 
cyclically increases the size and scope of the meta-problem of “falling behind in life,” 
which further increases global ratio strain, compounds in a vicious cycle. A variety of 
strategies may be used to compensate, including curating bigger, more immediate 
rewards, but this requires intentionally managing a balance among reward paths. Many 
rewards have costs (sugar, drugs, addiction, etc.), and oﬀsetting them requires a) 
creating positive addictions as a harm-reduction solution (i.e., working out or 
socializing), b) the need to distribute stimulation across reward types to avoid over-
reinforcing a single reward pathways as an addiction risk, c) normalizing focused bursts 
of stimulation to reduce energetic needs driving attentional deﬁcits, and d) 
systematizing goal-pursuits to manage priorities, motivation, decisional fatigue and 
ratio-strain within the system itself, which may involve intentional strategies to recruit 
timers, reminders (sticky notes), plans (lists) and motivation (rewards; Barkley, 2018; 
Nigg & Barkley, 2014; Poulton, 2015). 
Career challenges might better be framed as challenges of direction and 
purpose. Time blindness and motivational challenges create a sensitivity to ﬂow states

372 
that can create inertia between ﬂow states and focuses the solution on maintaining 
activity. One model for solving this dilemma is to foster hyper-adaptable roles (see: fast 
strategy), which is to say, roles that require a stream of hyperresponsivity, ideal for 
careers in an ER, restaurant kitchen settings, performance, entrepreneurs, consultants, 
and crisis workers. However, while this approach can be experientially meaningful and 
solve the problem of motivational extremes, fostering a state of hyperresponsivity may 
not solve the challenge of long-term positioning for a meaningful, purpose-driven career 
due when impairments to intentionality at long time horizons are not dealt with 
(intention deﬁcit disorder ; Barkley, 2018). Long-term goal positioning may be a perennial 
challenge that can become increasingly compromised with each failed opportunity for 
positioning (missing schooling opportunities, career building opportunities, etc.). Many 
ADHDers may not frame a problem of purpose at all, but rather eschew the concept 
altogether, lamenting the inability to instead live more experientially as the solution. 
Here, framing purpose can be a way to orient toward long-term niches within society 
that can enable roles and lifestyles that allow one to be more experiential and niche-
aligned. Eﬀectively, many ADHDers may yearn to lean into the “fast strategy” 
foundations of their temperament, where a more therapeutic frame is the need to 
create a “slow strategy” role and sense of meaning that can align with one’s fast 
strategy contributions. This centers the problem of M. Larsen et al. (2022), who found 
that meaning is sustainable while happiness is not, and ADHDers who live closer to a 
purely responsive, experiential life may still be more likely to struggle over time with 
questions of meaning, purpose and identity diﬀusion if they “succeed” in aligning with a

373 
vagabond lifestyle. Framing the need to align a “fast strategy” nature with a meaningful 
social role is to orient one to intentional curation of their niche, not to try to make their 
way of being diﬀerent than it is. 
ADHD career roles may span a continuum from hyper-adaptable roles with 
questionable long-term sustainability (a chef that works long, hard hours and may 
burnout), up through roles and niches built on greater meaning, purpose and 
sustainability but require more foresight - or luck - to attain (artist). A variety of possible 
job models exist, including: a) dynamic roles that require constant improvisation using a 
broad and stimulating knowledge base that must be constantly adapted to unique 
applications (sommelier, therapist, comedian, information technologist, etc.); b) jobs at 
the intersection of ﬁelds or roles that resist boredom by requiring wearing one to wear 
multiple “hats” (i.e., anything from a handyman, to a purchase manager for an eco-
friendly farm, at the crossroads of business, agriculture and management); and c) jobs 
that require discrete specialization but in a suﬃciently broad knowledge base (teacher; 
professor of the humanities professor, philosophy, therapy, etc.), though investing in 
such a course may feel risky if one is uncertain about the ﬁt relative to the opportunity 
cost. These jobs represent a continuum of role options that cater from immediacy to 
long-term commitments, with attendant trade-oﬀs for all of them, but the goal is not 
survival, but meaningful work as an ultimate goal of sustainable mental health and 
optimal niche (Hari, 2018). 
The challenge of ﬁnding “altruistic opportunity” in a Western capitalist culture is 
worth noting (M. Larsen et al., 2022). ADHDers may struggle with

374 
individualizing/universalizing moral values, egalitarian social values and a harm/care 
justice-sensitivity that can be incompatible with exploitative or coercive economics. This 
may compound the challenge of ﬁnding a social “purpose” in systems where one is 
exposed to signiﬁcant moral injury by contributing to corporate enterprises that seem to 
cause harm for proﬁt. An economic framework that skews most work culture in this 
direction may eﬀectively block paths to meaningful niches or else make them 
suﬃciently out of reach as to be demotivating, creating a lose-lose choice. Facilitating 
social change to these systems may be a more natural alternative, in which case 
progressivism and resistance can become purposeful in themselves. Values in openness 
to experience and empathic care would predict that ADHDers are naturally found in 
higher-frequencies in more liberal, counterculture movements (Haidt, 2013). Such niches 
are inherently high-risk and fringe, requiring sub-cultural support to make them 
sustainable. Moral-communities are thus important social environments, and ADHDers 
may need to seek roles that a) serve social change, b) promote universal rights, 
empathic care and autonomy-promoting values, and/or c) orient to a suﬃciently 
meaningful lifestyle to ﬁnd meaning outside of one’s economic role. Indeed, social 
change may be the natural evolutionary moral contribution of modern day “social 
specialists” (Haidt, 2013). It is possible that epistemic injustices obscure the full 
authority of modern-day social specialists who track social sustainability by nature, and 
framing the challenge of social and mental sustainability may be useful to expanding the 
niches of social specialists. 
Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) as Neurodiversity

375 
ASD is perhaps the diagnosis most likely to be associated with neurodiversity 
given the originator was herself diagnosed with among three generations of women 
diagnosed with ASD (J. Singer, 2017). ASD is typically characterized by symptoms 
considered the “autistic triad:” impairments of social interaction, impairments of 
communication and repetitive behaviors and restricted interests (Del Giudice, 2018). 
Impairments of interaction might be diﬃculties in mentalizing, reading body language 
and reciprocal sharing. Impairments of communication might be diﬃculties taking turns 
in conversation, non-literal speech (irony, sarcasm), idiosyncratic language, or failure to 
develop language in extreme cases. Restricted/repetitive behaviors and interests might 
be a narrow focus on interests and activities, rigid routines and stereotyped movements. 
Sensory issues are common and included in the restricted/repetitive category; feeling 
overwhelmed by intense, unpredictable or confusing stimuli can lead to sensory 
overload. There are only weak correlations between categories in the triad, so 
symptoms can range widely between those diagnosed with ASD, including patients with 
very low language abilities to those with elaborate language (though there may still be 
struggles with non-literal speech). ASD includes autism-like traits, which are normally 
distributed in the population, and are considered “male typical,” including high 
visuospatial abilities ( mechanistic thinking) and low mentalizing/mind-reading, and less 
social and aﬃliative motivation (high systematizing, low empathizing), leading to the 
extreme male brain theory of autism (Baron-Cohen, 2002; 2003). These traits include a 
deliberative, logical style of decision-making, contrasted with more emotional or 
intuitive style (Brosnan et al., 2014; De Martino et al., 2008; South et al., 2014), and

376 
accordingly, ASD is strongly represented in the sciences and technical ﬁelds (Del Giudice, 
2018). 
The DSM-5-TR has collapsed the separate diagnoses of autism and Asperger’s 
syndrome into ASD, with severity levels of “requires support,” “requires substantial 
support,” and the presence of intellectual disability or language diﬃculty. About 40% of 
those with ASD have an intellectual disability, which overlaps strongly with the 
mutational load etiology, while mutational load plays a relatively minor role among the 
remaining “high-functioning” variant of what was Asperger’s syndrome, where language 
ability is intact alongside normal or even high IQ (Del Giudice, 2018). Like ADHD, 
heritability is high for ASD, with an overall heritability of at least 75%. Neurotransmitter 
ﬁndings suggest roles for glutamate and GABA, which are implicated in a neurotic proﬁle 
(withdrawal subtype ); combined with the amygdala theory of autism (Baron-Cohen et 
al., 2000), which argues a central role for the amygdala as coordinator of social behavior 
including sensitivity to threat (Zalla & Sperduti, 2013), there is evidence consistent with 
autism as a stability strategy. Upregulated serotonergic activity (BIS), decreased 
oxytocinergic activity, and low default mode activation are involved (Del Giudice, 2018). 
Evidence of ASD as a cognitive strategy comes from theories such as the weak 
central coherence model (Happé & Frith, 2006), the extreme male brain theory (Baron-
Cohen et al., 2002), the enhanced perceptual functioning model (Mottron et al., 2006), 
and the intense world theory of autism (Markram & Markram, 2010), which generally 
paint a picture of enhanced low-level perceptual processing (bottom-up) and reduced 
global big picture processing (top-down), where local, detail-oriented processing

377 
becomes disproportionately weighted and global processing becomes slower and more 
deliberative. Recall that the default mode network (DMN) is at the “top of a 
representational hierarchy—the crown of cognition” and “the brain’s most 
comprehensive network for the integration of information” (Carroll, 2020, p. 37); and is 
highly implicated in mentalizing, social cognition and theory of mind (Buckner, 2012; 
Buckner et al., 2008; Carrol, 2020; Manning & Steﬀens, 2016; Spreng, 2012). A variety of 
studies have shown ASD to have a characteristic pattern of underconnectivity with 
salience, attentional and visual networks in the brain thought to reﬂect deﬁcits in social 
cognition (Nair et al., 2020), and the higher one’s autistic quotient (AQ), the more 
connectivity to the mentalizing subnetworks are compromised (Assaf et al., 2010). This 
echoes the theme that a) integrative, model-level thinking is reduced through 
underconnectivity of the DMN to other brain networks, and b) social cognition and self-
reﬂective thinking are consequently attenuated. This has been functionally framed in 
terms of Bayesian predictive processing (Friston et al., 2013) in terms of the brain over-
weighting incoming low-level perceptual data in favor of its precision despite it 
containing both information and “noise;” meanwhile “hyperpriors” in the system are 
discounted as imprecise, which is to say, the assumptions and beliefs at the model-level 
that serve to simplify and “pre-ﬁll” expectations often to screen out such noise (see: 
aberrant precision ). Social and self-referential processing, which are executed at the 
model level, are costs of this trade-oﬀ. 
Emphasizing low-level perceptual data leads to the increase in visuo-spatial 
mechanistic thinking associated with the problem-solving precision of the S/P strategy,

378 
but ASD highlights the trade-oﬀs of the gain. Discounting at the model-level means the 
social world becomes confusing and chaotic, which may lead to anticipatory anxiety and 
poor task-shifting as a corollary, while restricted and repetitive behaviors/interests 
serve to simplify the social world and increase perceived control through manageable 
predictability. While there is a case for an environmental contribution to neuroticism, 
the amygdala theory of autism (Baron-Cohen et al., 2000) suggested a role for 
heightened BIS activation, and a serotonergic-driven style of thought. This makes sense 
as a dispositional bias toward negativity has been shown to contribute to precision of 
thought at the cost of increased depression risk ala depressive realism , where higher 
basal orientation to negative emotionality increases a more perceptually accurate or 
“realistic” form of cognition that ranks consistently higher in tests of anticipated 
accuracy of events and realistic self-appraisal after test performance in laboratory 
settings (Alloy & Abramson, 1988). Thus, neuroticism has been associated with ASD (Del 
Giudice, 2018). Finally, in contrast to the generalism of ADHD, ASD may be a form of 
specialist thinking (Doyle, 2020), as other evidence from network analysis shows ASD to 
show reduced activity in the executive control networks of the brain (ECN) responsible 
for functional integration of task-negative and task-positive networks (de Lacy et al., 
2017), and this may corroborate observations of ASD as a “spiky proﬁle” where there is 
a discrepant gulf of high and low functioning across brain networks, rather than 
emphasizing eﬃcient coordination between networks, as with heightened DMN activity 
(Doyle, 2020). 
Autism as a slow strategy of the FSD model is evidenced by low impulsivity,

379 
restricted sociosexuality, and increased investment and relationships duration in long-
term partners (Del Giudice, 2018). Moral and sexual disgust, which are indicators of 
more conservative temperamental disposition in Haidt’s model, are also elevated in 
those with autistic-like traits (Del Giudice; 2018; Haidt, 2013). Personality correlations of 
those with highly autistic-like traits show increased neuroticism, and lower extraversion 
and agreeableness, with some mixed results for conscientiousness (Del Giudice, 2018) 
and openness (Shirayama et al., 2022). The latter two may be partially accounted for by 
increased environmental injuries and mismatch such as autistic burnout (Raymaker et 
al., 2020).  
A functional analysis of ASD as a functional relationship to the environment can 
help therapeutically frame ASD to maximize strengths and oﬀset challenges. Where 
ADHD is perhaps an increased, mismatched or over-expressed specialization in 
mentalizing cognition, the central trade-oﬀ of ASD is heightened mechanistic thought 
and a disinvestment in mentalizing cognition (i.e., social and imaginative thought; Del 
Giudice, 2018). Mechanistically, we can see how a sensitive amygdala self-organizes 
many of these features as a developmental path by creating anticipatory sensitivity to 
social injury and threat through greater BIS defense activation decreases social 
opportunism and increases eﬀorts toward somatic capital , such as skills and knowledge 
that support role-based learning as a path to prestige and success. ASD is likewise 
associated with smaller social circles, later sexual debut and embodies the long-term 
pay-oﬀ of slow strategies (Del Giudice, 2018). ASD pairs social challenges with a 
sensitive amygdala that neurotically maximizes the impact of social injuries and threats,

380 
as well as creating perceptual biases toward detail-orientation that makes big picture 
considerations overwhelming and unpredictable. Therapeutically, there is a need to: a) 
build up authentic, congruent and energizing social supports; b) buﬀer neurotic 
reactions to defeats and threats, and c) manage inner resources to be able to support 
industrious pursuit of self-relevant goals long enough to leverage strengths in niches 
that can deliver social success, and with it, precious social resources. Consequently, we 
may reframe some of the deﬁcits as niche considerations. When inside one’s niche, 
social capital ensures a balance of support and fewer burdens, which energizes 
resilience. Outside of one’s niche, less capital leads to more injuries encountered by 
sensitive defenses primed by traumatic precedent, and this may lead to a painful 
negative feedback loop outside of one’s niche. Given the developmental timing of slow 
strategy success, agonic environments may be front-loaded and hedonic environments 
accessible upon attaining some career success. Helping a client transition from the 
psychological injuries of agonic mode in adolescence to hedonic mode in adulthood may 
be a central therapeutic challenge. Given the cognitive niche strategy of experimenting 
with problem-solving models as central to the strategy, we speculate a heightened role 
for worldview as etiological to mental health challenges, speciﬁcally the over-
proliferation of perceived problems in the world as a source of depressive realism as a 
pathway for anxiety and depression. Furthermore, fantasy or ideation as a simulated 
way of meeting needs may become a coping mechanism that, when coupled with 
motivational barriers, becomes a self-reinforcing cycle of retreat from stressors into 
limiting, unrealistic fantasies, which creates more stressors.

381 
Niche Construction  
ASD may beneﬁt from niche construction that seeks to balance the cognitive 
autonomy of skill- and knowledge-expertise, with pathways that avoid autistic burnout . 
Autistic burnout arises from a poverty of social support resources, an excess of 
stressors, and the resulting imbalance of inner resources and external expectations 
(Raymaker et al., 2020). Stressors may include: a) masking, where one feels the need to 
hide their minority status and mimic neurotypical status in a way that is exhausting, 
stressful (i.e., the chance of discovery), and prevents authentic connection; b) social, 
occupational and familial obligations; c) disability management; d) life change stress 
such as transitions; e) social injuries such as rejections and defeats. Barriers to support 
include gaslighting/dismissal of concerns (convincing one their concerns are invalid); 
poor boundaries and self-advocacy (which may arise not only from the diﬃculties with 
relationships, but the adaptive compensation toward people-pleasing); inability for self-
care (“can’t take a break”), and lack of supports/services and resources. When the 
cumulative load meets an inability to ﬁnd relief, inner resources collapse in the face of 
social expectation, and burnout results. Again, here we see the three social mentalities in 
play, and the gas tank model of meaningful resilience may be useful. 
This autistic burnout model highlights both the challenges and goals of 
therapeutic niche development. As Armstrong (2010, p. 59) said, “the world needs 
systematizers: computer programmers, mathematicians, engineers, mechanics, and 
scientists, among others.” Niches curate respect for systematized knowledge, problem-
solving and skill expertise, but may work best when presented in a “free agent” style

382 
with suﬃcient autonomy to exercise their strengths without unnecessary social injury 
from team interaction and managerial domineering. In contrast to ADHD’s introspective 
generalist, ASD may be a problem-solving specialist, one happier in the concrete world 
of things. Protecting interests in both time and space is crucial to promoting an adaptive 
niche, including self-regulatory strength. However, social positioning is a social game, 
and the relatively slow road of role and skill development may give niches a temporal 
dimension as success comes later in life. This may delay the resilience-promoting factors 
of being in one’s niche concurrently, increasing the likelihood for agonic “damage” to 
accrue in the volatile developmental years of high school, where ASDers may be more 
likely to go unbuﬀered, traumatically stressed and rendered invisible. ASD misanthropy 
may come from unbuﬀered social pain, and therapeutic inﬂuence may require helping 
individuals in agonic mode mentally transition to be able to live in the hedonic realms 
that are suddenly possible. That may require honoring the reality of these agonic 
experiences, validating them, and consciously grappling with how to make a hedonic 
orientation possible. This new hedonic environment will likely be a moral one, where 
truth-seeking and problem-solving take on a transcendent moral signiﬁcance in the 
therapeutic microculture, giving deeper meaning to the ASDers underlying strengths, 
values and contributions. 
As with ADHD, the need to ASDers may face social pitfalls along the way. The 
cognitive and moral alignment of intellectual problem-solving may create a risk of 
“hyper-rationalism” that can interfere with relationships by applying analytical 
reductionism where social and emotional holism might be more appropriate. For

383 
instance, hyper-rational thinking may get in the way of conﬂict resolution when values in 
truth and objectivity make “being right” both a self-righteous and ego-involved goal, 
which may interfere with the relational goal of win-win de-escalation and mutual 
understanding (i.e., nonviolent communication ; Rosenberg, 1999). The agonically 
traumatized ASDer might encounter a misanthropic and cynical take on the “stupidity” 
of other neurotypes, which further alienates them as they justify their loneliness and 
social injury as misunderstood superiority. The relationship to the social world is 
important. A variety of early social interventions are available to ASD, but applied 
behavior analysis is controversial. More organic long-term facilitation of ASD niche 
construction will be a question of creating cultural spaces for ASD subcultures with 
organic norms, values and practices that are hedonic to them, and may ultimately align 
on shared interests; spaces like this are currently being facilitated by the internet, where 
the written word oﬀers a concrete medium with less reliance on mentalizing 
(Armstrong, 2010). Meanwhile, social decoding - of signals, meanings, and relationships 
- may be an important part of therapy. For instance, the importance of understanding 
the function and nature of diﬀerent kinds of relationships in the social network may be 
important as they provide diﬀerent functions, and require diﬀerent kinds of boundaries 
and expectations, with a special signiﬁcance placed on roles that oﬀer authentic depth, 
de-masking and social buﬀering. Therapeutic microcultures should oﬀer the opportunity 
to a) de-mask, and b) secure support, for instance, by processing neurotic content with a 
validating real-world agonism and avoiding the cognitive biases of depressive realism , c) 
lend ASDers some big-picture processing power where necessary, d) avoid over-

384 
stimulating sensory input (as well as strategies to help outside the oﬃce), e) avoid the 
epistemic injustice of tropey understandings of ASD, and f) celebrate the meaningful 
narratives that organize their lives. As usual, the therapeutic relationship as an acute 
stress-reducer, and long-term buﬀering micro-culture, is paramount. 
Part V: Summary 
This theory is an attempt at therapeutic consilience. It seeks to explore a large 
but important evolutionary meta-frame to situate the mental challenges of human social 
life at multiple levels and across a natural diversity of agencies that diverge and 
reconverge in environments organized with or against our needs. Making these discrete 
levels of analysis - ecologies, strategies and niche dynamics - we can frame their 
interaction in ways that bring new levels of empathy, understanding and intervention to 
bear. Speciﬁcally, we see three stories. First, that life strategies are organized into 
adaptive (happiness) and purposeful (meaning) ways of being (i.e., “normal 
neurodiversity”) that create unique paths to social success or failure, and consequently, 
unique paths through landscapes of buﬀering and injury. Second, we see how mental 
health biology is directly impacted by social injuries that drive the etiology of various 
disorders depending on the speciﬁc vulnerabilities of diﬀerent life strategies, particularly 
those who express normal neurodiversity at clinical levels and turn up the trade-oﬀ 
intensity in a for-better or for-worse fashion. Finally, we see how diﬀerent environments 
can be more nourishing or toxic to our individualized niche needs either by mismatch or 
by their moral valence, and therefore require diverse moral contributions to either 
change the worst, or maintain the best, of those systems. There may even be spiritual

385 
implications in that these evolutionary meta-narratives are increasingly thought to have 
a direction to life, and a complementarity of cognitive purpose, that could intentionally 
evolve toward a sense of meaning, purpose and shared success aligning to this direction 
consciously as a global meta-narrative (Heylighen, 2023; D. S. Wilson et al., 2023). 
The interacting narrative shifts involved help to resolve many [unjust] 
fragmentations in the mental health sciences, while aligning with one another in a 
consilient paradigm shift. This biopsychosocial, contextual, evolutionary and integrative 
(Gilbert, 2019) perspective could be seen as a tentative validation of the contributions of 
consilience; a path toward epistemic justice in reframing unfair stereotypes that exist to 
justify a “natural” social order; and a path forward for thinking about more 
hedonic/nurturing ways of organizing our individual and collective niches for better 
social outcomes and more constructive social discourse and praxis. 
At a meta-level, this theory also frames the need to resolve a tension between 
two ways of knowing - analytical problem-solving and model-level mentalizing - and 
their important contributions to the understanding of human ﬂourishing. As Jonathan 
Haidt said of psychology, much of the topography of the social sciences has been shaped 
by “systematizers” and not “empathizers” (Haidt, 2013), and indeed, in many ways this 
makes up the opposing poles of neurodiversity itself, represented in Table 3. This is true 
of the medical model with its bottom-up, problem-focused views of people and 
problems at its core, as a seemingly intuitive problem-solving approach. Yet mechanistic 
cognition fails to be counterbalanced without the clever holism of mentalizing cognition 
to wisely evolve the problem-solving paradigms themselves. While the two likely have

386 
reciprocal inﬂuence on human knowledge evolution writ large, mentalizing is likely more 
underutilized in the modern world, and with it, the inﬂuence of holistic, contextual, 
functional and integrative thought is neglected in the social sciences. The historic 
segregation of neurotypes between the bottom-up sciences and top-down humanities 
has likely exacerbated the divide, with the humanities arguably having been dealt the 
weaker inﬂuence of late, yet with a growing gulf likely to their mutual detriment. This 
dissertation articulates the problem anew, suggesting that two neurotype 
specializations oﬀer a yin-yang complementarity to knowledge evolution that should not 
be ignored. The two may need to play in the same intellectual sandbox to provide critical 
checks and balances to a common discourse. Academia currently trails further in its 
inability to support a holistic, pattern-based science methodology to make mentalizing 
contributions more rigorous and legitimate, and this is what consilience could be. Doing 
so might provide a secondary societal gain: an underrepresented neurotype 
demographic could gain access to an important niche role with a moral valence, a way 
to gain the important mental health beneﬁts of prestige and support for those missing 
the altruistic opportunity of a legitimizing social voice.

387 
CHAPTER III: METHODOLOGY 
The purpose of this study was to explore the subjective impact of a training 
model of neurodiversity on mental health practitioners as delivered by a professional 
workshop consisting of ten hours of video lecture content and two hours of virtual 
meeting to discuss and synthesize. This chapter will detail the research design and 
methodology used in the study. 
Research Design and Methodology 
Qualitative research is best used for systematic study of social phenomena in 
natural settings, particularly if a researcher is interested not just in testing reality, but 
testing people’s views on reality (Teherani et al., 2015). Berelson (1952) originally 
deﬁned content analysis as “a research technique for the objective, systematic and 
quantitative description of the manifest content of communication” (p. 18). Downe-
Wambolt (1992) framed content analysis as “a research method that provides a 
systematic and objective means to make valid inferences from verbal, visual, or written 
data in order to describe and quantify speciﬁc phenomena” (p. 314). Cavanagh (1997) 
called it a ﬂexible method for analyzing text data (Hsieh & Shannon, 2005). Content 
analysis is primarily a means of categorizing text data with a system of coding to make 
rigorous, credible and trustworthy interpretations of the meaning of the data. A central 
strength of content analysis is to study social behavior, views and messages without 
inﬂuencing them by performing analysis of various forms of media from newspapers, 
books, speeches and television broadcasts (Fraenkel & Wallen, 2006). 
Content analysis can be approached through a variety of methods - for instance,

388 
conventional, directed, summative - depending on the researcher theory and interests 
and problem to be solved (Weber, 1990). In this study, we will use directed content 
analysis as a theory driven approach to coding performed before and during data 
analysis to interpret the open-ended questions of workshop attendees before and after 
they attend a neurodiversity workshop. The theory-driven coding of the themes is 
performed through iterative rounds of the process, classifying patterns of meanings 
found across texts for the purpose of identifying broad themes relevant to answering the 
research question and beﬁtting the purpose of DCA more broadly as “provid[ing] 
knowledge and understanding of the phenomenon under study” (Downe-Wamboldt, 
1992, p. 314). 
Workshop participants were given a list of open-ended questions to take before 
and after the workshop which will then be coded for themes relevant to answering the 
research question. Analysis of how these themes changed from the initial answers to 
the latter answers were relevant to answering the research question. Given that 
respondents created the media to be analyzed at the prompt of the researcher, 
translating to a text medium did not eliminate threats to validity (for instance, giving 
answers inﬂuenced by their desire to appeal to the researcher) but it did minimize this 
threat by avoiding direct interaction with the researcher, and making answers non-
contingent on any rewards or punishments the researcher can link to participation. 
Participant Recruitment 
The number of 12 minimum participants for a qualitative study has been 
identiﬁed in the literature, though in practice, authors note there is signiﬁcant variance

389 
and little agreement (Clarke & Braun, 2013; Fugard & Potts, 2014; Guest et al., 2006; 
Vasileiou et al., 2018). That is, a variety of theory-driven, or thematic-driven qualitative 
analytical studies have converged on 12 interviewees as a point of saturation, though this 
may be a minimum number as many of these studies achieved this based on relatively 
focused, homogeneous studies, and that larger, more heterogeneous studies may 
require more (Guest et al., 2006). 
Participant Inclusion and Exclusion 
The study recruited mental health providers inclusive to all specialties by license, 
including licensed professional counselors, licensed social workers, licensed marriage & 
family therapists, licensed psychologists, and board-certiﬁed psychiatrists. The exclusion 
criteria consisted of any participant who did not meet the inclusion criteria. Participants 
self-selected themselves for the study based on the information included in the 
recruitment ﬂier or post, and their interest in the workshop topic area. Screening 
consisted of self-reporting the providers’ professional license when signing up for the 
workshop, including providing an active license number. Had participants not met the 
inclusion criteria based on the initial screening, then the following would have been 
recited or sent to the participant via email – "thank you for your interest, but 
unfortunately I am unable to accept you as a participant for this study. I am including 
some follow-up resources should they be helpful for you.” 
Recruitment Settings 
Veduta Consulting ━a Chicago therapy, supervision and consulting practice 
specializing in supporting doctoral counselor students as emerging

390 
professionals ━collaborated in setting up and deploying the workshop. This included 
distributing workshop ﬂiers (see: Appendix B1 & B2) through their established presence 
in local and national professional networks (e.g. professional listservs such as CESNET, 
professional groups such as “chicagotherapists@groups.io”, and social media sites such 
as the Chicago Area Mental Health Therapists Facebook group) as well as information 
about the study on a separate recruitment ﬂier. Appendix A includes the permission 
letter from Veduta Consulting granting permission to recruit from their professional 
networks in this fashion. Veduta had discretion to consider other networks to recruit 
from in the event of using a moderated social network or organization, and a letter was 
created asking for permission to do so (see: Appendix B3) giving permission for the 
moderator to send out recruitment materials. 
Recruitment Procedure 
Fliers for the study were circulated alongside ﬂiers for the workshop (see: 
Appendix B1, B2 & B3) and distributed to the social networks, organizations and online 
forums outlined above. Self-selected participants either clicked a link for online 
registration included in the emails circulated with the attached ﬂiers, or reached out to 
a Veduta contact through the provided contact information on the ﬂier, where they 
were directed by email link to online registration and online consent form. Participants 
were not oﬀered remuneration or incentive for the research aside from getting 
continuing education units (CEUs) for completing the workshop, which did not require 
completion of the research. 
Consent was obtained by electronic signature on the ﬂier (see: Appendix C) or

391 
checkbox on the online form. The consent was furnished to participants by emailed pdf 
and included in Qualtrics to be aﬃrmed electronically before ﬁlling out survey questions. 
The form explained the importance of ongoing consent, as well as the circumstances 
under which consent might change, as well as steps to take to notify the PI that they 
redact consent. A reminder of consent was provided at each step of the study (i.e. at the 
outset of the second round of open-ended questions, where participants reaﬃrmed 
consent). As member checking played out, reminders about consent were included 
through online communication. The extent and limits of conﬁdentiality and privacy were 
included on the informed consent form, as was the IRB assessment that there was little 
risk and no direct beneﬁt to participants. 
Development of the Workshop and Questions  
Theoretical Base and Reference for the Inclusion of Elements 
Research Findings Informing the Inclusion of Workshop Elements  
The workshop was broken into four video modules of relevant lectures with 
slideshows and a ﬁnal virtual conference to synthesize and discuss elements, as well as 
explore its application to clinical vignettes. To do this, the research was used from 
Chapter II as follows: 
Video 1 - Neurodiversity and Epistemic Injustice: Problems. This video explored 
current problems with the medical model as a frame for understanding and treating 
neurodiversity. This video highlighted problems with the medical model from an 
epistemic justice lens in general, but the video was bookended with considerations 
about neurodiversity in particular. This research came largely from part 1 of the

392 
literature review (Chapter II) and synthesized the critical literature about the medical 
model into six domains of relevant critical analysis: a) the medical model is associated 
with mental health stigma, b) the medical model’s utility is ﬂawed, c) the medical model 
has social costs, d) the medical model’s theory is ﬂawed, e) the medical model frames 
information about mental health in ways that are both inaccurate and create worse 
outcomes, f) the medical model’s assumptions about a singular form of normalcy are a 
particular impediment to understanding neurodiversity as a diversity of norms. The 
concept of epistemic justice (Fricker, 2007) is framed as highlighting the importance of 
getting these training models correct, as the ways in which people are known 
(hermeneutical justice) shape their treatment and reception in society, including the way 
they relate to themselves, which can drive stigma. This sets up the alternative training 
model of the rest of the workshop, which can usefully frame treatment, but can also 
capture an understanding of diverse strengths and strategies, and contextualize relevant 
challenges and optimal niches in light of them. Overall, this video contrasts the 
assumptions of a training model of medical pathology and considers what may be 
diﬀerent using a model built on diverse ways of being. 
Video 2 - Neurodiversity and Epistemic Injustice: Frames. This video explores 
parts’ 2 & 4 of the literature review by framing a) human mental well-being as a property 
of social animals (in contrast with a default state that is disrupted only by disease and 
dysfunction), and b) neurodiversity as a congruent model that emerges from a 
consilience of social science information just as social animal personalities are tailored 
to niches in their own social ecologies. In the ﬁrst part, human beings are framed as a

393 
special case of social animals, with the similarities and diﬀerences of both outlined. 
Well-being is considered a functional property of an evolved nature that seeks to 
motivate prosocial cooperation and coordination while suppressing self-interest, and 
where social feedback is instrumental in a) energizing cooperation toward mutual goals, 
or b) shifting people into this self-interested survival mode that is often associated with 
poor mental well-being. In the second part, four social science models are evaluated for 
a consilience paradigm of neurodiversity as emerging at the crossroads of two universal 
dimensions of human nature that are found in each of these sciences. Framed in terms 
of temperament, these two dimensions are, broadly speaking, a) more or less sensitivity 
to reward (the behavioral activation system, or BAS) and b) being more or less sensitive 
to threat (the behavioral inhibition system, or BIS). These two dimensions are validated 
in research from genetics, including gene-culture coevolutionary theory, personality, life 
history research, and moral psychology, with most of the presented ﬁndings being tied 
to major integrative models in the respective ﬁelds that agree on this two-dimensional 
approach. Here, each ﬁeld’s contribution oﬀers diﬀerent implications to an overall 
holistic gestalt about neurodiversity and its strengths, challenges, trade-oﬀs, values, 
strategies, mechanisms, optimal environments and more. This synthesis model is 
framed in the author’s own “quadrant model” (plotting these two dimensions against 
one another results in four emergent combinations that can be visualized as quadrants). 
This is considered in relation to “complementary cognition,” a major evolutionary 
contribution to framing neurodiversity as diverse yet complementing cognitive 
strategies that create a productive tension in driving cultural evolution, and a high-level

394 
framework that may come to serve as a critical strengths-based reframe to contextualize 
the challenging trade-oﬀs of neurodiverse people as being critical to the human project. 
Video 3 - Neurodiversity and Epistemic Injustice: Biosocial Models. This video 
explores part 3 of the literature review, which draws on what is called there “embodied 
relational theory,” and what is called in the workshop “biosocial models.” Here, a recap 
of social animal frames is used to explore how social animals are energized, or buﬀered, 
in their resilience through positive social feedback, and “injured” through negative 
social feedback, including the major pathways of this feedback: feedback about goals 
and barriers to them, feedback about ingroup safety and belonging, and feedback about 
social status and wins and losses. Models are used to attempt to capture these dynamics 
as health bars, gas tanks or thermostats, where accumulating stress (“allostatic load”) is 
a pathway to mental health diagnoses, as is the erosion of resilience, and these synergize 
into spiral dynamics that can play on diﬀerent identities or social positions diﬀerently. 
The relevance of environments of scarcity or abundance are considered, as these 
organize social environments of injury or buﬀering, and create environments where 
vulnerable people are more likely to be marginalized or oppressed, or more likely to be 
celebrated by having unique and specialized contributions. These are considered in 
terms of a) correctly attributing mental health problems, as well as b) the importance of 
niche-construction, i.e. the need to help people ﬁnd their optimal environment of 
function as a way to frame the goals of mental well-being as long-term sustainability in a 
niche that can support people in their unique strategies and trade-oﬀs. All of this is 
brieﬂy summarized relative to neurodiversity, as validating the burnout and “belief in a

395 
just world” models of unsustainable well-being and misanthropic worldview, which can 
come to shape neurodiverse well-being. 
Video 4 - Neurodiversity and Epistemic Injustice: ADHD & ASD. This video 
explores part 4 of the literature review, focusing on the sections about ADHD and ASD. 
This is done primarily through linking the research on ADHD and ASD to the implications 
of video 2 (parts 2 and 4 of Chapter II) which are connected to the diagnostic criteria, 
clinical presentations and neuroscience ﬁndings of both diagnoses, as well as implicated 
trade-oﬀs of strengths, challenges, values and niche considerations that can be framed 
by the quadrant model. This is contrasted with treatment information drawn from the 
author’s own clinical practice, which explores more nuanced understanding of real 
clinical presentations in light of the quadrant model framework, and considers potential 
relational treatments that are implicated and which have been tentatively validated 
from the author’s clinical practice. 
Research Informing the Inclusion of Questionnaire Elements 
The qualitative instrument used to generate the material for the content analysis 
was a survey questionnaire with seven open-ended questions (see: Appendix E2). Below 
are instruments used to inform the questions asked by drawing on the domains from the 
Therapist Training Evaluation Outcomes Framework (TTEOF) workshop assessment 
methodology such as demographic forms, knowledge assessment, attitudes scales and 
additional questions. These domains are considered for their inﬂuence in shaping the 7-
item survey questionnaire. 
Sociodemographic Characteristics Form. Typically used in conjunction with

396 
TTEOF assessments. Questions in the demographics form are typically tailored to 
information speciﬁc to the study, which was here relevant to experience in the ﬁeld, 
their neurodiversity status, professional training and theoretical modality as it speaks to 
their underlying values, attitudes, and beliefs. Consequently, these questions included 
age, sex, gender, race, ethnicity, neurodiversity status, degree completed, license held, 
certiﬁcations, years of experience, and theoretical orientation (as determined by rank 
ordering their top three modalities of choice). 
Assessment of Reactions & Barriers, Modiﬁed from Bartholomew et al. 
(2007) and the Evidence-Based Practice Attitude Scale. From the TTEOF. Reactions to 
the material and barriers to implementation. Example questions include: this training 
was beneﬁcial; this theory and knowledge in this training will be useful; the 
psychoeducation models and interventions in this training will be useful; what was 
the most useful element of this training? This section informed the last three 
questions of the questionnaire examining a) what participants hoped to gain/did gain 
from the workshop, b) barriers/constraints to understanding or using workshop 
information, and c) how participants hoped/saw the knowledge impacting their 
work/care of neurodiverse clients, with A assessing expectations about gained 
knowledge and understanding, and C assessing hopes about changes to clinical 
behavior and practice. 
Knowledge Assessment. A type of assessment in the TTEOF. It is common to 
assess knowledge gained as a workshop outcome, most commonly using multiple choice 
or true-false questions in a pre-post design (Decker et al., 2011). Some designs have

397 
used knowledge tests creatively, such as to give diﬀerent tests based on whether the 
material was presented in workshop format or by computer application, and whether 
there were diﬀerences in knowledge gained (Gega et al., 2007). Other tests of 
knowledge looked at whether techniques/modalities were indicated for diﬀerent 
treatment populations before and after a training (Knowledge of Evidence-Based 
Services Questionnaire; KEBSQ; Stumpf et al., 2009). Assessments in changes to 
knowledge are thought to be captured in questions 3 & 4 on the questionnaires, as these 
assess prior and gained knowledge of neurodiversity and ADHD/ASD. 
Attitudes Assessments.  
The Neurodiversity Attitudes Scale. The 24-item neurodiversity attitudes scale 
(NAS) measures attitudes toward Autism through the medical model versus the 
neurodiversity social model as a way of capturing stigma from the former. Both 
exploratory (N = 249) and conﬁrmatory (N = 259) factor analysis run on the NAS showed 
the instrument to have adequate reliability and validity, with high construct validity but 
some issues with internal consistency of some of the subscales (VanDaalen, 2021). 
Endorsing the social model was shown to be correlated with social activism, high self-
esteem and lack of negative views toward disabilities, eﬀectively showing the 
destigmatizing eﬀects of switching from the medical model in terms of both positive 
psychological and social consequences. This instrument was used to highlight the utility 
of contrasting the medical model with neurodiversity, as well as the role of characterizing 
the nature and origins of neurodiversity in establishing latent attitudes and stigmatizing 
assumptions about neurodiversity.

398 
Stigmatization towards Adults with Attention Deﬁcit Hyperactivity Disorder. 
The 37 item Stigmatization toward adults with attention deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder 
questionnaire (STAADHDQ) captures stigmatizing views toward ADHD. The STAADHDQ 
showed high internal consistency with subscale reliability ranging from .61 to .87, with 
.60 being the minimum allowable and .80 indicating good reliability (Fuermaier et al., 
2012). The STAADHDQ demonstrated that each subscale captured diﬀerent aspects of 
stigma, and that teachers and physicians - two populations with special references and 
access to ADHD populations - each demonstrate unique domains in which their training 
aﬀords less stigma on a speciﬁc subscale, suggesting good construct validity. As with the 
prior instrument, this instrument revealed how stated beliefs about the nature and 
origin of ADHD could be used to reveal latent stigmatizing views, attitudes and beliefs 
about ADHD, which informed the decision to ask questions about ADHD and ASD 
separate from a more value-laden construct such as neurodiversity. 
Decker et al. (2011) found that a variety of studies have sought to understand 
changes in attitude as a training outcome, including changes in attitudes towards training 
models (for instance, parent training and family therapy with the Therapist Attitude 
Inventory; TAI; Herschell et al., 2009), evidence-based practices (Evidence Based 
Practice Attitudes Scale; EBPAS; Henggeler et al., 2008; Herschell et al., 2009) or delivery 
methods (for instance, Attitudes Toward Treatment Manuals; ATTM; Henggeler et al., 
2008), changes in beliefs toward the philosophical models (for instance, toward the 
disease model of alcoholism versus the psychosocial model with the Understanding of 
Alcoholism Scale; UAS; Morgenstern et al., 2001), and toward competing therapeutics

399 
approaches (for instance, in the treatment of alcoholism with the Treatment Processes 
Questionnaire, TPQ; Morgenstern et al., 2001). Some of these were studied as an 
attempted predictor of clinical use of a new therapeutic modality, but were congruent 
in capturing changes in attitude. This research informed questions 1 & 2 on the survey 
questionnaire, which considered attitudes toward the medical model and a potential 
relationship with mental health stigma. It is thought that the assumptions of the medical 
model stand in contrast with the assumptions about neurodiversity, ADHD and ASD as 
presented in this workshop, and so if attitudes could be seen as changing with regard to 
the latter, they may be accompanied by changes in attitude toward the former. 
Additional Questions. Extra questions were included with the neurodiversity 
attitudes scale from VanDaalen (2021), including questions about familiarity, beliefs and 
support of the neurodiversity movement. Each question given with basic multiple-
choice responses from strongly agree through strongly disagree, with the last two 
questions oﬀering open-ended responses for a mixed methods qualitative component. 
Questions include: 1) how familiar are you with the neurodiversity movement?; 2) how 
much do you agree with the goals of the neurodiversity movement?; 3) how 
important/necessary is the neurodiversity movement?; 4) how beneﬁcial is the 
neurodiversity movement to people with disabilities?; 5) how would you deﬁne the 
goals of the neurodiversity movement; 6) what is your opinion of the neurodiversity 
movement? These questions were useful to probe how revealed attitudes about one’s 
support or attitude toward the neurodiversity movement itself might relate to revealed 
attitudes and beliefs regarding diﬀerent ways of framing ADHD and ASD, as well as

400 
attitudes toward stigma and the medical model. This shaped inclusion of question 3 
which asked about neurodiversity speciﬁcally, separate from ADHD and ASD alone, as 
this more value-loaded construct might elicit diﬀerent results from asking about ADHD 
and ASD, which would prime diﬀerent schemas, beliefs and attitudes. 
Workshop: A Training Model of Neurodiversity Informed by Epistemic Justice 
Format  
The workshop was developed by the primary investigator based on the research 
ﬁndings in Chapter II with some input on workshop best practices from the practice 
owner of Veduta, a counseling and consulting agency that had been accredited by the 
Accrediting Council for Continuing Education and Training (ACCET). Information about 
Veduta, and the research assistant furnished by Veduta, was given to the IRB to ensure 
that only those critical to the research had access to sensitive information, what 
information could be accessed by the assistant, and who the individuals in question 
were. The workshop was developed as a continuing education unit (CEU) training 
eligible for credit toward the continuing education requirements required by state and 
federal law, and as such, provided an incentive to partake in the training. However, 
participants could drop out of the research at any time, so this did not amount to an 
incentive to complete the research. A variety of promotional materials through the 
agency were used to disseminate information, including a brief description of the 
project and contact information available in the marketing materials of the training. 
The workshop utilized a “ﬂipped classroom” style, using four pre-recorded 
videos and a ﬁnal virtual group conference to discuss and synthesize the content. This

401 
allowed participants to take in a content-heavy training model at their leisure, and come 
together for shared elements of group discussion and activity. Participants had two 
weeks prior to the virtual meeting to consume the four videos which amounted to 
10:07:16 hours of content. The recorded lectures would normally have been given in 
person, but presenting them as recorded content instead allowed clinicians to take in 
the material at their leisure and focus on group process for the ﬁnal virtual portion, 
which was three hours in length. Providing materials this way, like the training 
equivalent of a “ﬂipped classroom,” had the advantage of cutting down on the 
necessary time needed for a ﬁnal in vivo group process, which was deemed to be a 
useful consideration given the ongoing uncertainty of the global pandemic that played 
out throughout most of this dissertation. 
Descriptions of the Workshop Videos and Lectures  
The following is a broad content overview of the video presentation content as 
well as lecture and activities in the virtual workshop session. 
Video 1 (1:06:31): Neurodiversity & Epistemic Injustice: Problems - What Are 
We Trying to Solve? 1) a brief history of neurodiversity: a) neurodiversity history: a 
movement, b) neurodiversity movement: [thematic] overview, c) summary: 
neurodiversity may be misunderstood; 2) problems with current frames: a) what’s in a 
frame? (visual metaphor of pathologizing diversity), b) Higashida quote, c) epistemic 
injustice, d) problems with the medical model, e) study ﬁnding: medical model and 
stigma, f) study ﬁnding: DSM problems, g) study ﬁnding: social costs, h) study ﬁnding: 
theoretical problems, i) study: autobiological information, j) study ﬁnding: role of

402 
normalcy, k) neurodiversity catch-22, l) summary: medical model as a single relationship 
to well-being; 3) paths forward: a) normal neurodiversity, b) evolved cognitive styles?, c) 
study: burnout model, d) study: belief in a just world, e) models: disease vs diversity, f) 
proposed neurodiversity deﬁnitions 
Video 2 (3:20:36): Neurodiversity & Epistemic Injustice: Frames - What is 
Neurodiversity? 1) frames & lenses: a) neurodiversity consilience overview, b) humans as 
social animals, c) social animals and personality diversity, d) complementary cognition, 
e) model: connections & injuries, f) empathic imagination; 2) neurodiversity: genetic 
research: a) genes: real role, b) sensitivities, c) smoke detectors, d) gene-culture 
interactions, e) quadrant model: level 1, f) summary: neurodiversity is genetic diversity; 
3) neurodiversity: personality research: a) cybernetic big ﬁve theory, b) cybernetic big 
two, c) personality research metatheory, d) quadrant model: level 2, e) summary: 
neurodiversity is personality diversity; 4) neurodiversity: life history research: a) model: 
fast-slow-defense, b) FSD: basic model, c) FSD: extended model, d) evolutionary 
psychopathology, e) quadrant model: level 3, f) life history strategy & diagnosis, g) 
summary: neurodiversity is a diversity of life strategy strengths & challenges; 5) 
neurodiversity: moral psychology: a) study ﬁndings: politics and temperament, 
personality and brain diﬀerences, b) study visual: ideology in two dimensions, c) 
quadrant model: level 4, d) complementary cognition, e) summary: neurodiversity is 
diversity of moral purpose; 6) conclusion: quadrant model synthesis: a) quadrant model: 
all levels, b) quadrant model: left vs right, c) quadrant model: up vs down, d) quadrant 
model: meaning matrix, e) quadrants: other ﬁndings, f) quadrants and ADHD/ASD, g)

403 
summary of summaries. 
Video 3 (2:48:44): Neurodiversity & Epistemic Injustice: Biosocial models - How 
Should we Think about Mental Health Issues? 1) biosocial models: a) overview, b) 
neurominority pain & dysfunction: quote, c) epistemic injustice revisited, d) 
evolutionary functional analysis; 2) social animals and mental health: a) social animals 
revisited, b) social animals and major mental health ﬁndings, c) social animals become 
predictably depressed under certain conditions; 3) embodied cognition: a) 
autobiological information: social biochemistry, b) brain as prediction machine, c) 
visuals: cybernetic loops and psychosocial injuries & buﬀers, d) visuals: social 
mentalities, e) visuals: psychosocial injuries as chronological experiences, f) visuals: 
social positions shape psychological dynamics, g) summary: experience is embodied; 4) 
embodied psychosocial injuries: a) ﬁndings: entrapment, b) ﬁndings: isolation, c) 
ﬁndings: defeat, d) psychosocial injuries and psychopathology: depression, anxiety, 
psychosis and trauma, e) visual: a model of injuries and buﬀers, f) study ﬁndings: 
biosocial sustainability, g) sustainability and epistemic injustice, h) social buﬀering, i) 
therapeutic implications; 5) self-regulatory strength: a) overview: three metaphors for 
science communication, b) visual: metaphor 1 - gas tanks, c) visual: metaphor 2 - health 
bars, d) visual: metaphor 3 - thermostats, e) visual: health bars and neurodiversity; 6) 
toxic and nurturing environments: a) structures, contexts and positions, b) study 
ﬁndings: toxic and nurturing environments as agonic and hedonic environments, c) 
visual: agonic and hedonic environments, d) environments and growth vs ﬁxed 
mindsets, e) study ﬁndings: social inequality and mental health, f) study ﬁndings:

404 
nurturing societies and mental health, g) quadrant model and environmental diversity, 
h) quote: environments and epistemic injustice, i) therapeutic implications: niches & 
buﬀers, j) intersections & spiral dynamics, k) sustainability; 7) injurious environments 
and neurodiversity: a) Higashida quote revisited, b) study: burnout model revisited, c) 
study: belief in a just world revisited, d) therapeutic implications 2, e) further reading 
Video 4 (2:51:35): Neurodiversity & Epistemic Injustice: ADHD & ASD - 
Neurodiversity Mechanisms and Treatment. 1) ADHD & ASD: a) overview, b) quote: 
neurominority pain & dysfunction revisited, c) typical assumptions; 2) frames: a) 
concepts and language, b) quadrant model revisited, c) visual: neurotypical trade-oﬀs 
versus neurodivergent, d) quadrant model: lower left trade-oﬀs versus lower right, e) 
quadrant trade-oﬀs versus ADHD/ASD ﬁndings; 3) Attention Deﬁcit Hyperactivity 
Disorder: a) ADHD facts, b) ADHD brain, c) strengths of imagination, d) summary: ADHD 
as a trade-oﬀ model, e) ADHD treatment implications, f) ADHD organization tool, g) 
ADHD values & strengths, h) ADHD summary: ADHD may not be a disease; 4) Autism 
Spectrum Disorder: a) ASD facts and basics, b) ASD brain, c) summary: ASD as a trade-oﬀ 
model, d) ASD treatment, e) ASD: values & treatment; 5) therapeutic application: a) 
quote: Higashida quote revisited, b) visual: neurotype buﬀering, c) visual: giftedness 
model, d) visual: burnout model revisited, e) visual: nurturing societies revisited, f) visual: 
ikigai, g) quote: lost connections 
Virtual conference (2:00:00): Synthesis: Case Studies and Discussion. 1) lecture 
recap of the three modules: a) neurodiversity frames, b) neurodiversity deﬁnitions, c) 
quadrant model recap, d) lower quadrants and ADHD/ASD, e) compensatory strengths,

405 
f) biosocial models, g) internalized toxicity, h) gas tank model, i) ADHD/ASD as 
neurodiversity, j) models: burnout, belief in a just world, k) model: burnout spiral, l) 
burnout therapy, m) breakout discussion: impressions, impactful concepts, struggles, 
relevant clients, personal relation?; 2) Case study vignettes: a) 4 case studies and 
discussion, b) review treatment concepts and tools, c) breakout discussion: reactions, 
salient concepts, techniques or applications?; 3) closing: a) medical model and the well-
being continuum, b) model: injuries and connections, c) epistemic injustice and 
neurodiversity, d) purpose not pathology?, e) autobiological information, f) 
communication not accommodation, g) disease vs diversity 
Workshop Questionnaire 
Participants were given two forms to complete prior to the workshop. The ﬁrst 
was a demographics questionnaire (Appendix E1) which collected basic demographic 
information (age, sex, gender, race, ethnicity, neurodiversity status) as well as 
information focused on professional experience (license held, certiﬁcations, years of 
practice, theoretical orientation). The second was the pre-workshop questionnaire 
(Appendix E2) which consisted of seven open-ended questions assessing information on 
three domains - assumptions / beliefs / attitudes about the medical model, 
neurodiversity and subjective reactions to the workshop. 
Following the workshop, participants were also given the post-workshop 
questionnaire which was identical to the pre-workshop questionnaire with the exception 
of some altered verb tenses to reﬂect that participants had been exposed to the salient 
information. The following is a list of the seven open-ended questions used on the

406 
workshop questionnaire. The ﬁrst two questions assess beliefs and attitudes about the 
medical model of training/psychopathology; the second two questions assess beliefs 
and attitudes about neurodiversity and representative diagnoses such as ADHD and 
ASD; and the ﬁnal three questions assess expectations (on the pre-workshop 
questionnaire) and reactions (on the post-workshop questionnaire) to the training 
model. 
1. The neurodiversity movement is partially deﬁned in resistance to the medical 
model of diagnosis and treatment - what is your relationship to the medical 
model as a frame for understanding people’s mental health troubles and their 
treatment? 
2. In relation to the medical model, what is the risk of stigma, and how does it 
impact our understanding of mental health troubles and treatment? 
3. What is neurodiversity in your view, and how have these views evolved? 
4. What are your beliefs about the origin and nature of ADHD/ASD? 
I.e. what IS ADHD/ASD? 
5. What do you hope to gain/did you gain from a neurodiversity workshop? 
6. What would be/was a barrier or constraint to understanding or using 
neurodiversity workshop information? 
7. How do you hope/see this knowledge impacts/ing how you move 
forward in your work/care of neurodiverse clients? 
Data Collection 
Two weeks prior to the workshop, participants were sent email communications

407 
orienting them to the ﬂipped classroom workshop style and schedule, including links 
directing them to pre-training materials such as informed consent, information about 
the purpose of the study, the demographics questionnaire and the pre-workshop 
questionnaire. Following completion of these, participants were sent links to the video 
modules hosted at private YouTube links with disabled comments. As a mechanism to 
ensure engagement with the video content, four-digit audio codes were added to 
random sections of each video module that were required to be reproduced on the ﬁnal 
survey before a participant could complete the training and obtain their CEUs. 
Participants were given two weeks to complete the materials. After the workshop, 
participants were given one week to complete the post-workshop questionnaire. 
Participants were told to expect the possibility that the researcher could follow up on 
this second questionnaire with some ﬁnal targeted questions to extend and clarify their 
answers (this was not exercised) and that researcher would follow-up after the study to 
employ member checking to ensure the trustworthiness and credibility of the results. 
Member checking was carried out following data analysis and guided by three 
questions: 1) Do the transcribed responses match your intended sentiment?; 2) Do you 
want to change anything?; and 3) Do you want to add anything? These questions were 
drawn from the Birt et al. (2016) as an approach to balance numerous ethical and 
logistical challenges in the member checking process. Appendix F includes the email 
used to explain the member checking process. Transcripts were sent to participants as 
attached Microsoft Word documents with the email oﬀering guidance on what to do if 
they sought to alter their answers. Select passages in the transcripts were highlighted

408 
for potential ambiguous meanings or dual interpretations and accompanied by a 
researcher comment on why the passage was chosen. Participants were invited to 
clarify, comment or elaborate on these and other passages, though it was made clear 
that participation was not mandatory in process, and participants were not required to 
alter any answers beyond their own desire for clariﬁcation of intention in the research. 
No participant elected to make changes. 
Participants were given the option to opt out of the research at any time without 
penalty (this information was provided in the initial materials), but they would still need 
to complete the ﬁnal post-workshop questionnaire to demonstrate that they engaged 
the workshop materials in order to get certiﬁed that they had completed the training and 
gain their CEUs. 
The initial email communications directed participants to use a secured Qualtrics 
survey to complete the pre-training materials: an informed consent form, demographics 
form, and the open-ended questionnaire. This information was captured in a secured 
Qualtrics account by the research assistant furnished by Veduta, who then sent the PI 
the information aggregated in password-protected spreadsheets with the identifying 
participant information removed, and each participant instead identiﬁed through a self-
selected four-digit pin that only the assistant could connect back to the participant’s 
email. Following the workshop, participants were given one week to complete the post-
workshop Qualtrics-hosted questionnaire, and again, the research assistant sent a 
transcript of the de-identiﬁed and password-protected data as an Excel spreadsheet to 
the researcher, who stored the results on a password-protected private computer in a

409 
locked residence. 
Data Management 
A Veduta research assistant was always available to liaison communications 
between the participants and researcher or vice versa to maintain the de-identiﬁcation 
procedures as needed. Identifying information was removed from all results, and 
participants were identiﬁed through self-selected four-digit pins as part of the initial 
Qualtrics pre-workshop survey. Secure email was used for most correspondence, which 
linked to a protected Qualtrics account to host the survey data entry used in the study, 
including pre- and post-workshop questionnaires, demographics forms and informed 
consent forms. Transcripts of these results were auto-generated and aggregated into 
password-protected spreadsheets, sent to the primary investigator for analysis and 
stored on a password-protected private computer. The study data will remain only on the 
researcher’s password-protected computer for ﬁve years following the publication of the 
dissertation. 
Credibility and Trustworthiness 
In qualitative research, statistical rigor is replaced by attempts to ensure 
credibility and trustworthiness using a variety of means that control for various kinds of 
bias on the part of researcher and participants. In this study, we employed triangulation 
by using multiple data controls and techniques to ensure the credibility of the data and 
ensure powerful, comprehensive themes (Lincoln & Guba, 1985). These techniques 
included using detailed researcher notes to ensure conﬁrmability of the methods used 
in the design, a software program to verify themes generated are neutral, and an

410 
iterative coding process (see: data analysis; Creswell, 2007; Patton, 2002). When the 
software-assisted coding failed to generate robust codes, multiple coding passes 
optimized separately for general coding themes before a separate pass to answer the 
research question, in the hopes of obtaining a neutral benchmark for codes to check 
against the more subjective interpretative process. Transferability was also aided by the 
use of feedback from experienced interviewers (previous committee chair, Dr. John 
Beckenbach) in designing the open-ended questions. Member checking was also used to 
ensure clarity of accuracy in respondent intent and researcher interpretation. A member 
checking process was adapted from Birt et al. (2016) was used to address logistical 
complexity, respondent burden and trade-oﬀs in implementing feedback (see: data 
collection). Researcher self-awareness was heightened and self-disclosure of bias was 
articulated in service of trustworthiness, including the outlining of study limitations to 
draw clear demarcations on what conclusions can be drawn from the results garnered 
and ways in which the implications can be transferable. 
Data Analysis 
Directive content analysis uses theory to extend an existing theory or research 
that might beneﬁt from further description (Hsieh & Shannon, 2005). Given that much 
of the consilience framework from within this model represents a novel synthesis, this 
workshop constitutes a pilot, and theory-directed questions may have multiple beneﬁts: 
a) in framing the salient theme of epistemic injustice as it relates to ways of 
understanding the neurodiverse, b) by extending theory as it is given meaning to 
participants who grapple with its meaning to their own lives, practices and worldviews,

411 
c) in gauging the intended and unintended implications of these models as a basis for 
reﬁning their utility for their intended purpose, and d) for assessing the implications of 
knowledge reception as it pertains to the ethics of knowing and understanding, 
including potential implications for how the neurodiversity community is viewed, or 
how the neurodiverse themselves might receive this information. 
Theory guided coding and interpretation in multiple ways (see: the development 
of the workshop section above). The TTEOF framework provided a framework for 
productive capturing of the functions of a workshop training. The neurodiversity 
attitudes assessments guided questions about stereotypes and stigma facing the 
community, and the direction knowledge might ideally move instead. Epistemic injustice 
and autobiological information framed issues relevant to the role of understanding and 
stigma. Finally, the SAP on mental health and neurodiversity was used to encode frames 
relevant to new perspectives as they may shift considerations of epistemic justice. 
Where necessary, it was important to highlight contradictory frames and perspectives 
such as the medical model or other counseling or political theories that may not support 
researchers' biases and assumptions as a means of ensuring credibility and 
trustworthiness. Here the goal was a) to see whether frames and meanings from the 
workshop impacted questionnaire answers following the workshop, b) subjective 
reactions on the usefulness, implications and directions of the work, and c) whether the 
subsequent answers can derive any changes with regard to epistemic injustice. 
The coding process was iterative to ensure maximum credibility, trustworthiness 
and accuracy (Bengtsson, 2016). A software program (NVivo) was used to systematically

412 
detect themes for potential codes in an automatic analysis, with the researcher left to 
identify and name potential patterns, though this was found to generate superﬁcial 
codes (i.e., “mental health” and “mental health practitioner”) which was not useful to 
answering the research question. This software was intended to be used in conjunction 
with the primary researchers’ coding by identifying patterns that may agree or disagree 
with the primary researcher’s approach, and incorporating them as one might a second 
coder, which can be used in qualitative analysis to improve trustworthiness through 
triangulation. However, as this failed to generate a robust check on the researcher, the PI 
instead employed two coding procedures, one coding for general themes with no 
particular goal, and one generating themes relevant to answering the research question, 
and using them in conjunction to triangulate the data to ensure trustworthiness and 
credibility. A note taking process was used to externalize the process and create 
transparency around the thinking informing coding, including the congruence between 
the two coding attempts by the PI. Per Hsieh and Shannon (2005), it was expected that 
data analysis would begin with a close reading of all responses, followed by generating 
an initial bank of codes between the researcher and the software including an 
exploration of where their codes agree or disagree (Creswell & Miller, 2000); a second 
reading iterated the coding process for accuracy, and a last pass on the codes sought to 
develop consensus on the ﬁnal codes to be used in the data analysis (Neuendorf, 2002). 
This was indeed the process, with an added pass seeking to seek general themes before 
a subsequent pass was used to generate themes relevant to the research question, with 
the ﬁrst pass used to check against the second to ensure clarity of meanings separate

413 
from the PI’s interpretation of the meanings relevant to the research question. The 
resulting data analysis was sent back to the participants for member checking, to further 
ensure trustworthiness and credibility in the data, but no emails were returned with 
changes to be made. 
Researcher as a Person 
In qualitative research, seeking clarity, awareness and transparency about one’s 
biases are important to manage one’s subjective interpretation of ambiguous results. 
This oﬀers a tool to incentivize objectivity and achieve credible results (Creswell, 2007). 
The eﬀort requires considering oneself as an aspect of the study (Denzin & Lincoln, 
2011). The most salient dimensions to consider are the researchers’ status as a 
neurodiverse (ADHD) participant researcher, his family-of-origin as having multiple 
neurodiverse members, his own experiences with epistemic injustice in the mental 
health ﬁeld, and his current status as a therapist with a predominant neurodiverse 
focus. 
As a clinician, my experience of the mental health ﬁeld has been shaped by years 
of practice watching people suﬀer, as well as transcend that suﬀering by turning pain into 
purpose. My entry into the ﬁeld was as a calling to do this, not as a believer in my 
current role, but as someone who once felt let down by the system. As a young man, I 
saw how a family members’ major mental health diagnosis changed his relationship with 
his wife, children and community. His treatment was a mixed blessing - he experienced 
intermittent pharmacological relief, but saw his identity reshaped by the institutional 
meta-narrative that turned him from quirky mad scientist to pitiable ﬁgure that few

414 
engaged with; a community pariah. Later, when the researcher wrestled with his own 
neurodiverse issues, this family member became a threatening genetic link that 
implicated a poor prognosis through the specter of bad genes. Mental health providers 
reinforced this stigma by mandating testing for this link. The available frames for 
psychological pain made the researcher lose faith in himself and his family, and his 
struggles became far worse before improving. Feeling profoundly misunderstood felt 
like an injustice, and only a calling to help others who felt similarly could turn pain into 
purpose by resolving to help others ﬁnd constructive, non-stigmatized relationships to 
their problems. 
This backstory animates an interest in helping people make sense of challenges 
that may not be understandable or justiﬁable from within a narrow frame, culture or 
experience. Social narratives have enormous impact in reshaping individual narratives to 
one’s self and others. These power imbalances create an enormous responsibility to 
understand the implications of such stories on vulnerable people, lest helpers become a 
tool of internalizing oppression rather than a last line of support in the face of adversity. 
Throwing away many of the assumptions about biological determination in mental 
illness can be an important part of healing. This has led to a journey of seeing 
eccentricity not as an expression of mental instability, but as a valuable trade-oﬀ 
intrinsic to the human condition, one that must be normalized to embrace important 
strengths, values, strategies, niches, and contributions that are found among unusual 
people (Del Giudice, 2018; Oller, 2019). The mental costs of these trade-oﬀs can 
sometimes be a necessary sacriﬁce to serve a unique role in the human project. What is

415 
needed now more than ever is a lens to understand the logic of our natural diversity, 
and how to position ones’ self to capitalize on strengths and mitigate the challenges in 
an often-hostile world. Orienting people to epistemic justice as a common ground to 
unite disaﬀected groups is one example of the prosociality needed to turn pain into 
purpose. Mental vulnerability requires creating eﬀective allies to understand one 
another beyond narrow experiences, allying against the systemic barriers that maintain 
individual problems. People must work together to create social niches and meta-
narratives that are favorable to diverse forms of thriving if everyone is to make it. 
These beliefs create a potential for systemic bias in this study. Sources of bias 
include: a) bias against the medical model (for instance, even using terms that medicalize 
suﬀering such as “mental illness” is something I notice myself resisting), b) a bias in the 
outcome of the study, c) ideological assumptions that might shape the interpretation of 
the data, and d) being invested in how these ideas are received and might impact 
emotional needs for validation, safety, hope and empowerment. These are biases, 
emotions, and assumptions to bring into relief when interpreting the results, to be 
mindful of when having emotional responses, and to be aware of to avoid becoming 
attached to outcomes. Triangulation tools may help to strategize around these factors, 
such as journaling and processing thoughts and feelings. It is my hope that awareness of 
these factors will help harness the positive dimensions of motivation, while avoiding 
biases that might harm the validity of the study.

416 
CHAPTER IV: RESULTS 
The purpose of this study is to explore the subjective impact of a training model 
of neurodiversity on mental health practitioners as delivered by a professional 
workshop consisting of 10 hours of video lecture content and two hours of virtual 
meeting to discuss and synthesize. The study used a qualitative method to explore the 
nature and change of their beliefs and attitudes about neurodiversity and their 
expectations of, or reactions to, the training model captured in questionnaires given 
both before and after the workshop. The methodology employed was directive content 
analysis, where a curated form of media is coded for salient themes, and the term 
“directive” refers to the interpretive process being theory-driven. The theory used to 
guide coding and interpretation was derived from the research synthesis presented in 
the workshop including a) framework for evaluating workshop best practices, b) 
neurodiversity-informed questionnaires to inform the range of attitudes and beliefs 
about neurodiversity, c) forms of epistemic injustice and their consequences, d) a 
neurodiversity consilience drawn from four major social science domains, and e) a social 
animal theory of mental health sustainability. The questionnaire assessed positions on 
these issues in three parts - beliefs and attitudes about the medical model (questions 1 
& 2), beliefs and attitudes about neurodiversity (questions 3 & 4), and 
expectations/reactions to the training model (questions 5, 6 & 7) - both before the 
workshop, and afterward, to determine the nature and direction of any change that 
resulted from the workshop. The goal was to answer the following questions: Does a 
neurodiversity workshop that seeks a de-stigmatizing frame on neurodiversity, to

417 
provide epistemic clarity on a nebulous topic area, and to derive adaptive community-
congruent self-knowledge, resonate with providers as useful in working with 
neurodiverse clients; how might perspectives of practitioners change regarding 
epistemic justice, social animal perspectives, normal neurodiversity and consilience as 
they serve this goal? The questionnaire answers seeks to answer these question by a) 
determining whether there are and positive endorsements of the material presented 
both in-line with the answers to the post-workshop questionnaire, and in the ﬁnal 
section of the questionnaire asking about reactions to the training model, and b) 
determining if there are any changes to the way opinions about the medical model and 
neurodiversity (including ADHD and ASD speciﬁcally) are framed in the post-workshop 
questionnaire relative to the pre-workshop questionnaire. Responses to the seven-item 
questionnaire were coded and analyzed using a content analysis method where codes 
were created to be partially inductive, i.e. informed by direct observation, and partially 
co-occurring, where codes could overlap and segments could have more than one code. 
In this chapter the results of the qualitative content analysis are reported. The 
ﬁrst section reports the return rate and eﬀects on the design, as well as participants and 
demographic information. Section two reports the codes and select excerpts produced 
from the pre-workshop questionnaire. Section three reports the codes and excerpts 
from the post-workshop questionnaire. Section four brings in relevant reactions from the 
workshop debrieﬁng. 
Response Rate and Participant Demographics 
Thirty-one participants signed up for the workshop in two days. Of those 31, 19

418 
began the data collection procedures (meaning 12 only expressed interest in the 
workshop by registering for it but did not attempt to complete it): one did not consent to 
the research process; one consented, but did not give any information; ﬁve began to 
give demographic information, but did not begin the pre-workshop questionnaire; four 
completed only the pre-questionnaire, and ﬁve completed both the pre-workshop 
questionnaire and post-workshop questionnaire. More demographic information is 
presented in Tables 4-8, including age, sex, gender, race, ethnicity, neurodiversity 
status, degree, professions, certifications and years licensed and theoretical orientation. 
The Pre-workshop Questionnaire 
The pre- and post-workshop questionnaires broke the research question into 
seven questions assessing three domains - beliefs about the medical model (n=2), 
beliefs about neurodiversity (n=2) and reactions to the workshop (n=3). The responses 
were asymmetric, with nine questionnaires completed before the workshop and the ﬁve 
questionnaires completed after the workshop, i.e. the loss of four participants to 
attrition. In terms of coding, all nine of the pre-workshop responses were kept from the 
original response cohort to maximize rich thematic saturation; the impact of this choice 
will be bracketed and discussed more in Chapter V. 
Directive content analysis was used to extend research and theory that might 
beneﬁt from further description (Hsieh & Shannon, 2005), so code categories were 
generated by theory-guided interpretation. A number of sources were used, including a) 
a variety of journal articles oﬀering constructive criticism of the medical model on issues 
of stigma, utility, theory & social costs; b) the concept of epistemic justice by Miranda

419 
Fricker (2008) and autobiological information by MacDuﬃe and Strauman (2017a; 
2017b) as they help to frame the cost of pathological narratives and contribute to the 
disempowerment of neurodiverse communities; c) a consilience framework on 
neurodiversity connecting the function of strengths tied to challenges as derived from a 
variety of social sciences including moral psychology, life history research, temperament 
& personality theory, and genetic plasticity trade-oﬀs; and d) a gold star workshop 
assessment, the Therapist Training Evaluation Outcomes Framework (TTEOF; Decker et 
al., 2011) and two neurodiversity assessment instruments, The Neurodiversity Attitudes 
Scale (24 items), and the Stigmatization towards Adults with Attention Deﬁcit 
Hyperactivity Disorder (37 items), as they may aid in assessing how to glean value gained 
in a workshop format, particularly around questions of neurodiversity. 
The qualitative data analysis software, NVivo, was used to generate an initial 
round of codes on the pre-workshop questionnaire data. Running a coding pass without 
existing codes was found to generate superﬁcial data; for instance, an initial pass on all 
of the answers to question one of the pre-workshop questionnaires found two auto-
generated codes - “mental health experiences” and “mental health practitioners” - 
which were overly abstracted and without insight for the purposes of interpreting 
themes relevant to answering the research questions. The primary researcher instead 
worked toward intracoder reliability by ﬁrst generating a set of codes across all 
questions irrespective of the speciﬁc questions, and then recoding the data question by 
question, with the determination that the coding systems used were more or less 
identical (more on this in Chapter V). A combination of inductive coding (codes

420 
generated through close reading of the text) and co-occurring codes (overlapping codes 
where a text segment could have more than one code) were used, while interpretation 
would be driven by the theory outlined above. This was to a) increase reliability by 
avoiding a priori assumptions early on, and b) creating rich saturation to the point of 
redundancy (multiple possible meanings for diﬀerent code segments), where later 
analysis could prune and abstract away in the most parsimonious and salient fashion. 
For example, many respondents levied criticism toward the medical model that was 
multidimensional, suggesting the problem was complex and multifaceted, and giving 
scant attention to any one problem in depth in favor of intimating many overlapping 
problems in brief. Consequently, it was less appropriate to characterize a singular theme 
about the problem with the medical model, and more useful to characterize a 
multidimensional issue emerging across respondents. Thus, ideas were broken down 
both within and across responses to illustrate micro-themes that became robust across 
responses. Statements that had elements of two overlapping forms of criticism would 
therefore be coded both ways. The below criticism invokes two glancing themes that 
emerged more fully across responses, that a) the medical model assumes a narrow 
normativity (“the right...or appropriate way”) and b) the medical model is built on 
‘deﬁcit-based assumptions’ (“problematic or in deﬁcit”): “The medical model makes an 
assumption that a speciﬁc and narrow way of processing and responding to information 
and stimuli is the "right" way or the only appropriate way. Any other way is considered 
problematic or in deﬁcit.”  
A note on categorizing respondents, the ﬁve respondents who were present for

421 
the pre-workshop through to the post-workshop are listed as A through E, while the four 
respondents who did not complete the post-workshop survey are listed as Z1 through Z4 
to maintain separation between these groups to track diﬀerences between those who 
completed the post-workshop questionnaire and those who did not. 
Beliefs about the Medical Model of Psychopathology: Pre-workshop Questions 1 & 2 
The themes from this section of the results were derived from the following two 
questions on the questionnaire: 1) The neurodiversity movement is partially deﬁned in 
resistance to the medical model of diagnosis and treatment - what is your relationship to 
the medical model as a frame for understanding people’s mental health troubles and 
their treatment? 2) In relation to the medical model, what is the risk of stigma, and how 
does it impact our understanding of mental health troubles and treatment? 
Theme 1.1: Most participants have negative views of the medical model due to 
its ﬂawed utility and harmful approach, while some acknowledge its utility. The most 
representative theme that emerged in the initial round of questions regarding the 
medical model is that it is largely held in a negative light by most of the clinicians 
surveyed. This could be categorized into two types of criticism: 1) problems with the 
medical model’s perceived clinical inadequacy, and 2) problems with the medical 
model’s social costs. In terms of inadequacy, the emphasis was on the medical model’s 
clinical limitations, with four sub codes emerging: a perceived lack of conceptual 
accuracy; an “overly simplistic” understanding of “human being’s mental health 
experiences;” a sense the medical model is not the most eﬀective or client-aligned 
treatment system; and the incompatibility of the medical model and counselor values of

422 
self-acceptance. Here a few representative quotes about its perceived clinical 
inadequacy: 
From Respondent A: “I do not like the medical model as I don't feel like it 
accurately captures issues pertaining to mental health and neurodiversity.” 
Respondent B: “...However, the medical model used exclusively is overly simplistic 
in understanding a human being's mental health experiences and ways to partner with 
them in their care.” 
Respondent E: “As a mental health professional, I want to do my best to 
encourage acceptance of how one is and how one feels, and I don't think the medical 
model does a good job of acknowledging this kind of idea.” 
From Respondent Z4: “The medical model is not inclusive and does not give a 
proper explanation of the clients we serve.” 
The second source of criticism was on the unforeseen social costs and 
externalities of the medical model, in three major forms: the creation of social barriers, 
marginalizing forces, and the role of stigma. The medical model was considered to drive 
barriers to both “quality and long-term care,” as well as care-seeking behavior. The 
medical model was considered exclusionary, with clinicians using language like 
“ostracize,” “marginalize,” and “not inclusive.” Given the emphasis on the second 
question, the role of stigma as a proxy for the salient theme of epistemic injustice in the 
dissertation, many clinicians believed there was a signiﬁcant role in the medical model 
regarding stigma prior to the information from the workshop. This theme could be 
broken further into A) causes of stigma, B) mental health consequences of stigma, C)

423 
clinical consequences of stigma, and D) inability to treat root causes. 
Regarding the causes of stigma, several clinicians emphasized the role of the 
language, assumptions and/or philosophy of the medical model in being deﬁned based 
on perceived negative characteristics. Words like “condition,” “deﬁcit,” “disorder,” 
“illness,” and “labels” were all suggested to be problems, sometimes ambiguously 
referring to the language, connotation, metaphor or assumption implied therein. 
From Respondent A:  
A big problem with the medical model and stigma is that everything is deﬁned as 
a ‘disorder.’ When it comes to ADHD we get ‘deﬁcit’ and ‘disorder’ all in one 
diagnosis which is just a lot. It is really problematic to me that this neurotype is 
literally deﬁned by its supposed deﬁcits rather than its strengths. I wish there 
was diﬀerent language and conceptualization for this. 
From Respondent E: “The language used by the medical model--"disorder", 
"condition", "illness" already reinforces stigma.” 
Respondent Z4: “We treat and diagnose symptoms, not root causes.” 
Another approach was to emphasize what was missing from a medical model 
framework rather than the presence of something negative, including one respondent 
addressing a perceived inability of the medical model to quantify client strengths, as 
well as the loss of clinical curiosity or the seeking of client understanding. For example, 
Respondent Z4: “The over pathologizing and use of labels in the medical model increases 
stigma and decreases curiosity and understanding.” 
Finally, other causes mentioned included what might be considered overreach,

424 
the “over-pathologization” of the medical model, and the lack of understanding that 
stems from the inadequacy of the model. For instance, Respondent C: “Stigma is related 
to all of society not fully understanding what neurodiversity means, nor how to interact 
and provide services to those who are neurodivergent.” 
A major theme around stigma was how it directly led to compromised clinical 
care. Several clinicians addressed this directly, including the role of a) limiting 
assumptions, b) fear, both of complex mental health issues and as a driver of treatment, 
c) punitive treatment, d) diagnoses with strong negative associations, e) diagnosis as 
limiting access to services, and f) the role of shallow understanding as a risk of 
misattribution to pathology, and misdiagnosis.  
From Respondent Z3:  
One example of the risk of stigma is in a therapist group, when therapists write 
down the functioning level of an autistic client, the information that is assumed 
can limit the client's access to therapists. If someone says, high functioning 
autistic client, a therapist may already make assumptions about that client's 
relationship to the world and their support needs. Not allowing the client to talk 
about their own experience in the world and how they are functioning in it. 
Respondent E:  
I think with mental health in particular, the risk of stigma within the medical 
model can be huge. For example, the pathologizing of personality disorders and 
diagnoses (e.g., borderline personality disorder) is rampant, and these conditions 
have such negativity associated with them.

425 
Respondent C: “There is risk [from not understanding neurodiversity] of people 
"blaming" some diagnosis, both those who have it or those who do not.” 
Respondent B:  
The risk of stigma is great! I have had colleagues who have said, "I'll never work 
with someone who is (insert mood disorder here)." I think it creates heightened 
vigilance when it comes to observing the struggles people with complex mental 
health issues face and treatment is often framed as punitive and based out of 
fear. 
Clinicians also singled-out how stigma caused a variety of mental health 
consequences for the clients. Codes included problems with A) creating barriers (to 
authenticity, self-acceptance, self-compassion, positive identity and care-seeking 
behavior), B) negative emotionality, negative self-belief and negative self-relationship, C) 
as a driver of “secondary” symptoms, D) social consequences (negative social 
experiences, pressure to mask, perceived diﬀerences are seen as negative) and E) lack of 
resources to support non-pathological diﬀerences.  
From Respondent A:  
But the stigma is there and prevents people from seeking care and/or there are 
parts of their internal world that feel very ashamed and self-negative. I ﬁnd that 
almost all the neurodiverse people I work with have negative self-beliefs related 
to their neurodiversity and perceived diﬀerence from others, as well as trauma 
related to experiences with school or other childhood/adolescent experiences. 
This creates additional symptoms and barriers to developing a positive sense of

426 
self or the capacity for self-forgiveness/acceptance. 
Respondent Z1:  
The medical model reinforces stigmatization of neurodivergence and reinforces 
guilt and shame in those who interact with and respond to their experiences in 
diﬀerent ways. We understand that when people cannot be authentic to who 
they are and how they function, it increases risk for developing mental health 
struggles as well as negatively impacting how neurodiverse folks understand 
themselves and advocate for themselves. There is pressure to hide their 
authentic and unique diﬀerences and meet the expectations that others claim 
should be "strived" for (i.e., masking). 
Respondent Z2: “The risk of stigma can be limiting and disempowering.” 
Finally, the only other themes that emerged might be called ambivalence about 
the medical model, and the diﬃculty of reconciling clinical practice that is incompatible 
with the medical model to working within a system guided by it. Regarding the former, 
some clinicians acknowledged that the medical model either may or does have some 
utility in organizing information or organizing symptoms, while both balanced these 
attributes with criticisms. Another clinician embodied ambivalence by having strong 
negative feelings about labeling, while also suggesting an exception to when such labels 
might be useful, presumably despite the risk of stigma.  
For instance, from Respondent B: “The medical model may be helpful in 
organizing symptoms but I ﬁnd it to be limiting and an oversimpliﬁcation of humans in 
regard to mental health.”

427 
Respondent D: “The whole idea of labeling by diagnosis is repugnant to me, 
unless there is profound disturbance such as psychosis that is less amenable to 
counseling.” 
Several clinicians intimated ways in which they accommodated their practice to 
their incompatible feelings with the medical model. 
From Respondent A:  
I do work within the medical model in my work, due to the fact that taking 
insurance is an important way to make therapy ﬁnancially accessible to clients. I 
typically have collaborative conversations with clients about using diagnosis and 
the medical model to be able to access care but that we are going to work to 
understand and meet their needs as an individual. 
From Respondent D: “I do not orient myself to the medical model or DSM 
diagnosis. I’ve been counseling for 50 years, as a school counselor and in private practice 
for 46 years. I do my own assessment based on the clients history.” 
Lastly, two clinicians did not express negative feelings toward the medical model. 
Respondent C expressed confusion about what was meant by the medical model, while 
Respondent Z2 said they were “trained on the medical model but open and interested in 
other approaches.” 
Beliefs about Neurodiversity: Pre-workshop Questions 3 & 4 
The themes from this section of the results were derived from the following two 
questions on the questionnaire: 3) What is neurodiversity in your view, and how have 
these views evolved? 4) What are your beliefs about the origin and nature of

428 
ADHD/ASD? I.e. what IS ADHD/ASD? 
Theme 1.2: Neurodiversity is broadly considered to be natural diﬀerences in 
human beings that manifest as multidimensional or holistic diﬀerences in functioning, 
interacting and self-expression; it is unclear how neurodiversity the identity relates to 
neurodiversity the diagnoses, which are often conceptualized in the pathological 
language of developmental disorders and gene-environment interactions, which was 
previously considered problematic for neurodiversity the identity. Nearly all 
respondents (n=8) endorsed some variation of neurodiversity being a diﬀerence in the 
way people experience the human condition. The language here was nuanced; some 
(n=3) emphasized neurodiversity as “natural” and being at the species level, ala “the 
human equivalent of biodiversity” or “variety within the human species” or “the 
naturally existing spectrum we all fall within.” While emphasizing the diﬀerence relative 
to the whole tends to centralize the normalcy of diﬀerence relative to a species-wide 
whole, others (n=5) talked about neurodiversity in a more narrow or reductive way. This 
included deﬁning neurodiversity as “variation in neurocognitive diﬀerences” or “brain 
diﬀerences” and emphasized how brains “function at diﬀerent speeds or dimensions,” 
or “the varied range of how each person processes and responds to stimuli/information 
internally and externally” or “the naturally existing spectrum of...brain development, 
functioning and processes.” We might consider this an emphasis on substrates, or 
speciﬁc and narrowly deﬁned diﬀerences in embodied pathways in the body such as 
brains, nervous systems, cognitive processes, etc. 
A third category might be people who tried to get at something more holistic,

429 
person-centered or socially intersecting. That included language like “individuals have 
diﬀerent ways of processing, understanding and reaching to the world” (where 
‘understanding’ or ‘reaching the world’ could be considered more holistic or socially-
intersecting processes) or “there is a wide range of capacities and experiences for people 
and these arise in diﬀerent ways due to both genetics and lived experiences” (where ‘a 
wide range of capacities and experiences’ creates an expansive and inclusive view of the 
nature of diﬀerences). This category was more involved with the holistic interaction 
with the world, what might be called diﬀerences in “ways of being;” they also 
emphasized neurodiversity’s relationship to the social context. For example, one 
respondent who deﬁned it primarily in terms of a social majority-minority dynamic. 
From Respondent D: “In my view, neurodiversity means a way of thinking that is 
non-normative. It could be any way of thinking or processing information that isn't 
linear, isn't accepted nor acknowledged by mainstream society as being legitimate nor 
‘correct.’” 
The relationship of a person with their social and economic context tended to 
echo a theme of neurodiversity as at least partially deﬁned by its history of being 
misunderstood, mischaracterized, oppressed or devalued socially. 
From Respondent B:  
Neurodiversity is a way to describe a way people might show up in the world in 
regard to how they think, present to others, body movement. Historically, 
society viewed people who are neurodiverse as "mad" and it seems that things 
have softened and there is a deeper understanding of neurodiversity in modern

430 
culture. We're by no means aﬃrming but we are doing better than 100 to 300 
years ago. 
From Respondent A: “I also try to understand these diﬀerences as inherently 
valuable and important, even when they do not ﬁt neatly within societal conceptions of 
worthiness like "functioning" or capacity to work under capitalism.” 
To acknowledge neurodiversity as a form of social diﬀerence or as problematic 
relationship to the social context is to acknowledge the current lens on understanding 
neurodiversity may feed into the problem. One respondent even emphasized some of 
the controversial or problematic areas of thinking around the neurodiversity movement 
itself, typically considered part of the solution, not the problem. 
From Respondent A:  
Often when people are discussing neurodiversity now they are talking about 
people with ASD or ADHD but I think it is a much broader concept that I would 
like to see better deﬁned. I also don't like to see neurodiverse contrasted with 
neurotypical as I don't really think anyone is neurotypical and that those 
conceptions of normalcy are very problematic and a slippery slope towards 
eugenics-oriented belief systems. I do like the autistic/allistic language and wish 
there were more versions of that to essentially describe if the person does or 
does not have a speciﬁc type of neurodiversity. 
Of ﬁnal note, while several people used language and concepts informed by 
neurodiversity advocacy (i.e., neurodivergence versus neurotypical), only one person 
addressed the possibility of strengths in neurodiverse individuals, including language

431 
that invoked the possibility of neurodiversity having an innate social function or purpose 
(“integral to the ongoing development of the human species.”) This was the only direct 
reference to strengths and neurodiversity. 
From Respondent A:  
I also want to add that I think ADHD/ASD neurotypes are related to increased 
capacities in certain areas like creativity and scientiﬁc thinking and that much of 
our modern world is driven by technology and innovation devised by 
neurodiverse people. So, relating this back to biodiversity I think ADHD/ASD are 
integral to the ongoing development of the human species in some way. 
Two themes emerged in the evolution of people’s views on neurodiversity: that 
they had evolved throughout adulthood, particularly in the most recent three to four 
years, and that they had evolved in part based on personal experiences with 
neurodiversity. Regarding the former, of the ﬁve people who acknowledged that their 
views on neurodiversity had changed in their life, three mentioned speciﬁcally the last 
3-4 years as being a leap forward in understanding, with one only becoming aware of 
the concept of neurodiversity in that timeframe. The other theme was the change being 
informed by personal experience. Three respondents mentioned having a diagnosis 
themselves; two mentioned working with neurodiverse children or clients; and one 
mentioned having a child or family member with a neurodiverse diagnosis. In the 
answer to a separate question, another respondent also disclosed a neurodiverse 
diagnosis, bringing the total to four of the nine pre-questionnaire respondents having a 
neurodiverse diagnosis, while three of the ﬁve who stayed through the full study did as

432 
well. Interestingly, it was only the four respondents who disclosed a neurodiverse 
diagnosis that also acknowledged that their views on neurodiversity had evolved. Three 
of these four wrote about the role of personal experience with neurodiversity as 
instigating a change around their views, while the remaining respondent only suggested 
that there was still more to know. 
From Respondent B: “However, I've come to understand in the last 4 years since 
2019 that neurodiversity is so much more diverse than we've conceptualized.” 
A personal experience was at the heart of longer-form stories about evolving 
views. One of those responses made special mention of their growth in terms of ableism 
and their own experience with seeing the costs of misunderstanding in their own 
evolution on the topic. 
From Respondent A:  
My views around neurodiversity have evolved a lot throughout my adulthood. As 
a younger person I certainly held uniformed and ableist views around ASD, ADHD 
as well as other disabilities, consistent with the problematic ways neurodiversity 
and disability are portrayed in the media and public discourse. I was not 
diagnosed with ADHD until I was in graduate school, though I struggled with the 
symptoms much earlier and was simply told to "try harder." So there has 
deﬁnitely been a parallel process between understanding, accepting and 
accommodating my own ADHD and working with neurodiverse clients to better 
understand and support them. 
Respondent A would go on to include another personal anecdote that informed

433 
their understanding of ADHD etiology with a thought experiment in their response to 
the fourth question (see: below). Respondent D emphasized the growing popularity of 
the term, but also emphasized their own deep grappling with applying views to their 
experience, this time as a struggle with the positive implications of the advocacy 
movement. 
Even as someone with ADHD myself, I often forget that my "neurodiversity" is 
okay, is acceptable, because the norm is to view yourself in relation to normative, 
mainstream society. It's still easy to feel like there's something wrong with 
myself because I have diﬃculty focusing sometimes. 
Finally, while the last respondent was vague about their journey of personal 
understanding, they alluded to receiving limited academic supports and discovering the 
limits of their own views in supporting both students and their own child. 
From Respondent Z3:  
I was dx [sic] with ADD in college, and I had no idea what to make of the 
diagnosis, nor was there much support for me. I also worked in a school where I 
had autistic children and ADHD children on my caseload and I attended their IEP 
meetings or 504 meetings. At that time, I thought I was supporting them but my 
understanding of it was extremely limited. Since entering private practice, my 
son being dx autistic, and discovering my own autism, I have learned more about 
neurodiversity. 
Regarding the nature and etiology of ADHD and ASD, the most common 
response (n=4) about the speculative origins of these constructs was that ADHD and ASD

434 
were considered to be an interaction of genes and biology. This is an interesting 
response because it could be viewed as in-line with the medical model’s stress-diathesis 
vision of mental health, where genetic vulnerabilities are activated by environmental 
triggers, or a somewhat competing non-pathological interpretation that innate yet 
normal diﬀerences interact with environmental factors in the development of all people 
for good and ill, with the latter view not necessarily carrying the pathological 
connotations that a role for biology must inherently be to pre-dispose neurodiverse 
people to “vulnerability” or “pathology.” 
One of the four respondents with a nature plus nurture view elaborated on some 
of the speciﬁc environmental factors in a thought experiment with personal relevance, 
which highlights the potential complexity with which some people may envision the 
interaction: 
From Respondent A:  
I do understand these traits to be something we are born genetically inclined 
towards and that as our brains and nervous systems interact with our 
environments we grow and develop in the ways that we do. Family systems are a 
big part of this as our families often have similar neurotypes or traits, and that 
can eﬀect us as well. For example, my parents who both have ADHD traits 
(though they don't understand themselves in this way), struggled with emotional 
regulation when I was growing up. I do think this had a signiﬁcant and in some 
ways traumatic impact on me which did impact my ADHD symptoms, my own 
capacity to regulate, and my sense of self. Still, it is impossible for me to know

435 
what my life would be like had I had perfectly regulated and attuned parents. I 
imagine I would still have ADHD but it would probably look diﬀerent. I realize this 
is a personal example but I try to use this to understand the origin/nature of 
ADHD/ASD and how the "born with"/"live experience" pieces of this are pretty 
inseparable feeling to me when it comes to talking to actual people who have 
lived actual lives. 
Respondent Z3 took the stance that they were ADHD and ASD were biological in 
nature (“I believe that you are born autistic or ADHD”) which again, may or may not 
subscribe to the medical model; one could subscribe to the view that neurodiversity 
reﬂect pathology genes while alternatively one could believe in genetic ‘diﬀerences,’ not 
deﬁcits, that lead to neurodiverse phenotypes.  
A sixth respondent explicitly used the framing and terminology of the medical 
model. From Respondent Z4:  
Both ADHD and ASD are developmental disorders of the brain, meaning that in 
development some (external or internal) factor(s) altered the brain’s ability to 
develop in a healthy way, causing impairments in many diﬀerent areas 
depending on the time of the disturbance to development. 
This is a classical medical model way to frame ADHD and ASD as “developmental 
disorders” because “[brains have an] altered...ability to develop in a healthy way” due to 
“disturbed development.”  
A seventh respondent maintained neurodiversity-centered language when 
framing the nature of ADHD and ASD. From Respondent B:

436 
ADHD / ASD are both variations within the human species and show up 
diﬀerently in people. I believe we have always had neurodiversity, throughout the 
course of humans existing on this planet....“ADHD/ASD is a variation of being 
human. It's just another way that people show up in this world. 
Interestingly, between these two statements, Respondent B attempted to 
characterize their understanding of ADHD & ASD at the substrate or etiological level, 
leading to a more medical model characterization that invoked the language of 
[developmental] disorder: 
ADHD = executive functioning within the brain is diﬀerent and impacts the ways 
a person organizes themself in the world (several researchers I've read, call it a 
disorder of time). ASD is what folks call a diﬀerence in the way someone's brain 
and body function. I know that some folks around me call it a developmental 
disorder. 
An eighth respondent focused on speciﬁc etiological mechanisms in the 
manifestation of ADHD and ASD. From Respondent Z1: “I remember learning that ADHD 
is contributed by less neurological pruning during brain development in babies. I don't 
recall learning anything about speciﬁc origins of ASD.” 
The ﬁnal respondent, Respondent C, expressed deep confusion and uncertainty 
and had more questions than answers, while focusing on some of the mechanisms that 
are more marginal to the common consensus, but which may be said to be related to a 
medical model conception. This includes people who subscribe to the view that ADHD 
and ASD are a pathology, and heavily weigh environmental causes from the plausible

437 
(food dyes and toxic contaminants; Arnold et al., 2012) to the less plausible 
(vaccinations; L. E. Taylor et al., 2014). However, this respondent is also open to 
experiential roles for things like trauma, and generally suggests they are open to 
information, including to the plasticity for change: 
Truly, I have no idea. Some say childhood, or Yellow 5 or whatever, so I honestly 
have no clue. Also, sometimes it might just be trauma, and I don't know how 
that is or is not ruled out, or how that impacts someone having ADHD. Also is it a 
permanent thing to the brain or can it be lessened over time? 
Not everyone fully characterized their understanding of ADHD and ASD beyond 
the etiological nature, but among those who did, no two talked about it identically. 
Respondent A endorsed a nature/nurture interaction talked about ADHD and ASD as 
traits, and included the thought experiment example of “emotional regulation” as a trait 
interaction that played out in their family system. Respondent B used neurodiversity-
centered language thoughtfully to engage a deeper functional presentation of ADHD 
that is often considered an evolution on the medical model, such as psychologist Russell 
Barkley’s work that emphasizes what the respondent here calls “a disorder of time” and 
suggested ASD to be a ‘diﬀerence’ in functioning: 
ADHD = executive functioning within the brain is diﬀerent and impacts the ways 
a person organizes themself in the world (several researchers I've read, call it a 
disorder of time). ASD is what folks call a diﬀerence in the way someone's brain 
and body function. I know that some folks around me call it a developmental 
disorder.

438 
Here the respondent attempts a balance between medical model language (“disorder of 
time” and “developmental disorder”) and neurodiversity-centered language 
(“diﬀerent...ways a person organizes themself in the world” and “diﬀerence in the way 
someone’s brain and body function.”). Respondent Z1 attempted a pithy way to address 
clinical ‘functioning:’ 
With regards to what is ADHD... my understanding is that attention and activity 
are primary areas of functioning impacted, which can inﬂuence how a person 
functions/navigates in various areas of functioning (i.e., social, work/academic, 
cognitive, emotional areas); and ASD primarily inﬂuences sensory processing and 
socialization, which can also inﬂuence how a person functions/navigates in those 
same previously mentioned areas. 
Respondent Z3 advocated for being “born with” ADHD and ASD and only 
characterized autism, emphasizing a nervous system sensitivity “where you are living in 
a mobilized state.”  
Expectations about the Training Model: Pre-workshop Questions 5, 6 & 7 
The themes from this section of the results were derived from the following 
three questions on the questionnaire: 5) What do you hope to gain from a neurodiversity 
workshop? 6) What would be a barrier or constraint to understanding or using 
neurodiversity workshop information? 7) How do you hope this knowledge impacts how 
you move forward in your work/care of neurodiverse clients? 
Theme 1.3: Respondents want more information, clinical beneﬁt and tools for 
justice work from a neurodiversity workshop; they see barriers to learning the

439 
material, implementation of the material and challenges to accepting the materials; 
ﬁnally, they hope that the material will improve their clinical conﬁdence, clinical 
eﬃcacy, holistic understanding/case conceptualization, ability to 
empower/destigmatize, and clinical relationship. This ﬁrst question about the 
information to be gained in the workshop had three major themes: a) respondents 
wanted knowledge and understanding about neurodiversity - i.e. “I truly hope to learn 
more about neurodiversity and how people navigate their world” - b) to be able to 
better support clients and loved ones - i.e. “I want to learn ways to better support 
people (my clients and family members) who are neurodiverse.” - and c) to understand 
more about the role of neurodiversity and justice - i.e. “more information on autism and 
justice.” 
Respondent C was interested in better practice with neurodiverse people, but 
framed their interest as coming from a place of fear: 
Working with people with ADHD at a past job was terrifying because I didn't 
know what I was doing. I didn't know what services would really help. Now I have 
a couple adult clients in my private practice who tell me they have ADHD or are 
on the autism spectrum, and again I don't know what to do with that. I don't 
know that I need to do anything about it. 
Many of these responses were blends of the three. Two respondents were 
interested in the intersection of knowledge and justice-related issues. From Respondent 
A: “I would like to learn a lot more about de-stigmatizing neurodiversity and also if there 
are important pieces of concepts that I am missing.” Respondent E said:

440 
More appreciation, understanding of neurodiversity and how this can manifest in 
people. Also, the recognition of neurodiversity as a social justice issue, 
something that aﬀects how people in society are perceived, and how people 
receive privilege from thinking only in one kind of way that. 
Other respondents (n=) emphasized the intersection of knowledge and practice, 
such as Respondent D: “More knowledge to make me more eﬀective.”  
Respondent Z2 echoed: “Greater knowledge of the research and how to work 
with neuro diverse individuals.”  
Respondent Z4 added: “To better understand myself as a neurodiverse clinician 
and better support my neurodiverse clients,” though it is worth noting that this last 
excerpt emphasized the role of knowledge for self- understanding as a person with 
neurodiversity. 
The question about anticipated barriers to using the information brought about 
a range of information with no consistent theme. The only answers approaching a similar 
code might be said to speak to personal barriers to learning such as time constraints, 
personal limits of “comprehension and retention,” and sensitivity to social pressures.  
For instance, Respondent Z3: “The platform of online learning, limited 
information access, and sensitivity to expectations of recalling or restating information in 
the "right" way.” 
Others included barriers of implementation: lack of supporting materials - “If the 
workshop didn't provide collateral materials (handout, resources, etc.)” - and 
insuﬃcient post-workshop supervisory support - “If the workshop didn't provide

441 
collateral materials (handout, resources, etc.)” - or barriers of testing - “Barrier for 
people to be properly tested, if that's necessary.” One respondent was wary of the 
government - “In these times, governmental interference.” One thoughtful response 
focused on what might be considered a tension at the heart of the material, the need to 
validate the struggles of those with neurodiversity alongside a need to include and 
accept neurodiverse strengths: 
From Respondent E:  
Something that might make it diﬃcult to use workshop information is a client's 
willingness to see neurodiversity as a strength, and something to accept rather 
than ﬁx. I think a lot of neurodiverse people (including myself at times) want to 
minimize what makes them neurodiverse so that they can ﬁt in at their jobs, 
relationships, etc. Therefore, the perspective of aﬃrming/celebrating 
neurodiversity might be encountered as something that isn't necessarily desired 
by many people. 
The ﬁnal part of this question involved a more speciﬁc hope for how the 
respondent envisioned the material being used to help their work with neurodiverse 
clients. Here, most addressed a variety of clinical implications in their answers, that 
could be broken down thusly: clinical conﬁdence (n=1), clinical eﬃcacy (n=4), holistic 
understanding/case conceptualization (n=4), empowerment/de-stigmatizing (n=4), 
improved relationship (n=4). 
Clinical conﬁdence: 
From Respondent C: “Better understanding, more conﬁdent and less scared.”

442 
Clinical eﬃcacy: 
From Respondent A: “...increase capacity and well-being for neurodiverse 
clients.” 
From Respondent B: “I hope it provides me greater insight into how I might be a 
better therapist, parent, friend to people who are neurodiverse.” 
From Respondent Z4: “...This will help me to make adjustments for myself and 
clients in a way that is more catered to their unique brain functioning.” 
Holistic understanding/case conceptualization: 
From Respondent Z4: “As a trauma informed clinician I believe that 
neurodiversity is an important identity to consider when looking at the whole person.” 
From Respondent A:  
I would deﬁnitely be bringing this knowledge into my work as an individual 
therapist with neurodiverse clients. I love the idea of a non-medicalized 
approach to understanding neurodiversity and I think that ﬁts with my current 
approach of understanding, accommodating and accepting neurodiversity. 
Empower/destigmatize: 
From Respondent E:  
I deﬁnitely want to have more information on how to use neurodiversity and the 
concept of diﬀerences in ways of thinking/being as sources of empowerment for 
clients, rather than something that makes them feel "wrong" or "deﬁcient". I 
also want to help clients understand that society at large makes people feel like 
they have to conform to be "successful", that there's nothing inherently wrong

443 
with neurodiversity. 
From Respondent Z1:  
My hope is to be able to be a more supportive and understanding practitioner so 
that anyone I work with can feel more pride and empowerment in connecting to 
their authentic selves and attend to their needs and goals in ways that feel good 
for them. 
From Respondent Z3: “I try to use all the information to empower and inform my  
clients.”  
Improved relationship: 
From Respondent Z3: “I try to use all the information to empower and inform my  
clients.” 
From Respondent B: “I hope it provides me greater insight into how I might be a 
better therapist, parent, friend to people who are neurodiverse.” 
From Respondent Z2: “Better informed to understand, relate to and respond.” 
The Post-workshop Questionnaire 
Five of the original nine respondents completed the closing questionnaire (see: 
discussion for implications of the asymmetric response). For the purposes of answering 
the research question, the remaining respondents did exhibit diﬀerences in how they 
answered the questions as well as characterized ways in which the information had an 
impact. To capture these diﬀerences, the information will be coded to reﬂect a) the 
nature of the response, and b) the nature of the change from the original answer to the 
question.

444 
Beliefs about the Medical Model of Psychopathology: Post-workshop Questions 1 & 2 
The themes from this section of the results were derived from the following two 
questions on the questionnaire: 1) The neurodiversity movement is partially deﬁned in 
resistance to the medical model of diagnosis and treatment - what is your relationship to 
the medical model as a frame for understanding people’s mental health troubles and 
their treatment? 2) In relation to the medical model, what is the risk of stigma, and how 
does it impact our understanding of mental health troubles and treatment? 
Theme 2.1: The medical model may oﬀer some speciﬁc functions in 
coordinating care, reimbursement and oﬀering ways of thinking about symptoms, but 
it is limited, narrow and reductive, with pronounced consequences for stigma. Of the 
ﬁve post-questionnaire responses, two remained unchanged either implicitly or 
explicitly. Respondent B explicitly said that the beliefs remained unchanged, while 
Respondent D gave pre- and post- responses that would be coded similarly as de-
prioritizing the guidance of the medical model (“It is far down on my list of approaches in 
my assessment when meeting someone.”).  
Respondent B did change in the way they reported their answer, in that they 
elaborated that the workshop had deepened and helped them understand their stance 
better. 
...As a social worker and a youth worker who is now a practicing therapist, I have 
always understood human behavior/constitution to be directly related to the 
environment that one is baked into. After the workshop and pre training videos, 
my understanding is more grounded in the science of why this has always made

445 
sense to me. 
Respondent A did not change or disavow the stance of her original answer, but 
the question brought out an entirely diﬀerent focus, which could be said to be about the 
function of the medical model in coordinating care while maintaining their original 
stance that the medical model did not oﬀer them any clinical utility: 
I used the medical model to be able to work with client's insurance and make 
therapy ﬁnancially accessible to people. I also think that this is the system we 
have in place to allow people to get help for distress and other clinically 
signiﬁcant systems so I use it because I cannot remake the system myself. That 
said the medical model does not signiﬁcantly impact how I conceptualize clients 
and this training was helpful for broadening my understanding of neurodiversity 
and relevant treatment strategies. So, I suppose my relationship to the medical 
model is that I utilize it functionally for accessibility purposes and it is less 
meaningful to me. 
The nature of the change in their answer may be considered a “role-clariﬁcation” for the 
medical model and its use in their clinical practice, as they have articulated a way to 
resolve their ambivalence with the medical model from their ﬁrst answer, with their 
ongoing need to work within this system. This ambivalence and need to work within the 
system was a theme in several pre-questionnaire responses. 
Respondent E grappled with their ambivalence about the medical model while 
working within it, but emphasized a diﬀerent dimension to this struggle, one that 
engaged with their ambivalence about the impact of the medical model in shaping their

446 
clinical understanding of people and problems. In relation to their ﬁrst answer, which 
endorsed a strong disdain for the medical model, this follow-up response might be 
considered “growing awareness and movement,” as the respondent began with new 
information - a recognition on the impact of the medical model in shaping clinical 
judgment - and the praxis of taking action on this by facilitating new, particularly social 
justice framing: 
I am trying to move beyond the medical model as a frame for understanding 
mental health. However, at the same time, it would be unrealistic for me to say 
that my perception of mental health issues hasn't been inﬂuenced by the medical 
model and "impairments/deﬁcits" as a lens through which to view people's 
challenges. My interest in this training is an attempt to get me realign my value of 
social justice with the clinical work I do with clients and to center people's 
strengths instead of seeing them through the medical model. 
Respondent C, who had not heard of the medical model in the ﬁrst questionnaire, 
now aﬃrmed that there is a role for the medical model, while also highlighting the 
limitations. This represented a change in terms of growing awareness. 
It seems that the medical model can be helpful for people to sometimes get some 
sort of aﬃrmation of their brain functioning in a diﬀerent way. The buck does 
certainly not stop there, as there is much more to learn and understand on an 
individual level. 
In terms of question 2, all ﬁve answers still maintained that there was a 
moderate to signiﬁcant risk for stigma from the medical model. However, there was

447 
signiﬁcant change in how they reported this information. The most signiﬁcant change 
was that people elaborated with new nuance and clarity about the problematic 
implications of the medical model framing while invoking alternative considerations. 
Respondents who had not previously mentioned speciﬁc problematic aspects of the 
medical model now articulated the medical model as reductive, unchanging, narrow and 
decontextualized, while contrasting the medical model with alternatives that were more 
holistic, dynamic, complex and contextualized. 
For instance, while Respondent A had been critical of the medical model in their 
ﬁrst answer, here they added all new emphasis: 
The risk of stigma is high, as well as the risk of understanding people's distress 
and symptoms as individual dysfunction rather than culturally or 
environmentally determined/inﬂuenced. It also doesn't allow for change over 
time and frames challenges as inherent and immutable. For example, that idea 
that some people "outgrow" their ADHD does not make sense to me - I would 
conceive of that as a person who is still of the ADHD neurotype but was able to 
learn about themselves, have a good enough environmental ﬁt, and develop 
eﬀective strategies for accepting and accommodating their individual needs. 
New here is a) the role of social context, b) castigating the reduction of the medical 
model to the individual or intrinsic factors, and c) the static, unchanging nature of 
diagnostic constructs. Respondent A also invokes a speciﬁc workshop-based 
understanding of how a person might holistically and contextually change and grow 
through a maturing relationship to their environment and a niche-of-ﬁt.

448 
Respondent B, who had given an example of stigma risk in the pre-workshop 
questionnaire, also became speciﬁc on the medical model’s failings: 
In the medical model the risk of stigma is great. The medical model locates the 
problem within the individual and tries to "ﬁx" what is "broken" or not normal. It 
oﬀers up limited, narrow and rigid diagnoses that often don't account for the 
variation of what is happening within the individual. Further, it doesn't 
acknowledge or take into account in treatment, the ways in which the world 
around the individual creates a toxic environment that may and often does, 
injure the person(s). 
The respondent speaks to a) the externalities of a problem-solving frame in assuming 
intrinsic dysfunction and abnormality, b) a reductive and static frame, and c) an inability 
to account for contextual factors and social determinants of mental health. They 
contrast “limited, narrow and rigid diagnoses” with normal variation, and use workshop-
driven language to characterize “toxic environments” that lead to “injury:” 
Finally, Respondent E who had given an example of stigma in their ﬁrst response, 
articulated some speciﬁc problems of the medical model: 
The risk of stigma is almost inherently tied to the medical model; when you see 
mental health issues as "something wrong" with someone, it's hard not to view 
the person experiencing them through a lens of negativity. The medical model 
also lacks suﬃciently detailed explanations of how social contexts aﬀect people's 
behaviors and moods, as it places so much of the responsibility onto the person 
with the diagnosis, rather than onto the social world.

449 
This respondent addressed a) the problem-based view of individual mental health as a 
source of “negativity,” and b) the role of decontextualization in misattributing blame to 
individuals. 
Regarding the ﬁnal two respondents, neither gave answers to question two that 
could be attributable to the workshop per se. Respondent D, they acknowledged the risk 
of stigma in stark terms, but did so in a way that did not signiﬁcantly depart from their 
ﬁrst response. Respondent C took a balanced approach that acknowledged some people 
may ﬁnd a diagnosis useful, but that stigma can impact care, an answer that cannot be 
attributed to the workshop in any obvious way. 
The most consistent pattern across answers to questions 1 and 2 was that the 
medical model lacked a role for social determinants of mental health, and failed to 
address contextual, environmental and cultural factors. Secondarily, there was an 
attempt to address the speciﬁc characteristics of the model that prevented seeing clients 
holistically, dynamically, contextually and as embodying normal variation. The other 
answers were either a) entirely consistent with their original message about the dangers 
of the medical model, or b) presented overly general answers about the nature of stigma 
that could not be attributed to the workshop or represent meaningful change in 
understanding. 
Beliefs about Neurodiversity: Post-workshop Questions 3 & 4 
The themes from this section of the results were derived from the following two 
questions on the questionnaire: 3) What is neurodiversity in your view, and how have 
these views evolved? 4) What are your beliefs about the origin and nature of

450 
ADHD/ASD? I.e. what IS ADHD/ASD? 
Theme 2.2: Neurodiversity is a multi-level phenomenon where normal 
biological diﬀerences between people create emergent cognitive diﬀerences and 
behavioral strategies that shape how people move through the world to create a 
natural diversity in “ways of being” that may in fact complement each other, and some 
think this at least partially extends to ADHD and ASD itself. The original pre-
questionnaire codes for the answers on neurodiversity consisted of those who a) took a 
species-level or “big picture” view of diverse human expression, b) took a narrower 
mechanistic or reductive view of diﬀerences in brains, functions or processes, and/or c) 
took a more holistic, person-centered and socially-interacting view. Of the pre-
workshop responses to this question, one respondent did not attempt to characterize 
neurodiversity, two took a species-level view, one took a reductive view and one took a 
person-centered or socially-focused view. Broadly speaking, most respondents changed 
their answers following the workshop by synthesizing their original sentiments with a 
more nuanced, comprehensive and workshop-informed perspective. 
A contribution of the workshop was to frame how multiple levels of analysis 
(biopsychosocial) interacted normally in understanding neurodiversity. Accordingly, 
three respondents added multiple levels of analysis to their framing of neurodiversity in 
their questionnaire answers. Of the two respondents who originally characterized a 
species-level view of neurodiversity, for instance, both added some of the mechanistic 
ways in which biological factors interacted with social experience in a normal and 
diverse way.

451 
From Respondent A:  
Neurodiversity to me is the normal diversity/range of expression of human 
brains/nervous systems. I think this is both genetic and based on 
experience/injury/trauma as we know there are real, physical changes to the 
brain that comes with trauma and injury. 
From Respondent B:  
Neurodiversity refers to the ways in which the human species is organized. 
Speciﬁcally, there are distinct proﬁles of ways that humans may show up 
internally (think inner constellation of genetics, brain aka executive functioning, 
body/sensory) and each of these ways of showing up results in complimentary 
cognition. We need ALL types of brains/bodies to help the species evolve and 
survive. 
Each response captures several levels of analysis drawn from the workshop. The 
“normal diversity/range of expression” captures the gestalt or “big picture” of 
neurodiversity, as does characterizing the way “the human species is organized.” Each 
answer also addresses the role of diﬀerences in brains and cognition, while also bringing 
in some dimensions of the social world, either in a role for social experience and [social] 
injury which was shown to shape neurodiversity or the way in which cognitive diversity 
enriches the social milieu through complimentary cognition, both of which were drawn 
from the workshop. 
Alternatively, Respondent E, who emphasized “non-normative thinking” in their 
original answer, oﬀered a more social-level explanation while integrating other

452 
dimensions of neurodiversity in their post-workshop response. Their deﬁnition of 
neurodiversity itself - “I would say neurodiversity means diﬀerent cognitive strategies 
for diﬀerent people” - has elements of the big picture/functional perspective (ala 
biodiversity) and mechanistic/substrate perspectives captured in “a diversity of 
cognitive strategies.” They elaborated: 
My knowledge has evolved from the stereotypes of ADHD and ASD 
("inattention", "hyperactivity", "diﬃculty reading emotions and empathizing") to 
incorporate diﬀerent ways of engaging with the world based on things like 
reward sensitivity, exploration, and brain plasticity. 
The second half of this response not only highlights the movement in their perspective, 
by invoking three concepts from the workshop, they are inherently highlighting 
biological diﬀerences that were used to illustrate biosocial interactions, or physical 
interactions between people and their social environment, which is a more 
holistic/social framing. 
Respondent C, who originally deﬁned neurodiversity in a more reductive fashion 
(“It's an umbrella term for highlighting how brains function at diﬀerent speeds and 
dimensions”) answered in a similarly coded way after the workshop: “It is the range of 
how people organize naturally in their brain.” Similarly, Respondent D, who did not try 
to characterize neurodiversity per se in their pre-questionnaire answer - “The science 
research giving us greater insight to neurodiversity gives us guidance on how to help 
people who are neurodivergent as well as those who are not identiﬁed or self-identify 
as such” again avoided directly characterizing the nature of neurodiversity in their

453 
second: “My knowledge of the speciﬁcs of neurodiversity was enhanced by this session. 
I see it as ﬁtting in the many areas of diversity and multiculturalism that must inform our 
profession.” 
The other part of the prompt for question three asked how their views on 
neurodiversity have evolved, and everyone acknowledged some role for the evolution of 
their views. Some respondents also added their subjective reactions to the workshop in 
answering this, despite it not being part of the prompt. One person oﬀered a critique of 
the workshop model, yet seemed to oﬀer a view that was explicitly compatible with the 
model. From Respondent A:  
Also contrary to the quadrant model, I think of all brains as expressions of 
neurodiversity and those considered "neurotypical" as people with neurotypes 
that are given more power and validation in our society. I really eschew the idea 
that there is a "normal" or "typical" way of being. 
The statements the respondent expresses are in agreement with the model, prompting 
curiosity if this was accidentally misframed with the word “contrary” (more on this in the 
discussion). She went on to characterize the evolution of her views: “Those views have 
certainly evolved over my lifetime and from this training as well - lots of unlearning to 
be done.” 
On the other side, one respondent oﬀered high praise for the workshop content 
while characterizing the evolution of their views which they attribute to the workshop 
itself. From Respondent B:  
As a result of attending the pre-training videos and workshop, I've got more

454 
language and science backed research that helps me articulate what I've had an 
inkling around my entire life! Speciﬁcally, that people who are "diﬀerent" think 
ADHD/ASD, are in fact so important within our species and are just a variation of 
what it means to be human. No better than/or less than neurotypical people…I 
absolutely LOVED this workshop, the videos and suggested reading. I'd love to be 
in a consult group with Morgan Kinney as the lead! 
Most respondents fell in the middle, with neutral to positive evaluation of the 
eﬀect of the workshop in shaping their views on neurodiversity.  
From Respondent C: “I think the views in general and for myself have shifted to 
see more range in all the world, and see it as a positive thing to be desired.”  
Respondent D said: “My knowledge of the speciﬁcs of neurodiversity was 
enhanced by this session. I see it as ﬁtting in the many areas of diversity and 
multiculturalism that must inform our profession.”  
Respondent E: “My knowledge has evolved from the stereotypes of ADHD and 
ASD ("inattention", "hyperactivity", "diﬃculty reading emotions and empathizing") to 
incorporate diﬀerent ways of engaging with the world based on things like reward 
sensitivity, exploration, and brain plasticity.” It is worth mentioning in regards to the 
evolution of views, that three of the ﬁve respondents used language and concepts from 
the workshop in framing their integrated post-workshop understanding of 
neurodiversity. 
Regarding opinions on the etiology of ADHD & ASD speciﬁcally, Respondents A 
and C report being “still unsure.” Respondent A elaborates on this with an answer that

455 
draws on a constructive understanding of the workshop information and framing, and 
may thus be acknowledging the ambiguity remaining within the workshop’s information 
itself: 
I am still uncertain of the origins of ADHD/ASD but understand it in the context of 
neurodiversity and biodiversity - that there are a range of types of brains as well 
as a range of what those brains need and are good at. I understand these as 
diﬀerences that are largely heritable and related to our family systems but also 
inﬂuences and perhaps "activated" by adverse experiences and environments. 
Respondent C adds: “I'm honestly still not sure. I would have to review the videos 
if nature and origin were covered. If it was it honestly did not sink in for me.” 
Respondent D asserts a perspective more informed by the medical model: “These 
are conditions that have a much higher “nature” component than “nurture” than many 
of the other conditions and issues we treat. Consequently, neuropsych testing is much 
more relevant than in other issues.” 
The ﬁnal two respondents, B & D, oﬀer workshop-informed answers with the 
latter being more nuanced. From Respondent B: “ADHD and ASD are variations of the 
human species and show up to help the species adapt so that it cannot only survive but 
thrive!” Respondent D: 
I think ADHD and ASD result from a complex interaction of biological factors, 
environmental factors, the inﬂuence of the social world on the individual, and 
family inﬂuences. These "conditions" really are just diﬀerent cognitive strategies 
that certain people have, and diﬀerent ways of processing and relating to

456 
diﬀerent kinds of information (emotional, technical, details, big-picture thinking, 
among others). 
Reactions to the Training Model: Post-workshop Questions 5, 6 & 7 
The themes from this section of the results were derived from the following 
three questions on the questionnaire: 5) What did you gain from a neurodiversity 
workshop? 6) What was a barrier or constraint to understanding or using neurodiversity 
workshop information? 7) How do you see this knowledge impacting how you move 
forward in your work/care of neurodiverse clients? 
Theme 2.3: The workshop was useful in diﬀerent ways for diﬀerent people in 
terms of framing and working with neurodiversity; it may be too big and/or complex in 
its current form and require some shifts in how it is presented, but it oﬀers a variety of 
frames and treatment approaches that hopefully will prove, or have already proven, 
useful with clients. Respondents all agreed they had gained from the workshop. 
From Respondent A: “There was lots of wonderful information in this 
workshop...” 
Respondent B: “I gained inspiration, gratitude, a more robust understanding of 
neurodiversity, a few people that I will keep in touch with AND so much KNOWLEDGE 
that has immediately impacted the way I move and practice therapy.” 
Respondent C: “A new way to approach understanding. It was honestly so packed 
with information...” 
Respondent D: “An expansion of my knowledge base” 
Respondent E: “I deﬁnitely gained a more social justice-oriented understanding of

457 
neurodiversity; speciﬁcally the idea that neurodiversity is not a "problem" or 
"impairment" with the individual...” 
All but one respondent went further to characterize the nature of what they 
gained. Respondent E focused on the social justice component: 
Rather [than neurodiversity being an individual ‘problem’ or ‘impairment’], 
neurodiversity encompasses normal cognitive strategies for diﬀerent people, and 
many challenges related to neurodiversity result from society and culture being 
invalidating and inhospitable to any deviations from the norm. 
This feedback, it should be noted, not only embraces a thesis of the workshop, it draws 
on concepts from the workshop such as cognitive strategies and poor “niche-of-ﬁt,” 
which reﬂect changes in thinking about neurodiversity relevant to previous questions 3 
and 4. 
Another respondent said that in addition to gaining information, they found the 
workshop “inspirational,” and their overall characterization may be coded as the 
workshop oﬀering a “meaningful” experience or informational framework. From 
Respondent B:  
Oh my goodness! I literally can't stop talking about all that I've learned in the 
workshop. I wish we could continue to study and help (soon to be Dr) with his 
research/ intervention. I gained inspiration, gratitude, a more robust 
understanding of neurodiversity, a few people that I will keep in touch with AND 
so much KNOWLEDGE that has immediately impacted the way I move and 
practice therapy. Babam!!

458 
Respondents A and C oﬀered multi-faceted responses to a more complex 
reaction. Respondent A might be said to have deepened her existing knowledge base 
(her original responses did speak to a thoughtful familiarity on the topic): 
There was lots of wonderful information in this workshop. Many concepts were 
things that I already understood about ADHD/ASD but had not seen named as 
clearly or outside of real people sharing their experiences. Some things were 
entirely new to me. The strategies for understanding and treating burnout were 
all very helpful and more nuanced than a simple "you need to do less/take things 
oﬀ your plate" approach. 
Respondent A emphasized that existing concepts deepened as a result of the workshop, 
while new concepts proved useful. 
Respondent C emphasized a “new way of understanding” that outlined speciﬁc 
concepts and ideas that resonated, as well as the overall subjective resonance of the 
material despite the fact that they did not have a neurodiverse diagnosis: 
A new way to approach understanding. It was honestly so packed with 
information. As I think about it now, a few days later, I had liked the niche of ﬁt, 
the burnout spiral due to values friction. I liked re-learning the word 
"misanthropic... I found that various ideas of organization suggested could be 
helpful to me, and I do not currently, nor have I ever in past, had a neurodiversity 
diagnosis (doesn't mean I'm not! haha). But it makes me think about how the 
ideas may or may not be applicable to all humans, not just those with atypical 
neurodiversity.

459 
Regarding the barriers of the workshop, the themes that emerged was that the 
scale/volume of the material, the pacing/presentation of the didactics, the complexity of 
the material, and translation of the material, were potential impediments. Two 
respondents, respondents A and D, both thought the scale/volume of the material was a 
barrier. 
From Respondent A: “The length/volume of material was a lot to take in.” 
Respondent D: “The overwhelming ﬂood of information that was totally germane 
and useful.” 
Respondent B felt the pacing was mismatched with their learning style, and 
respondent A had other thoughts related to the way the material was presented to make 
it more digestible and build more logically for them. From Respondent B: 
Hmmm, the videos and workshop day happened so fast. My brain/body moves a 
bit slower. I think the pacing for me was a bit of a barrier. I had to slow the 
YouTube videos down and I often replayed the videos over so that I could fully 
grasp the information. It was deﬁnitely worth it though! 
Respondent A:  
As you continue to develop it, I think ﬁnding ways to repeat/revisit the 
information along the way might be helpful and ﬁt well with adult learning 
styles. Additionally, I do wish things were ﬂipped and we started with the 4th 
module. Or maybe made the 4th the 2nd instead. There was a lot of really great 
information in there and I think it would have been nice to know going into 
module 2 and 3.

460 
Respondent E felt the complexity was overwhelming: 
The complexity and technical language of neuroscience (genes, alleles, brain 
pathways, etc.). I sometimes struggle with providing psycho-education for 
precisely these reasons. The more digestible the explanations, the easier it is for 
me to incorporate them into my work with clients. 
Finally, respondent C was still considering how to use the information clinically: 
“I'm not yet sure how I will build your ideas (and research/researched ideas) into 
sessions with people I work with.” 
In regard to how the respondents hoped this information would prove useful to 
clients, one respondent said they would need to digest the material more fully before 
they could give an answer, but four respondents oﬀered ideas for how the material 
might oﬀer some clinical utility.  
Respondent C was brief: I like idea [sic] of talking with how your needs are being 
stimulated or not throughout the day.” Here Respondent C refers to treatment 
approaches that can frame eﬀorts to self-manage in terms of their ability to meet 
heightened needs for stimulation with ADHD, for instance, also framed in the 
sustainability metaphors (health bars, gas tanks & thermostats). 
Respondent E emphasized the role of systemic and oppressive factors, and 
speculated about the role of some of the neuroscience: “I deﬁnitely plan on 
incorporating ideas about systemic oppression and moving away from the medical 
model with neurodiverse clients. Also, some of the neuroscience concepts... might be 
really helpful for some clients.”

461 
 
Respondent B focused on factors that focused on the relational and sustainability 
dimensions of the workshop: “Oh my goodness. I've already incorporated the concepts 
of "buﬀering" into my daily practice, not only with my neurodiverse clients but with 
neurotypical people as well! I also have been using some of the framework Morgan 
suggested, think - gas tank, health bar, thermostat. This has helped me reconceptualize 
how I approach working with clients. From how I ask questions to what I "contact" in the 
therapy room with the client.” Respondent B refers to social buﬀering, a way of 
conceptualizing how relationships can be used to actively mitigate stressors, while the 
“framework” refers to metaphors for communicating the concept of sustainability. 
Interestingly, Respondent B brings in a more abstract or deeper role of the workshop 
material, which is in reframing what clinicians can and should therapeutically “contact” 
for neurodiverse clients. 
Respondent A had a similarly thoughtful take on the metamessage of the 
workshop: 
This will certainly inform how I work with neurodiverse clients and in some ways 
all clients around issues like burnout. It was very aﬃrming, empathetic and 
compassionate towards people of all neurotypes. I think someone had the 
comment that "this is useful information for all clients, how does this connect to 
neurodiversity?" To me they are right but we often and historically have not 
extended compassion/empathy/humanity to neurodiverse folks and rather 
pathologized them and focused on deﬁcits, dysfunction and disorders. So really,

462 
it’s just about understanding the speciﬁc strengths and needs of neurodiverse 
people and extending compassion/empathy/humanity to them as we would 
people who are considered "neurotypical." This has really ﬂeshed out my 
conceptualization of neurodiversity and supporting people with these 
experiences/presentations. Thank you for sharing and I would love to do 
additional training/consultation with you! 
Respondent A grapples with the deeper message of the workshop, which is to shift the 
assumptions about neurodiversity from one of reference to a narrow demographic 
defined by diagnostic-concerns, to a lens of universal relevance and broad explanatory 
power; this will be discussed more in Chapter V.

463 
CHAPTER V: DISCUSSION 
Demographics and Design Factors 
One factor that inﬂuenced the results is participant attrition. The workshop was 
closed to participants after 32 people signed up within two days, but of those who 
reserved space, only 9 people ﬁlled out the pre-workshop questionnaire, 7 attended, 1 
had to leave early, and 1 did not complete the ﬁnal questionnaire. In retrospect, this is 
likely due to the low cost of expressing interest and reserving a spot in a free workshop, 
and consequently, the ease of being non-committal about a free workshop, particularly 
one that carries the commitment of participating in a study. Attrition during the study 
may have been compounded by the discovery that the length of the materials required 
once participants ﬁnished the pre-workshop materials included over 10 hours of video 
content. Indeed, two of ﬁve respondents commented that the length of the material 
presented a barrier to using or learning the material on the post-workshop 
questionnaire. It is worth noting that a consequence of participant attrition may be a 
hypothetical limit on thematic saturation; that is to say, had more participants 
completed the post-workshop materials, there may have been more codes to inform the 
overall thematic picture. This is particularly true for the post-workshop questionnaire, 
which saw the 9 pre-questionnaire respondents shrink to just ﬁve. However, this is not 
deemed to present a fatal ﬂaw to the study, as even within the smaller participants' 
response pool, a suﬃcient range of responses were observed to suggest a diversity of 
opinions, while patterns between responses also suggested a robustness of themes. 
While a boosted sample size would be an obvious target for improvement to this or

464 
subsequent studies, useful reaction data was gleaned for the purpose of answering the 
research question being asked. Most importantly, while there is guidance regarding the 
number of participants that results in thematic saturation in qualitative studies - Guest 
et al. (2006) found thematic saturation after 12 interviews - this may be considered an 
ideal with no consensus about the importance or operationalized value of any particular 
number (Vasileiou et al., 2018). 
It should be acknowledged, however, where this creates challenges to be aware 
of in interpreting the data. An area of note is the asymmetry between the number of 
respondents who completed the pre-workshop questionnaire (n=9) versus the number 
who completed the post-workshop questionnaire (n=5). While one option would have 
been to strike the four respondents who gave pre-workshop data but did not complete 
the study, a qualitative study aﬀords other ways to view this scenario given that this 
asymmetry does not pose challenges to validity in the way it would to a quantitative 
study. In this case, the pre-workshop questionnaire and post-workshop questionnaire 
were coded as separate events that are only partially informed by one another. In terms 
of the value of the pre-workshop questionnaire responses, for instance, having more 
information about the assumptions brought in by clinicians ahead of the workshop 
could be considered useful without knowing how those respondents may have felt 
about the content area after the workshop per se. Consequently, the primary researcher 
made the decision to keep the extra four pre-workshop response sets to achieve greater 
thematic saturation about the pre-workshop themes, while bracketing those data sets 
using identiﬁers (Z1-Z4). This allowed a clearer demarcation between the respondents

465 
who did not complete the study and those who did, Respondents A-E, whose pre-
workshop data and post-workshop data could be compared to one another in search of 
changing views inﬂuenced by the workshop. 
By retaining the answers of pre-workshop questionnaire respondents Z1-Z4, we 
introduce the possibility that there is some systemic diﬀerence between those who 
completed the workshop and those who did not, and therefore this inﬂuence should be 
explored for any hypothetical eﬀects on the data. For instance, if the diﬀerence 
between those who decided to stay in the study versus those who did not was that 
more of those who stayed were neurodiverse clinicians, the resulting data would carry 
opinions ﬁltered through hidden demographic factors. This may not be a threat to 
validity in the quantitative sense, but it should be considered nonetheless. As this 
inﬂuence is speculative, we can only consider some of the demographic information 
available for possible trends when comparing the group who stayed versus the group 
that did not. For instance, of the psychologists (n=2), social workers (n=4) and 
counselors (n=3) who registered for the workshop, four social workers and one 
counselor completed the entirety of the workshop and post-workshop questionnaire. 
Perhaps there is something about the workshop that retains social workers more than 
counselors and psychologists, and one could speculate further that this might have to do 
with a focus on social context and justice issues or perhaps, views critical of the medical 
model. On average, those who stayed to complete the workshop and post-workshop 
materials oﬀered longer, more engaged answers in both their pre- and post-workshop 
responses, and this perhaps points to diﬀerences in early commitment and engagement,

466 
though it should be noted that these diﬀerences are only slight. Finally, the average 
number of respondents who were neurodiverse was higher in the core group (n=3, or 
60%) who stayed than those who left (n=1, or 25%), and again, this may be a slight 
inﬂuence that neurodiverse clinicians could be more open and interested in themes that 
are critical about the medical models’ way of handling neurodiversity, epistemic justice 
regarding neurodiversity, researcher from a neurodiverse participant-researcher 
(Respondent A stated this explicitly), general interest on the subject or any number of 
related factors. 
Separate from diﬀerences between those who stayed and those who left, it 
should be noted that the participants of the workshop are unlikely to be a representative 
sample of the US population, for instance, because the demographics of the helping 
professions are skewed toward women among other things, and that is before we 
consider the subset of this group who are more likely to be drawn to this topic area. 
Thus, it is worth being aware of general demographic trends for potential demographic 
factors on views stated both before the workshop and after, including the potential 
receptiveness to the ideas stated. Of those who completed the pre-workshop materials, 
for instance, more were female (n=6), while of those who completed the post-
workshop, more were male including (n=3; 2 assigned male at birth, 1 trans male). Of 
those who completed the pre-workshop materials, most identiﬁed as racially 
White/Caucasian, while only three identiﬁed as ethnically non-European: 2 who 
identiﬁed as Jewish, and 1 who identiﬁed as Hispanic. Of those who completed the pre-
workshop materials, 5 of 9 identiﬁed as neurodiverse, while 3 of 5 who completed the

467 
post-workshop materials identiﬁed as such. While some of these factors implicate the 
demographics of the helping professions overall, some may reﬂect a subset interested in 
neurodiversity and epistemic injustice; beyond this, there is no speculative discussion to 
be had about this demographic information, but it should be noted that there may be 
hidden factors here that are useful when considering the views oﬀered in both sets of 
responses. 
One open question to the researcher was the degree to which training and/or 
theoretical orientation might predispose people toward being more or less open to the 
message of the training model. For instance, those trained in modalities that are more 
congruent with the medical model, such as cognitive behavioral therapy, versus 
modalities such as humanistic or relational-cultural or feminist, which have more of a 
social justice orientation, may show more pre-disposition to be either closed, or 
receptive, to the message of the workshop as the workshop may be more congruent 
with the underlying beliefs and attitudes in some modalities more than others. We can 
only speculate about this, particularly as this is not a quantitative design and there was 
no systematic control for such variables; consequently, this discussion won’t busy itself 
excessively with this consideration. That said, we might consider for the pre-workshop 
questionnaire in particular, and post-workshop questionnaire to some degree, mixed 
support for the idea. For instance, within the core cohort that completed the study, those 
with a more behavioral therapeutic approach (respondent’s D & E) showed either less 
engagement overall, or more initial support for pathological causes of neurodiversity, in 
line with medical model positions. Congruently, those with more humanistic, relational,

468 
feminist, or anti-oppression/queer, were generally more outwardly endorsing of a) 
neurodiversity friendly positions in advance, or b) the workshop materials in the post-
workshop questionnaire. However, one of the more explicit medical model 
interpretations of neurodiversity in the pre-workshop questionnaire came from 
someone who endorsed a relational-feminist, trauma-informed and feminist orientation, 
emphasizing ADHD and ASD as developmental disorders, impairments and the 
“disturbance of the brain’s ability to develop in a healthy way.” To the extent that this 
might example might illustrate an interesting exception to a very nominal trend, one 
possible interpretation is that neurodiversity as a justice issue does not yet possess the 
same recognition about the source of its oppression - epistemic injustice from a 
misframing of its nature as a fundamentally deﬁcit-based diagnosis - and as such, people 
who are otherwise highly sensitive of power relations such as feminist practitioners, 
many not be aware that such frames are disempowering. The idea that many people 
who intersectionally consider themselves social justice practitioners may not orient to 
known and unknown neurodiversity issues, is an area ripe for expansion of awareness 
and discourse. 
The Pre-workshop Questionnaire 
Beliefs about the Medical Model of Psychopathology: Pre-workshop Questions 1 & 2 
A discussion of the results begins by positioning the interpretation theoretically. 
The theory of the workshop was driven by a) a body of literature oﬀering constructive 
criticism of the medical model, b) theories that inform the concept of “normal 
neurodiversity,” which grounds normative biopsychological diﬀerences between

469 
individuals across the social sciences, c) epistemic injustice and related programmatic 
ways of addressing stigma created by mental health theory and practice, and d) 
workshop evaluation tools that guide how such information should be presented and 
assessed. The ﬁrst section of the questionnaire, questions 1 & 2, falls most clearly with 
the scope of medical model criticism and epistemic injustice, while questions 3 & 4 are 
driven by neurodiversity, and 5-7 are informed by questions of evaluation of a 
workshop. 
Regarding information about the medical model, the primary researcher was of 
the belief that many clinicians harbor misgivings about the medical model’s role in 
clinical practice. It was nevertheless a surprise to ﬁnd that most participating clinicians 
agreed that the medical model was burdened by compromised utility, theory and 
sociopsychological costs. What is noteworthy from the ﬁrst set of responses about 
clinicians’ attitudes toward the medical model and its potential role in stigma, was how 
many clinicians came to the workshop with well-articulated critiques - only one clinician 
who completed all materials was unaware of what was meant by the medical model, 
while another who only completed the initial materials expressed somewhat neutral 
views (“I was trained on the medical model, but I am open to other approaches.”). 
Among those who expressed criticisms, many expressed negative to strongly negative 
views. 
Negative views on the medical model included problems with the utility of the 
medical model - a lack of rich explanation or understanding; a limited ability to partner 
with clients in their goals; and the incompatibility of the medical model and counselor

470 
values of self-acceptance and authenticity. Alternatively, many clinicians singled out the 
role of the medical model as creating negative social externalities such as stigma; that is, 
that the medical model has unintended consequences in creating social barriers (to 
treatment, for instance), social mistreatment, social exclusivity and self-stigma through 
its frames, language and assumptions. Some took this a step further by attributing these 
outcomes to creating further mental health symptoms, pressures or negative emotions 
and self-beliefs. This may explain the signiﬁcant degrees of negative sentiment toward 
the medical model, as these forms of social stigma are the antithesis of the clinicians’ 
espoused values of inclusivity, rich self-understanding and self-acceptance and 
partnership. The perceived incompatibility between these positions is made worse by 
the fact that clinicians must frame clinical judgment, conceptualization, intervention and 
care coordination from within a system dominated by a model they are sometimes are 
ambivalent about at best, or don’t believe in at worst. In other words, if the medical 
model is both a necessary gatekeeper of care and reimbursement, while also a driver of 
mental health pressures that those services seek to treat, the resulting tension may be 
particularly egregious to mental health providers who are most explicitly misaligned 
with the medical models’ values and propositions. After all, for some, this may be less of 
an incidental consideration and more of an urgent dimension of all clinical work. Several 
clinicians highlighted the way in which this stigma pervaded the culture of treatment 
itself; for instance, Respondents B, E and Z3 all articulated ways in which stigma created 
a climate of judgment which could then create barriers to care and inﬂuence treatment. 
Clinicians who feel that their clinical eﬀorts are hampered by the lived culture of their

471 
ﬁeld and profession may feel demoralized, helpless, alienated or frustrated by their 
participation in a system they do not fully endorse, something which may cause moral 
injury. 
It should be noted that the question itself may prime either certain kinds of 
answers, or certain identities in the answering. Furthermore, the prevalence of this type 
of critical response may have been due to a self-selecting group of workshop 
participants; indeed, multiple people endorsed being neurodiverse clinicians, which may 
have further biased them away from the medical model or undergirded their own 
tensions with it. However, if true, this later point may then highlight the unique position 
of neurodiverse clinicians that they be asked to work within a system guided by a model 
that they consider to be problematic to one of their identities or those of their clients. 
Beliefs about Neurodiversity: Pre-workshop Questions 3 & 4 
The pre-workshop responses to the questionnaire were elucidating for the kinds 
of beliefs people have about neurodiversity in the current cultural and 
psychoeducational climate. This may be said to reﬂect the rise of the concept of 
neurodiversity and neurodiverse advocacy alongside a growth in information about 
ADHD and ASD from more traditional psychological and psychiatric research, and the 
inevitable conﬂicts between them. This has arguably created a social tension that 
polarizes the two into A) a science-based paradigm that rests on assumptions of deﬁcits 
and dysfunction, and B) a political advocacy perspective that is identity-aﬃrming but is 
largely antagonistic with the former. 
Broadly speaking, the responses oﬀered by clinicians, many of whom are

472 
neurodiverse and who are interested in a workshop about justice, reﬂected a tentative 
engagement with both the science and advocacy frames. Where there were attempts to 
traverse both, there was arguably some contradiction between the stigmatizing and 
non-stigmatizing language being used, not due to confused thinking in the respondents 
themselves, per se, but due to incommensurability of the underlying paradigms. For 
instance, in moving between questions about neurodiversity and questions of ADHD and 
ASD speciﬁcally, several respondents switched from identity-aﬃrming language to the 
more technical language of “disorders,” and the eﬀect sometimes seemed to move from 
between the identity-aﬃrming frames to the deﬁcit-based frames that those people had 
espoused struggling with. The codes for talking about neurodiversity itself were 
ultimately chosen to be parsed in terms of three partially-contrasting and partially-
complementary perspectives as these seemed to correspond to three theoretical 
inﬂuences through which respondents engaged with the construct of neurodiversity. 
The ﬁrst derives from the literature on neurodiversity itself, which may include anything 
from an identity-aﬃrming political discourse about neurodiversity as an identity or 
advocacy, to a “big picture” conceptual view of neurodiversity as a natural evolutionary 
diversity akin to biodiversity which oﬀers a technical counter-narrative about the 
function and origins of neurodiversity that diverges from more pathological narratives. 
The second perspective is a comparatively analytic or mechanistic emphasis on 
neurodiverse substrates like brains, nervous systems, processes, speeds and so forth, 
and may involve any attempt at a technical understanding of how the various 
neurodiverse diagnoses “work,” to a more reductive or deﬁcit-based inﬂuence on how

473 
neurodiverse diagnoses are framed by traditional psychiatric assumptions. Finally, some 
thinking seemed to reference a more person-centered, humanistic or socially-interested 
perspectives, which could represent people who are not steeped in the neurodiversity 
movement per se, but may carry a general humanistic, multi-cultural or justice-based 
orientation poised to see neurodiversity as an issue of minority-majority dynamics, 
oppressive social contexts, and accommodating societies ala the disability rights 
movement. 
Each of these three dimensions could themselves be seen as either a) a partially 
complementary perspective on the multifaceted nature of neurodiversity as a 
phenomenon, or alternatively, b) as an ideological predilection for certain kinds of 
thinking on a subject, which may reference deeply incompatible values, identities, 
narratives and agendas. For instance, as complementary perspectives, there is a role for 
understanding the evolved origins of neurodiversity; the identity-aﬃrming implications 
of an equitable political framing; the mechanistic diﬀerences that inform the strengths 
and challenges of these diﬀerences; and the just or unjust nature of the relationship 
between neurodiverse people and their social context. Alternatively, as ideological 
inﬂuences, each may respond to competing identities and inﬂuences on ways of thinking 
about neurodiversity between a) neurodiverse people and allies b) scientiﬁcally or 
clinically-minded professionals, and/or c) humanistic social justice advocates. For 
instance, those motivated by the neurodiversity movement may struggle with 
information that seems to reify scientiﬁc frames that are perceived to slide into eugenic-
style beliefs about ranking people’s worth, while those motivated by clinical eﬃcacy and

474 
accuracy may ﬁnd anything that challenges evidence-based understanding to be 
disqualifying; those who are motivated by a socially critical or humanistic lens may 
struggle with information that does not aﬃrm a broader view of cultural relativism and 
social justice. It is useful to consider that each of these intellectual inﬂuences represents 
both an objectively important dimension to the question of what neurodiversity is, as 
well as the potential for diﬀerent lines of ideological inﬂuence that could shape 
incompatible assumptions about what makes a good neurodiversity workshop. 
Depending on how information is framed and integrated, those who are more or less 
interested in a given area - neurodiversity advocacy, diagnosis and treatment, or social 
criticism and justice - may ﬁnd information presented to trigger strong opinions that 
could disqualify the authority of the workshop from one or more directions. 
As evidence for how this framing might bear itself out in the responses, consider 
Respondent A’s initial answers. Respondent A aﬃrmed views consistent with an 
advocacy perspective when A) advocating that neurodiversity represents a form of 
biodiversity, and B) exploring the identity-based discourse of whether language like 
“neurodiversity versus neurotypical” had problematic dimensions by reifying rejected 
concepts of normalcy in a neurodiversity framework. In addition to being important and 
thoughtful considerations in their own right, these points credibly track the political 
advocacy literature which emphasizes the framing and identity of neurodiversity. As an 
example of the potential conﬂict this could have with other perspectives, many authors 
who contribute these topics have chafed at using a scientiﬁc lens at all in understanding 
neurodiversity, rejecting any use of scientiﬁc or evolutionary conceptions that attempt

475 
to inform how neurodiverse diagnoses are understood (Chapman, 2021b; Meadows, 
2020); people advocating this frame might reject technical or functional understandings 
of neurodiversity when they verge into deﬁcit-based frames ala “disorder,” though it 
should be mentioned that Respondent A did not. Respondent A also demonstrated a 
critical consciousness beﬁtting the political advocates in regard to valuing neurodiverse 
diﬀerences even when they don’t align with “societal conceptions of worthiness like 
‘functioning’ or capacity to work under capitalism” as well as the previously mentioned 
resistance to neurotypical versus neurodivergent frames for reifying “normalcy” that 
can be a slippery slope to “eugenics-oriented belief systems.” Deﬁning neurodiversity 
based on economic value and output has been as a slippery slope to eugenics-style 
beliefs has been explored before by political advocates (Chapman, 2021b; Meadows, 
2020); similarly, the social injustice propagated through problematic beliefs and frames 
that are themselves oppressive has been considered (Walker, 2012), though this could 
also be seen as brushing against the third perspective of social critical thought. 
Alternatively, of the core group, Respondent C oﬀered several responses that 
oﬀered a view that may have default by training to a more medical model perspective. 
Respondent C a) had not heard of the medical model, and was therefore unaware of it as 
a paradigm inﬂuence; b) focused on a mechanistic or substrate-based explanation of 
neurodiversity as “an umbrella term for highlighting how brains function at diﬀerent 
speeds and dimensions,” and c) espoused some etiological ideas about ADHD and ASD 
that might be more deeply shaped by medical model views of deﬁcit and dysfunction, 
such as ADHD as caused by environmental contaminants such as “Yellow 5.”

476 
As an example of the third inﬂuence of socially critical thought, Respondent E is 
the closest exemplar. Respondent E deﬁned neurodiversity as “non-normative thinking” 
which did not reduce neurodiverse people to the mechanisms of diagnosis (such as 
executive dysfunction), nor did it take a high-level or identity-based view of 
neurodiversity as a natural biodiversity. Respondent E emphasized non-linear thinking 
and the society that deems that those styles of thoughts might not be “legitimate nor 
‘correct.’” This view looks at the whole person view between the high-level and 
reductive perspectives, and the way social diﬀerences manifest in marginalizing or 
exclusionary forces. This line of thinking may not stem from any one branch of 
humanistic, multicultural or social justice thinking, but may reﬂect any kind of “critical 
consciousness” perspectives and inﬂuences that lead to a critical awareness about 
marginalized groups including the neurodiverse. 
While the examples above highlight both valuable perspectives and potential 
ideological or interpretive inﬂuences, it should also be mentioned that they are not 
mutually exclusive and indeed, several people embody more than one. What is relevant 
here is that these can sometimes represent fragmented views and perspectives that 
might be artiﬁcially compartmentalized. Indeed, in this workshop, we attempt to 
disentangle the seemingly incompatible agendas and assumptions of diﬀerent starting 
point and potentially show a path through them all that is more complementary and 
integrative, so it is interesting to note in this pre-workshop period where people fall 
back on views that are more polarized into diﬀerent camps and inﬂuences before 
presenting a workshop that attempts to blend the three and assess the extent to which it

477 
was successful. 
It is interesting to note that there may be a tension between questions 3 & 4, as 
question 3 primes the more identity-aﬃrming political lens of “neurodiversity,” while 
question 4 primes a more evidence-based lens on diagnoses like “ADHD and ASD.” 
Several respondents in the pre-workshop questionnaires in particular answered 
question 3 using identity-focused language, while question 4 was answered with talk of 
biology versus environment and the language of disorders. This is interesting, because 
at a deep level these two frames can be viewed as deeply incompatible. For instance, 
the medical model relies on a nature-nurture framing of deﬁcits and disorders when 
invoking the stress-diathesis hypothesis of dysfunction, which holds that environmental 
adversity activates latent genetic vulnerabilities in expressing psychopathology. 
However, one non-pathological interpretation of the role of nature and nurture could 
be to not assume any invocation of biology is synonymous with pathology genes or 
chemical imbalances, but instead references normal biological diﬀerences that interact 
with diﬀerent experiences to create diﬀerent clinical presentations, and indeed, this 
workshop presents some evidence to this eﬀect. However, while possible, these 
reference points are not necessarily common or widely known, and a potentially more 
plausible explanation is that respondents answered each question simply by priming 
diﬀerent schemas and using the appropriate references and language for each, 
regardless of any personal ambivalence or ideological conﬂict between them. As an 
example, Respondent B, took pains to initially characterize ADHD and ASD as “variations 
within the human species and show up diﬀerently in people” and closed their answer

478 
with ADHD and ASD being “just another way that people show up in this world,” yet 
between these statements Respondent B characterized ADHD as a “disorder of time” 
and ASD as a “developmental disorder,” two stances that are at least partially challenged 
by their own aﬃrmations and this workshop. This may suggest that even among those 
who are inclined to resist medical model frames and aﬃrm neurodiverse identities, 
respondents may feel forced to draw on language or assumptions primed by diﬀerent 
questions or lenses, i.e. drawing on deﬁcit-based technical knowledge the “further they 
get” from talk of neurodiversity, and the “closer they get” to clinical conceptualizations 
of ADHD/ASD. 
Finally, many respondents invoked thoughtful insights at the cutting edge of the 
current zeitgeist on neurodiversity. Respondent A invoked the question of whether the 
very conception of neurodivergent versus neurotypical is antiquated and problematic, 
for even the idea that some are “neurotypical” could be seen as staking claims to 
“normalcy,” which necessarily pushes neurodivergence toward a position of social 
deviation, potentially reinforcing problematic dynamics. Respondent A also highlighted 
the need for critical awareness on the way “functioning” can be a hidden proxy for 
evaluating people based on economic value, not intrinsic value. They challenged the 
assumption that neurodiversity should be eﬀectively synonymous with a narrow range 
of disorders like ADHD and ASD, while suggesting that the broader conceptual nature of 
neurodiversity remains ill-deﬁned. On this point, it should be noted that this workshop 
agrees with this position, but necessarily takes a stance that ADHD and ASD can be 
considered signiﬁcant signposts that are useful in structuring a broader conversation;

479 
furthermore, the workshop presents a quadrant model that tentatively characterizes 
the broader conceptual topography in question. Respondent B suggested that 
historically, much of what societies called “madness” may have been related to 
neurodiversity. This is not only an interesting theory about neurodiversity throughout 
history, it poses a question about the current foundations of the psychopathological 
taxonomy and whether we continue to make the same mistake; again, this is something 
the workshop touches on, and lends some credence to. Respondent E suggested that 
neurodiversity is synonymous with “non-normative thinking,” an insight that suggests 
that pathologization can be a crude proxy for assigning deviance to all divergence from 
the social mainstream, a criticism that has been made about the mental health ﬁeld 
before, and is fairly compatible with some of the propositions of this workshop despite 
not being particularly central to the modern-day advocacy movement. All of these are 
not just useful questions, they are relevant to the workshop at hand in that A) the 
workshop addresses issues that are at least relevant to these observations, and B) these 
assertions may be worth revisiting directly on subsequent presentations. 
Expectations about the Training Model: Pre-workshop Questions 5, 6 & 7 
In terms of how the clinicians hoped to use information about neurodiversity, 
most clinicians wanted variations on knowledge, clinical tools and more about the justice 
perspective. The fact that these interests did not have any major themes per se may 
speak to the relative novelty of the neurodiversity concept in the clinical domain, 
particularly as it oﬀers a novel framework with unclear clinical implications. Many are 
potentially still unsure of what a change in framing means not just for those aﬀected,

480 
but for those supporting those aﬀected, which could include new identity dynamics, 
therapeutic interventions, case conceptualizations and more. In terms of social justice, 
there is also a question of the social implications - how can clinicians both respond to 
client needs more compassionately or understand the injustices clients face for 
therapeutic beneﬁt, and how can clinicians better advocate for these clients? Of 
particular interest for many at the intersection of these questions is how to destigmatize 
neurodiversity, thereby tying back to the tension evident in questions 1 and 2 were 
clinical roles and values were seen to conﬂict with the stigma of the medical model. That 
this was at the forefront of answers from people like Respondent A, suggests the 
importance of the tension in section 1 to clinical issues for this population. 
Other answers of note were Respondent C suggesting they had fear of working 
with neurodiverse people prior to this - “terrifying” was the word they used. This could 
be because of a lack of understanding the clinical needs and beneﬁcial interventions, 
but it could also reﬂect a perceived exoticism attributed to those with the diagnosis and 
which may translate to a lack of comfort with an unrelatable “other,” something that 
might impact the clinical alliance. Alternatively, Respondent B suggested a holistic 
orientation to the role of neurodiversity in session by centering the same issues face by 
non-neurodiverse people and a more oblique role for neurodiversity as it might shape 
these traditional clinical concerns: “I've got several clients in my therapy practice that 
see me for speciﬁc issues (grief, anxiety, life transition, etc.) and happen to also have 
ADHD...I'm hoping to get more understanding of ADHD and ways it impacts my clients 
adult lives.” Several spoke in terms of trying to understand diﬀerent “ways of being” or

481 
how people “navigate” or “move through their world.” This again, is a productive way of 
framing the role of neurodiversity according to this workshop, as a normal diﬀerence in 
how people diﬀer but the challenge of ﬁnding ways of characterizing this diﬀerence is 
evident. This diﬀerence has been invisible both culturally and clinically, and it is 
interesting to see how clinicians are beginning to characterize these diﬀerences as 
“ways of being” to try to carve out this hidden clinical domain. 
In terms of potential barriers, there were few themes and most people 
considered the kinds of typical issues that face all workshops: supplementary learning 
materials, post-workshop support, personal limits of comprehension, lack of intuitive or 
supportive learning platforms. A neurodiversity-speciﬁc answer was barriers for clients 
getting testing, which spoke more to clinical barriers for neurodiverse people more 
generally in the mental health ﬁeld. One interesting answer from Respondent E was the 
internal tension they felt when grappling with aﬃrming messages implicit in the 
neurodiverse concept. The idea of neurodiverse strengths felt at odds with his own 
intuitive goal to mask and ﬁght his neurodiversity, not accept and embrace it. This is a 
great point at the emotional heart of a workshop like this one, and another good point 
to follow up on directly in subsequent presentations, as it gets to a central meta-
message of the material: that to truly work with one’s neurodiversity one must accept it 
and work with it, not against it. This could be framed as an acceptance strategy applied 
at a deep identity level, or as a second-order solution to a deep ﬁrst order problem 
where even the social narratives add unhelpful layers to the struggle. 
In terms of ways in which clinicians hoped the information might prove useful,

482 
clinical conﬁdence and eﬃcacy was common. A diﬀerent theme, clinical holism (treating 
the whole person) and improving clinical relationships are interesting for understanding 
a counterintuitive mechanism of change - counter to the expectation that neurodiversity 
should be ﬁnding “speciﬁc ingredients” for therapies targeting “exotic” diagnoses, the 
information a frame to make neurodiversity more relatable and understandable, which 
may unlock normal mechanisms of alliance and empathy in all clinicians. Finally, 
empowerment/de-stigmatization as a direct clinical intervention emphasizes the role of 
therapeutic intervention around the role of stigma caused by medical model 
stereotypes. Several respondents address “non-medicalized ways of knowing” and not 
making clients feel “deﬁcient” which are being emphasized as the most important 
therapeutic goal, i.e. mitigating the impact of the medical model itself. This suggests 
that reinforces the clinical concern of some clinicians that the system of care itself may 
present the biggest harm. Respondent E expanded stigma to include all unhelpful social 
messaging by expressing a desire to see their clients be able to understand the 
diﬀerence between an assumption that neurodiversity is inherently “wrong” from the 
persistent pressures and “failures” to conform. This would be a novel therapeutic 
approach built on a certain critical consciousness, but one that might be as eﬀective as it 
is radical by addressing marginalization in session. 
The Post-workshop Questionnaire 
Beliefs about the Medical Model of Psychopathology: Post-workshop Questions 1 & 2 
After the workshop, few people changed the basic direction of their belief about 
the medical model, and Respondent B, for instance, said as much explicitly. However,

483 
this is largely in line with the researcher’s initial surprise at how well-developed many 
critiques of the medical model were prior to the workshop. What is most signiﬁcant in 
this section is the nature of how responses changed from their pre-workshop responses 
to their post-workshop responses. 
Respondent A acknowledged the practical utility of using the medical model to 
coordinate care, but felt it was otherwise “meaningless” which was in line with their 
ﬁrst response to the question in the pre-workshop questionnaire. Respondent B 
expressed appreciation at having an alternative from the workshop in the form of the 
diversity model, and expressed not a shift in their feelings (their ﬁrst response espoused 
being strongly against it) but that they now felt clearer and more grounded in why they 
felt the way they did. 
Respondent E and Respondent C both grew in awareness around the medical 
model discourse, but in diﬀerent ways. Respondent E was able to more clearly see the 
contours of how the medical model had shaped their views on mental health, stating 
they wished to “move away from the medical model” while acknowledging that it 
inﬂuenced their views about “impairments/deﬁcits,” and that they valued this workshop 
as an attempt to facilitate this transition. This could be seen as a positive growth in self-
awareness around the inﬂuence of the any model on their thinking, and the ability to 
reﬂect and make choices about how those inﬂuences matched their values. Respondent 
C went from having no frame of reference for ‘the medical model’ - “Medical model? I 
am not sure that neurodiversity has ever come up in PCP visits...” - to an opinion, which 
is also a constructive rise in awareness. However, their post-workshop response should

484 
be unpacked, as it ostensibly espoused a positive function to the medical model that 
some might dispute. Respondent C said the medical model “can be helpful for people to 
sometimes get some sort of aﬃrmation of their brain functioning in a diﬀerent way.” 
Critics might take issue with the medical model as aﬃrming diﬀerences in brain 
functioning,” as such labels have been controversial as they can entrap people in a 
pathological sense of deﬁciency; meanwhile, much of the language used has been 
attributed to the neurodiversity movement which has sought to redress exactly these 
issues by aﬃrming diﬀerences in brain functioning while also validating that they can 
still be associated with real distress and suﬀering. However, a plausible explanation here 
is that Respondent C may be talking about the sometimes-cathartic role of having a 
diagnosis, which many people have found to be a validation that they are struggling with 
something real, and which even neurodiverse advocates have acknowledged (Chapman, 
2021a). Given the confusion, we can conservatively say that Respondent C has grown to 
engage the discourse around the medical model in a new way, a success in terms of the 
workshop. 
With regard to stigma, again, most respondents felt similarly to how they felt 
when they answered the pre-workshop questionnaire. However, as with question 1, 
their answers were on the whole more speciﬁc and comprehensive in how the 
limitations of the medical model were articulated, as opposed to using more anecdotal 
information on the ﬁrst questionnaire. Much of this more speciﬁc language also drew on 
the workshop information to highlight problematic dynamics of the medical model as 
static, reductive, narrow or limited in contrast to ways of understanding that are

485 
dynamic, holistic, contextual and evolving. 
For instance, Respondent A talked about the misattribution of social problems to 
individual problems which held echoes of the ﬁrst module of the workshop. They also 
alluded to assumptions of the medical model about disorders being static and 
unchanging, in contrast to the workshop which illustrated in several ways how ADHD 
and ASD can be dynamic and changeable: 
[The medical model] also doesn't allow for change over time and frames 
challenges as inherent and immutable. For example, that idea that some people 
"outgrow" their ADHD does not make sense to me - I would conceive of that as a 
person who is still of the ADHD neurotype but was able to learn about 
themselves, have a good enough environmental ﬁt, and develop eﬀective 
strategies for accepting and accommodating their individual needs. 
Respondent B also picked up on the individualizing attributions of the medical model, as 
well as the problematic implications of misapplying a problem-solving approach which 
bears out a view of people as being in need of “ﬁxing,” or similarly, as being “broken,” 
both of which contribute to stigma. Respondent B characterized the medical model 
using words like “limited, narrow and rigid” that, like Respondent A, failed to capture 
the dynamic variation that happens within individuals. They pointed to the inability of 
the medical model to incorporate social etiologies like “toxic environments” as stripping 
important context away from understanding and treating people, also echoing 
workshop material. Finally Respondent E also focused on the problems of the medical 
model as misattributing causes, a lack of complexity and promoting negative

486 
connotations. They felt the medical model creates individualized assumptions that 
people have “something wrong” with them, creating a negative connotation, and like 
Respondent A and B, invoked the missing role of social context, which can lead to 
misattributing social problems to individuals, oﬀering the obvious relationship between 
a person and their context in shaping moods and behaviors as an example. 
Each of these suggests the medical model constrains the dynamism of real-world 
mental health issues and misattributes them, obscuring the relationship with etiology 
that is useful for treatment, empathy and understanding, while also blaming individuals 
as an unintended externality. Each drew on the workshop to contrast the medical model 
with a more dynamics alternative, sometimes using workshop examples (i.e. “toxic 
environments” and the relationship of ADHD and environments of ﬁt). The workshop 
seemed to help people articulate the speciﬁc properties of a limited paradigm while also 
oﬀering a vision of dynamic yet useful alternatives to help people articulate the ways in 
which the current model can constrain clinical thinking with problematic externalities. 
While sentiments changed little, the way they were communicated changed 
signiﬁcantly, with greater depth of understanding, articulation and possible alternatives 
in the post-workshop responses seeming to be a pattern in line with the workshop’s 
goals. 
Beliefs about Neurodiversity: Post-workshop Questions 3 & 4 
The answers respondents gave about the nature of neurodiversity changed more 
from the pre-workshop questionnaire to the post-workshop questionnaire than did their 
responses about the medical model. In their original answers, many responses gave

487 
answers that were simpler and drew from a singular perspective, leaning toward 
advocacy language, medical model framing or something more humanistic. Following 
the workshop, answers drew on several perspectives and were thus more multi-faceted 
and integrated. Responses that attempted a deep characterization of neurodiversity 
(n=3) drew largely on the workshop information to blend some combination of the 
three frames, functional/identity, mechanistic/substrate and humanistic/social. 
For instance, Respondent B attempted a concise summary of what could be 
considered the neurodiversity thesis of the workshop: 
Ah, this is a great question. Neurodiversity refers to the ways in which the 
human species is organized. Speciﬁcally, there are distinct proﬁles of ways that 
humans may show up internally (think inner constellation of genetics, brain aka 
executive functioning, body/sensory) and each of these ways of showing up 
results in complimentary cognition. We need ALL types of brains/bodies to help 
the species evolve and survive.  
Respondent B illustrates the functional/conceptual framework in the way “the human 
species is organized,” while also incorporating a role for diagnostic substrates: “think 
inner constellation of genetics, brain aka executive functioning, body/sensory.” 
Respondent B closed by referencing “complementary cognition,” a concept which 
embodies all three perspectives - functional/identity, mechanistic/substrate, and 
humanistic/social as it frames the evolutionary origins and roles of neurotypes as they 
contribute to a collective human project, aﬃrming the value of all diﬀerences therein. 
All of these are drawn from the workshop in an integrative, multi-level and multi-

488 
perspective way. 
Respondent E invoked conceptual frames from the workshop that spoke to a 
functional/conceptual framing as well as diﬀerences in diagnostic substrates: 
I would say neurodiversity means diﬀerent cognitive strategies for diﬀerent 
people. My knowledge has evolved from the stereotypes of ADHD and ASD 
("inattention", "hyperactivity", "diﬃculty reading emotions and empathizing") to 
incorporate diﬀerent ways of engaging with the world based on things like 
reward sensitivity, exploration, and brain plasticity. 
The reference to cognitive strategies employs a workshop construct that inherently 
synthesizes a variety of perspectives. As a construct, cognitive strategies are styles of 
thought, action and emotion that are purpose-built for diﬀerent social roles and niches, 
and as such are inherently identity-aﬃrming as they are not deﬁcit-based. Cognitive 
strengths also carry the humanistic and social dimensions as it emphasizes the whole 
person in their environment and highlights the importance of social determinants of 
sustainable or unsustainable mental health. That is, cognitive strategies imply adaptive 
strengths optimized for speciﬁc roles and niches, and when one is mismatched to their 
environment, strengths are minimized and challenges highlighted in an unsustainable 
and accumulating way. Finally, Respondent E extended this to explicit substrates that 
highlight how these things work at a mechanistic level by mentioning “reward 
sensitivity, exploration and plasticity” as constructs that help organize and interpret 
research data on how some of these properties work in the brain and behavior. The 
respondent frames this as a movement from relatively superﬁcial understanding of

489 
ADHD/ASD “stereotypes” to something more robust. This response illustrates a 
respondent using information from the workshop to create a post-workshop answer 
that is more integrated and multi-perspective by drawing on constructs that are 
functional, identity-aﬃrming, substrate-compatible, and carry multi-cultural and justice-
based implications. 
Respondent A had an interesting response that brought in other parts of the 
workshop: 
Neurodiversity to me is the normal diversity/range of expression of human 
brains/nervous systems. I think this is both genetic and based on 
experience/injury/ trauma as we know there are real, physical changes to the 
brain that comes with trauma and injury. 
This answer is integrative of a functional frame of neurodiversity - normal diﬀerences in 
brains and nervous systems - while also incorporating physical substrates like genes and 
“experience/injury/trauma.” Here, Respondent A brings in some of the biosocial model 
presented in workshop section three, that explores the speciﬁc mechanisms and brain 
changes that emerge from lived experience and “social injury” which has biogenic 
eﬀects. Respondent A also took issue with an implication with the workshop’s framing of 
the quadrant model, synonymously referred to as the diversity model: 
Also contrary to the quadrant model, I think of all brains as expressions of 
neurodiversity and those considered "neurotypical" as people with neurotypes 
that are given more power and validation in our society. I really eschew the idea 
that there is a "normal" or "typical" way of being. Those views have certainly

490 
evolved over my lifetime and from this training as well - lots of unlearning to be 
done. 
This part of Respondent A’s answer is intriguing, as it disputes an implication of the 
material, which is a valid reaction to have. However, complicating this discussion is that 
the quadrant model is not as incompatible with the respondents’ position as is stated: 
the quadrant model holds that there is no typical or normal way of being, and in fact, 
those neurotypes associated with being “neurotypical” simply have more power and 
validation as the respondent says. What may have been missing from the workshop is 
the explicit underlining of a point that remained more of an implication: the quadrant 
model oﬀers a possible explanation of why some neuro-communities are invested in 
conformity to norms (more socially conservative neurotypes use norm conformity to 
create coalitions central to their social adaptive strategy), and while they are often 
associated with the word neurotypical, this word would in fact be a misnomer (more on 
this below). This begs the question of whether this comment highlights a potential 
misunderstanding or miscommunication about the presented information, which may be 
useful to consider in clarifying the way the workshop message going forward, or 
whether there is a more real and subtle disagreement that may yet persist. 
To consider that there is a real disagreement that persists, one possibility based 
on Respondent A’s other answers, is that they emphasize individual diﬀerences of 
neurodiversity more than the “subgroup” diﬀerences characterized in the quadrant 
model. This may reﬂect a similar concern in the advocacy literature highlighting the 
problematic political implications of framing neurotypes in terms of “neurodivergence

491 
vs neurotypical.” There is a perceived problem that this framing may reify an 
imbalanced power dynamic by implying that any group can lay claim to normalcy as a 
kind of “default” neurotype, and by extension, this may prove a slippery slope to group-
level eugenics-style comparisons that historically lead to concluding some groups 
relative inferiority, something pointed out by Respondent A in their initial responses as 
well. The advocacy wing of the neurodiversity movement typically falls down on dealing 
with this problem by emphasizing individual diversity over subgroup diﬀerences, and 
indeed, arguments deconstructing concepts of race have used a similar strategy to good 
eﬀect. 
While the researcher does welcome and respect the possibility of good faith 
disagreement among neurodiverse participants, the researcher would have people 
consider that there may be several options to this problem, and so we may want to 
avoid losing important gains from these insights if these insights might also further 
progressive goals. First, a quadrant model is compatible with the idea of individual 
diversity, as all people exist along the same two interacting metatraits of temperament 
in a way that supports an analytical emphasis on individual diﬀerences. What this model 
suggests is that where individuals overlap in the poles of these temperament spectrums, 
there may emerge subcultural diﬀerences in the aggregate that help us understand 
valuable elements of the social context of well-being. If we fail to appreciate these 
emergent sub-cultural diﬀerences, we throw away a) the importance of these 
subcultures in creating environments of ﬁt-or-friction that are critical for well-being 
depending on the neurotype, and b) that subcultures are necessary context to

492 
understanding neurodiverse people in their optimal environment, including the way in 
which cognitive diﬀerences are naturally normalized, supported and found to be 
functional in these subcultural environments. These are important justice implications in 
their own right, and do not require eschewing concerns of neurodiversity political 
implications but may complement them. Finally, to return to the issue of neurotypical vs 
neurodivergent directly, socially conservative neurotypes construct normalcy to 
regulate their communities for better and worse, but a neurodiversity frame is 
particularly useful in highlighting why this a) makes sense as a social feature to have 
evolved for some groups, and b) that not all groups beneﬁt from constructs and norm-
enforcement like this, and may in fact ﬁnd it oppressive. Consequently, the quadrant 
model can help us contextualize and normalize both the concern among advocates that 
this framework can be oppressive even as it suggests it is an inappropriate way to judge 
those who do not wish to use it. Demarcating these conceptual boundaries may even be 
useful in fostering intergroup understanding and harmonious relations. It becomes 
theoretically possible to address the political dynamics of an idea like normalcy, as well 
as the problems inherent in power imbalances between communities, without getting 
eschewing the value of acknowledging group-level cultural diﬀerences among 
neurotypes that happen to overlap at diﬀerent places on the temperamental spectrums. 
Given all of this, we should consider that this answer could be a) compelling to the 
respondent, and so would need to be better explained in subsequent workshops to 
address concerns among similarly-minded people, or b) the answer still leaves room for 
disagreement and the discussion needs to evolve further. Both options are useful to

493 
entertain when considering future research and conversational directions. 
Finally, both Respondents C and D established that they valued and were 
changed in how they view neurodiversity by the workshop, while C went so far as to 
suggest that they see neurodiversity as a “positive thing to be desired,” while 
Respondent D was more minimal in their feedback. 
It is worth noting as we prepare to transition to questions about feedback and 
subjective reactions to the workshop, Respondent B sprinkled several subjective 
reactions throughout their answers in the other sections, including passion for the 
material and the “vision” of the diversity model. This enthusiasm may reﬂect a sense of 
overlapping positivity that emerges from a model that can simultaneously a) explain and 
aﬃrm neurodiversity, b) oﬀer useful tools, and c) accomplish justice goals: 
As a result of attending the pre-training videos and workshop, I've got more 
language and science backed research that helps me articulate what I've had an 
inkling around my entire life! Speciﬁcally, that people who are "diﬀerent" think 
ADHD/ASD, are in fact so so important within our species and are just a variation 
of what it means to be human. No better than/or less than neurotypical people… 
I absolutely LOVED this workshop, the videos and suggested reading. I'd love to 
be in a consult group with Morgan Kinney as the lead! 
Regarding the way the workshop shaped views of ADHD and ASD, there was less 
conﬁdence in the speciﬁc implications, even as respondents showed evidence of 
internalizing the important subtext of these workshop sections, which was that these 
diagnoses may plausibly represent extreme values of normal diﬀerences in the ways with

494 
which people embody challenges that are trade-oﬀs of speciﬁc strengths. 
For instance, Respondent A expressed uncertainty about the precise etiological 
origins of ADHD and ASD, but emphasized a contextual understanding that these 
diagnoses likely reﬂect “a range of types of brains as well as a range of what those 
brains need and are good at... I understand these as diﬀerences that are largely 
heritable and related to our family systems but also inﬂuences and perhaps "activated" 
by adverse experiences and environments.” 
Respondent B puts a similar conﬁdence that ADHD and ASD are well understood 
in the context of the neurodiversity frames presented by making their answer more 
concise: “ADHD and ASD are variations of the human species and show up to help the 
species adapt so that it cannot only survive but thrive!” 
Respondent E follows a similar thread, suggesting that the same framework that 
is used to understand neurodiversity can be understood to frame ADHD and ASD as “a 
complex interaction of biological factors, environmental factors, the inﬂuence of the 
social world on the individual, and family inﬂuences... These "conditions" really are just 
diﬀerent cognitive strategies that certain people have, and diﬀerent ways of processing 
and relating to diﬀerent kinds of information (emotional, technical, details, big-picture 
thinking, among others).” It is worth noting that Respondent E’s original answer 
involved “non-normative thinking,” and so their picking up on the implications of 
“cognitive strategies,” including diﬀerent ways of thinking and shaping emergent 
diﬀerences in cognition, follows their preestablished interest in ways that suggest the 
workshop has room for people’s preexisting opinions. It should be noted here, where it

495 
appears most directly, that there is a capacity after the information from the workshop 
to see questions about neurodiversity and ADHD/ASD as not polarizing into advocacy vs 
medical model language, but to suggest they are diﬀerent sides of the same coin, which 
Respondent E articulates well. 
Respondent’s C and D may suggest the need to reﬁne the workshop messaging 
over time for diﬀerent reasons. Respondent C said they were not sure [about the origins 
and nature of ADHD/ASD] and would have to go back to the material; this suggests a 
lack of “stickiness” of the material, either in the length, complexity, understandability or 
salience. Respondent D invoked a view that was not particularly congruent with the 
workshop, but may rest on existing stereotypes and assumptions by emphasizing “a 
much higher ‘nature’ component than “nurture” than many of the other conditions and 
issues we treat... Consequently, neuropsych testing is much more relevant than in other 
issues.” The workshop takes pains to emphasize the role of nurture in neurodiversity, 
and says nothing about neuropsych testing, suggesting Respondent D gave a “stock” 
answer rather than one relevant to this workshop and its materials. This may be a) a 
preexisting belief that was not altered, or b) the possibility of limited engagement with 
the workshop and its materials, which might further suggest a need to reﬁne the 
messaging, length or other criteria for better likelihood or ease of consumption. 
In closing, the implication of the responses given to the neurodiversity questions 
is that there is far greater congruence between the answers on question 3 and question 
4 than there were in the pre-workshop questionnaire. In the pre-workshop 
questionnaire, it was noteworthy that the language used to describe neurodiversity was

496 
“advocacy-friendly,” while the language used to describe ADHD and ASD was more 
medical model in using words like developmental disorder, dysfunction and other 
deﬁcit-based views. Here, we see that ADHD and ASD were eﬀectively able to stay 
conceptually consistent from question 3 to 4, in ways consistent with the workshop 
itself. 
Expectations about the Training Model: Pre-workshop Questions 5, 6 & 7 
All respondents oﬀered praise for the workshop material. Several people valued 
the scope of the information presented - “lots of wonderful information” and “so much 
KNOWLEDGE [sic]” and “honestly so packed with information.” Respondent A 
emphasized that, as someone knowledgeable with the topic area, many concepts they 
knew but had “not seen named as clearly or outside of real people sharing their 
experiences... Some things were entirely new to me.” Respondent E expressed a 
satisfaction with their goal of attaining a more social-justice informed lens and beﬁtting 
his early ideas of neurodiversity as “non-normative thinking”: 
I deﬁnitely gained a more social justice-oriented understanding of 
neurodiversity; speciﬁcally the idea that neurodiversity is not a "problem" or 
"impairment" with the individual. Rather, neurodiversity encompasses normal 
cognitive strategies for diﬀerent people, and many challenges related to 
neurodiversity result from society and culture being invalidating and inhospitable 
to any deviations from the norm. 
Several emphasized speciﬁc constructs they found useful including the burnout 
spiral, values friction, niche-of-ﬁt and others. Respondent A emphasized what felt better

497 
about the way the burnout spiral was framed and treated in this workshop as it was 
“very helpful and more nuanced than a simple "you need to do less/take things oﬀ your 
plate" approach.” Respondent B suggested the buﬀering concept and the health 
bars/gas tanks metaphor had already proven useful to clients in their response to 
question 7: 
Oh my goodness. I've already incorporated the concepts of "buﬀering" into my 
daily practice, not only with my neurodiverse clients but with neurotypical 
people as well! I also have been using some of the framework Morgan suggested, 
think - gas tank, health bar, thermostat. This has helped me reconceptualize how 
I approach working with clients. From how I ask questions to what I "contact" in 
the therapy room with the client. 
Respondent B oﬀered an insightful twist in how this material can be used clinically in a 
way the primary researcher found promising: as a deeper reorientation to the needs 
and challenges neurodiverse people face, which in turn shapes what the clinician can 
“‘contact’ in the therapy room with the client.” Respondent B also oﬀered general 
enthusiasm, which was something of a pattern across all of their responses in the post-
workshop questionnaire: 
Oh my goodness! I literally can't stop talking about all that I've learned in the 
workshop. I wish we could continue to study and help (soon to be Dr) with his 
research/ intervention... I gained inspiration, gratitude, a more robust 
understanding of neurodiversity, a few people that I will keep in touch with AND 
so much KNOWLEDGE that has immediately impacted the way I move and

498 
practice therapy. Babam!! 
Again, this emphasis may speak to threading a needle of the material being accurate, 
useful, meaningful and justice-informed. To speculate more tenuously at the meta-
message level, some may feel there is an unexpected repudiation to the comparatively 
simple medical model approach if a competing model can not only avoid stigma, but 
compete in terms of explanatory richness, empowering validation and practical utility; 
this may generate some excitement around the material. 
Another unexpected quality of the information may come from Respondent C, 
who oﬀers surprise at how personally relevant the material felt despite their own lack of 
diagnosis: 
I found that various ideas of organization suggested could be helpful to me, and I 
do not currently, nor have I ever in the past, had a neurodiversity diagnosis 
(doesn't mean I'm not! haha). But it makes me think about how the ideas may or 
may not be applicable to all humans, not just those with atypical neurodiversity. 
Respondent C’s statement that the material may have unexpected resonance as 
someone who does not identify as neurodiverse may indeed be considered an optimistic 
goal of the researcher and a validation to the broader thesis of the “normal 
neurodiversity” as a reframe to challenge the idea that neurodiversity is a niche or 
specialty topic. That a non-neurodiverse- identifying person may expect to learn about 
their clients but be surprised to ﬁnd the material personally relevant suggests that an 
integrative model may show a topic of general clinical and even broad appeal. This would 
be because it oﬀers some explanatory and validating power as a universal

499 
biopsychosocial lens across all demographics and people. 
In terms of barriers, there were several themes in the responses. Respondent A 
felt the material’s scope was “a lot to take in” while Respondent D put it even more 
succinctly that the barrier was “the overwhelming ﬂood of information that was totally 
germane and useful.” In a related fashion, Respondent B found the pacing diﬃcult, likely 
because the researcher was trying to convey a large amount of information relatively 
quickly. Respondent E found the “complexity/technical language” diﬃcult, an issue with 
attempting to build credibility in novel and ambitious framing. Respondent C said they 
were not yet sure how to use the information, a challenge perhaps that something of 
large scope does include a trade-oﬀ in not having a simple and tangible anchor to the 
material. It is worth noting that this may be a stylistic factor, as Respondent B and 
others had also suggested that they had already found the material useful, so there were 
diﬀerences in how immediately applicable people felt the material to be. Regardless, all 
of these legitimate concerns speak perhaps to the researcher’s attempt to have a 
paradigm that is integrative, ambitious and inclusive to multiple diﬀerent goals (i.e., 
accurate, useful and justice-based) that can balance these factors in a digestible fashion. 
Going forward, it may prove useful to ﬁnd ways to do so even more economically and 
eﬃciently; perhaps breaking the material into smaller portions, or using some of the 
takeaways in these responses to focus how some of the material is presented. To that 
end, Respondent A had tangible suggestions to change the order in which the material 
was presented, something which may also be useful in maximizing the digestibility of the 
information.

500 
Finally, in terms of the anticipated beneﬁt for their neurodiverse clients, many 
respondents ended by emphasizing the emotional impact of the material as Respondent 
B had done more consistently throughout. This is where Respondent B continued their 
enthusiastic endorsement and emphasized that the buﬀering concept and the health 
bar metaphors had already proven useful both to neurodiverse and neurotypical people 
in their practice. Respondent C may have been echoing this when they said they found it 
useful to conceptualize how one’s needs are being dynamically met or not met 
throughout the day, which is a way the metaphors can be of immediate use. 
Respondent E again returned to the utility of the justice perspective as they reinforce 
their own desire to evolve toward justice-informed models, while also seeing a beneﬁt 
for the information on speciﬁc neurodiverse substrates: 
I deﬁnitely plan on incorporating ideas about systemic oppression and moving 
away from the medical model with neurodiverse clients. Also, I want to go back 
and review some of the self-study modules to try and solidify my knowledge 
around some of the neuroscience concepts, since I think this might be really 
helpful for some clients. 
Respondent A again had an interesting answer by addressing some of the 
subtextual aspects of the presentation, as well as echoing Respondent B that some of 
the point of the workshop is in the demonstrated stance of the material presented 
toward the community: 
This will certainly inform how I work with neurodiverse clients and in some ways 
all clients around issues like burnout. It was very aﬃrming, empathetic and

501 
compassionate towards people of all neurotypes. I think someone had the 
comment that "this is useful information for all clients, how does this connect to 
neurodiversity?" To me they are right but we often and historically have not 
extended compassion/ empathy/humanity to neurodiverse folks and rather 
pathologized them and focused on deﬁcits, dysfunction and disorders. So really, 
it's just about understanding the speciﬁc strengths and needs of neurodiverse 
people and extending compassion/empathy/ humanity to them as we would 
people who are considered "neurotypical." This has really ﬂeshed out my 
conceptualization of neurodiversity and supporting people with these 
experiences/ presentations. Thank you for sharing and I would love to do 
additional training/consultation with you! 
Respondent A grappled with the meaning of the workshop wherein by demystifying 
neurodiversity as normal variance of the human experience, the result is to extend 
compassion, understanding and insight as we would for any and all clients, and thereby 
make the material feel paradoxically universal. Contrary to the expectation that 
neurodiverse people are a “clinical other” and require unusually idiosyncratic 
approaches, here the innovation is to reframe our understanding to extend 
neurodiverse concerns to all people and make their concerns our own, tackling the 
problem in an altogether diﬀerent way by making us see our common issues and 
empathic connection with the neurodiverse community. Respondent A thoughtfully 
integrates this paradox by recognizing that though the expectation for the workshop 
was subverted, this was in fact the point, helping us see neurodiverse people as we

502 
would any other client, not as characterized by deﬁcits and dysfunction, but with 
diﬀerent challenges, strengths and needs. The result is to expand our normal clinical 
approach to people we previously felt to be an exotic other, and instead see ourselves 
anew, expanding the realm of normal counseling approaches more generally. 
Conclusion 
Broadly speaking, the workshop fulﬁlled the primary researcher’s goals, though 
the attrition rate means that the responses cannot be transferable beyond a non-clinical 
and neurotypical community and may be generally challenged as being less 
representative of the sample, and more illustrative that there may be merit in pursuing 
the training model further. A defensible statement may be that three of ﬁve post-
workshop respondents signiﬁcantly engaged with the material, and a fourth also 
displayed engagement despite signs of less familiarity and greater challenge with the 
material. This would allow us to say something like three or four clinicians out of ﬁve, 
with a bias toward neurodiverse clinicians, reported resonating with the utility or 
salience of the material presented. It should be noted that this could be because of 
either their professional identity, or their neurodiverse identity, or both to the extent 
that this material reconciled the two. This would not be an incidental point; as a 
community that feels that they are stigmatized by the medical model, the ability to 
reconcile a marginalized identity with the professional training that contributes to that 
marginalization may be empowering and align personal and professional identities to 
synergize advocacy and practice. Some signs in the responses included here suggest 
some positive support for that conclusion.

503 
From the perspective of the researcher, the most noteworthy feedback from the 
respondents was: a) signs that the medical model limitations become clearer in contrast 
to a model that attempts deep dynamism, explanatory power, compassion, and utility; b) 
that there is potential for congruence between advocacy, identity, justice, clinical 
understanding and treatment; c) there may be a need to dive deeper into the question 
of neurodivergent vs neurotypical to position this model with respect to this important 
political/identity frame; d) that a deeper approach to framing and treatment can feel 
more rich, empathic and useful relative to current neurodiversity treatment approaches; 
e) that a subtext of this model is to create new ways of relating with neurodiverse 
clients including new forms of “psychological contact;” f) that the material may feel 
personally relevant even if one doesn’t have a neurodiverse diagnosis; g) that this 
workshop may represent a subversion of expectations wherein people are surprised to 
see their own neurodiverse identity rather than see a separate neurodiverse 
demographic; and h) that the material could be shortened and simpliﬁed. We will 
review these points brieﬂy, and in summary of the takeaways of the respondent 
feedback, while also asserting a potential way they may build on one another 
productively. 
1. Medical model critiques: that these critiques became “crisper” in the post-
workshop questionnaire responses may speak to both a gained ability to 
articulate the limitations of the medical model, as well as the possibility 
that the diversity model highlighted these constraints by presenting an 
alternative that was at times holistic, dynamic, evolutionary, functional,

504 
contextual, biopsychosocial, empowering and compassionate. 
2. Many respondents demonstrated a post-workshop view of neurodiversity 
with greater congruence among the perspectives in their answers. This may 
speak to a diversity model that attempted to integrate several elements: a) a 
deep framing of neurodiversity origins and functions that is identity aﬃrming 
and politically progressive; b) technical information, descriptive richness and 
explanatory power about the diverse biopsychosocial substrates relevant in 
understanding and treatment; and c) holistic, contextual and justice 
dimensions that are useful to framing etiological, advocacy and social 
problems and solutions. That these can be made to harmonize in the right 
frameworks may be useful to aligning values, information and understanding, 
as well as aligning stakeholders who have heretofore been fragmented by 
incommensurable paradigms and agendas. 
3. The positioning of this model (see: above) on the nature of “neurodivergence 
versus neurotypical” as outlined by one savvy respondent may require 
explicit clariﬁcation to reconcile some positioning of this workshop material 
in service to the researchers’ stated goal of harmonizing stakeholders and 
perspectives. It is believed this model can speak directly to this issue with 
clarity and progressive insight by speaking to the concerns of advocates, 
clinicians and clients, who may beneﬁt from how neurodiversity is not just an 
individual issue, but about subcultural contexts of ﬁt-or-friction. Therefore, it 
may be important to address this insight directly in subsequent

505 
presentations. 
4. Respondent A’s feedback suggested that some of the clinical techniques and 
approaches oﬀered in this workshop felt more substantive than platitude-
level advice often given to neurodiverse people, i.e. “take some things oﬀ 
your plate.” The researcher agrees with the respondent that there is room for 
a deeper framework to better understand the challenges for improved 
empathy and intervention, including at the relational level (per Respondent 
B). The fact that this model might harmonize ideas to better understand 
neurodiverse challenges and solutions at a more complex and dynamic level 
may be practical in unlocking better tools and perspectives. Generally 
speaking, a model that can be useful has a better chance at spreading; a 
model that spreads, has a better chance of furthering its goal of promoting a 
de-stigmatized way of understanding; a model that is shared has a better 
chance at shifting the social discourse to better support neurodiverse people.  
5. As mentioned, Respondent B’s emphasis is noteworthy that signiﬁcant beneﬁt 
may come from the way a frame like “normal neurodiversity” may improve 
the way clinician relate to all neurodiverse clients. Once you see the logic of 
compassionate understanding from relatable frames, the innovation becomes 
in how clinicians can expand their latent compassion to new people including 
themselves or those that do not identify as neurodiverse as such. It may be 
part of the problem that traditional models maintain a problem frame that 
sees neurodiversity as a “special case of humanity,” a clinical other requiring a

506 
uniquely isolating and marginalizing view. 
6. A model that creates new ways of orienting to diversity may ﬁnd its unique 
value in expanding our understanding of everyone more than a particular 
subset. As Respondent C noticed, this feels like a subversion of expectations, 
but the upside is to make the material feel more universally salient and 
meaningful, including a whole new way of relating to ourselves and all clients 
with compassion, intelligence and strategic sustainability. It is an exciting 
possibility that this workshop may be seen as a way of reevaluating ourselves 
and our nature more broadly if it was picked up in only a handful of 
responses. 
7. Finally, the idea that a framework can add a new way to relate to all people 
including ourselves across diﬀerences may create new ways of framing and 
solving social problems. This may include a latent ability to create more 
“surface area” for non-zero-sum games of cooperation and understanding 
that can be used clinically, yes, but also through advocacy in areas of 
justice, politics, culture and economics. It is perhaps an unexpectedly 
subversive point that the right paradigm that is in the words of Paul 
Gilbert, integrative, contextual, biopsychosocial and evolutionary, can be a 
tool to align stakeholders and agendas in ways that beneﬁt all people, and 
that can include immediate beneﬁt to clients. 
Limitations 
There are several potential limitations to this study. Themes may have been

507 
undersaturated as the original study had 31 participants which saw signiﬁcant attrition as 
there were only 9 pre-workshop responses and 5 post-workshop responses to the 
questionnaires. Though there is no consensus on the number of participants necessary 
for qualitative saturation of themes and 12 may be a minimum number despite some 
question about whether establishing such a universal number even makes sense 
(Macnamara, 2018), the concern of under-saturation remains, particularly as 12 was 
considered a minimum number for small homogeneous studies; if this study were to 
increase in size and gain a range of cross-demographic participants, it would also be 
important to boost the number from 12 to achieve greater saturation across a 
heterogeneous sample. Even within this study, it is unclear what may have beneﬁted 
from an expanded number of participants - new themes, depth, clarity of themes, or 
perhaps, a sharper sense of which themes were more prominent reactions, beliefs and 
attitudes, and which were less so. In qualitative research, this may be considered a 
challenge to transferability, or whether the ﬁndings could be said to “transfer” to similar 
contexts or individuals in the way generalizability works in quantitative research. For 
instance, here we see that many of the participants were neurodiverse, white, women, 
and thus, the ﬁndings may be said to be transferable to similar demographics, but it is a 
separate question of how the results transfer to mental health clinicians in general (or 
perhaps, to speciﬁc ﬁelds that were more underrepresented here), which on average 
belong to only some of these demographic categories. 
Secondarily, the diﬃculty of creating this design during the global pandemic 
limited potential tools to aid in the triangulation of data for trustworthiness, particularly

508 
the credibility gained from having multiple perspectives throughout the data collection 
process. For instance, as it became clear that the NVivo software would not prove to be 
a robust coding aid, the use of a second coder became particularly valuable to the 
credibility of the data, which is the need to have multiple perspectives in agreement 
about the data as presented as a dimension of trustworthiness. However, this was not 
easy to ﬁnd in the pandemic environment, creating many challenges to study 
implementation. As explained in Chapter III, NVivo was originally supposed to provide a 
function similar to a second coder by generating automatic codes but the results were 
relatively thin, creating themes such as “mental health” and “mental health 
practitioner.” The researcher overcame this by creating two coding passes, one as a 
general set of emerging themes, and the second focused on the themes as they 
answered the research questions, with the hope being that the two produced similar 
results or at least, clarity when the researcher’s answers to the research question were 
becoming biased. This was an improvised method to create a diversity of perspectives, 
and while it was useful in boosting credibility, in a follow-up study, a clear path to 
improvement would be to ﬁnd multiple perspectives throughout the data collection 
process. 
Other aspects of trustworthiness were more eﬀective, such as creating rich notes 
to track the data analysis process in the case of an external audit, which is considered a 
measure of dependability in qualitative research, or a rich documenting of the process 
to “follow in the researcher’s footsteps.” The choice to do two coding passes which 
added to a clear interpretive schema for coding, and a fairly comprehensive

509 
understanding of the researcher’s personal biases, likely helped with conﬁrmability as 
another aspect of trustworthiness, the ability for the study to be recreated through a 
follow-up qualitative design. 
However, there are other tools that may have helped to triangulate the data and 
establish credibility and trustworthiness. The ability to oﬀer feedback on the reasons 
people dropped out of the study would have been valuable information in hindsight, as 
attrition was signiﬁcant, and understanding the perceived barriers that turned into 
oﬀramps to participation would have provided more direct understanding on what 
could aid in retention of participants in a subsequent design. Moreover, to combat 
participant attrition more generally, the material could be reshaped to ﬁt into a more 
digestible length to compensate for the density of content, as this was a theme that 
emerged in the barriers section of the post-workshop questionnaire. This may be 
coupled with improving the format. While the ﬂipped classroom was likely positive for 
allowing people to take in material at their pace, it is also unclear how the loss of social 
interaction was as a barrier to engaging the material particularly for social learners, and 
the need to create relationships and create a group dynamic within two hours of a ﬁnal 
meeting may have put undue pressures on the ability for social dissection of the 
material. 
Implications 
Research Implications 
The research used here is drawn from interdisciplinary science using a 
consilience methodology, i.e. strong conclusions from converging ﬁndings.

510 
Paradoxically, to get at fundamental issues of evolved meaning and purpose using a 
scientiﬁc approach, one must use a framework of the human experience that is complex, 
diverse, functional, evolved, contextual and biopsychosocial. Methodologically, this has 
led to weighting integrative theories, models and frames more heavily, with the greatest 
weight going to most integrative and comprehensive models. The advantage is a 
common conceptual space with room for multiple perspectives, stakeholders, values 
and agendas. Multilevel selection theory is chosen as an evolutionary meta-frame for its 
ability to frame these integrations, including social sciences from gene-culture 
coevolutionary research, personality research, life history research, moral psychology 
and more. The result has been an encouraging prospect of a) a complementary, not 
fragmented, set of conceptual tools, b) a rich and useful understanding of complex 
issues, c) concrete implications about human beings and their place in the world, 
including the “wisdom” of moral, social, political, economic and spiritual implications, 
and d) great promise for advancing our understanding of mental health at the 
paradigmatic level. The downside is that the academic climate favors studies of one or a 
few variables, and there is little support for inquiry at the level of frameworks, even 
when they may be important to solving existing problems. Given the contention of this 
dissertation, that modern mental health paradigms are limited and fail to capture some 
important observable and ethical issues, the advantages stand despite the challenges - 
the ﬁeld is less in need of new data than new frameworks, and the status of such 
pursuits is worthy but in need of an outlet. 
A consilience approach brings rigor to building useful frameworks despite the

511 
diﬃculty directly testing them. However, the implications of such frameworks are highly 
testable if the frames themselves are not, and a signiﬁcant amount of data already 
supports them. For instance, a number of existing studies fall outside of the current 
paradigms, such as data about the psychosocial variables contributing to depression, 
anxiety, trauma and psychosis, or the “normal neurodiversity” of subclinical traits 
shared by families. This data is not only used, but meaningfully centered by this frame. 
This could be considered progress beﬁtting Kuhn’s theory of paradigmatic revolutions - 
that new paradigms come along and “win” because they build on older conclusions 
while accommodating new data, resulting in a more parsimonious account overall. In 
this vein, the model proposed herein incorporates a variety of useful frames including 
evolutionary psychological mechanisms of defeat, rejection and entrapment; self-
regulatory resilience; social animal specialization; moral psychology, complimentary 
cognition, multilevel models of well-being, restorative capital, and more. The result is 
new, more congruent and integrative ideas about the topography of mental health well-
being and suﬀering that are holistic and ﬂexible, and may have important justice and 
ethics implications. 
Some testable implications of the frame also follow. At the level of biosocial 
niches, for instance, one can test a variety of predictions regarding niche dynamics. First, 
that people may a) become depressed from the loss of connection to sub-niches, or 
from imbalanced dynamics therein, such as a lack of buﬀers relative to threats; b) that 
threats to “social survival” may engender anxiety about, and sensitivity to, future threats 
in kind; c) that one’s sense of progress toward an ideal niche confers resilience to

512 
existing challenges, and that there is a relationship between current niche factors and 
anticipated niche factors; d) that many of the cognitive and behavioral elements 
associated with mental illness, such as loss of self-regulatory control or delusional 
positivity/negativity biases, are functional and driven by a perceived lack of present or 
future resources relative to costs; e) that many unique mental health qualia such as 
apathy, paranoia, and psychosis can be predicted from unique patterns of social injuries 
(such as entrapment, persecution and defeat); f) that individual diﬀerences interact with 
these niche dynamics not through deﬁcits but trade-oﬀs, for instance, those who are 
high in trait mentalizing may be more sensitive to social feedback, a “strength” in social 
learning, but also a vulnerability to social injuries; and g) that sustainability is real and 
operationalizable, for instance, as a capture of the frequency and magnitude of social 
injuries (or the anticipation of such injuries) relative to social resources, including one’s 
proximity to supportive niche as it is shapes the distribution of both. 
Regarding “normal neurodiversity,” the trade-oﬀ model could explore the 
connection between ADHD or ASD and the link to subclinical temperament traits. The 
model would predict, for instance, people with clinical neurodiversity would likely share 
traits, subcultures and jobs with people who have subclinical traits, which could testably 
verify the concept of strengths linked to challenges. Building on this, a testable 
hypothesis is that there is a major diﬀerence between one’s success with a life history 
strategy may be the extremity of the traits in question, which are more likely to be 
punished in unfriendly environments. A hypothesis that follows is that one’s proximity 
to a niche that values such traits, also captures their likelihood of being punished or

513 
supported for having them. The role, prevalence and magnitude of social injuries in 
diverting someone from a niche path, for instance, by inhibiting developmental 
exploration, experimentation, or building social capital and reputation, among other 
things, is also testable. Framed diﬀerently, this model would predict that one can be 
high enough in temperamental traits to be diagnosable with clinical neurodiversity and 
still thrive in life, with the major diﬀerence being the degree to which they ﬁnd roles, 
relationships and environments that are supportive particularly in ﬁnding altruistic 
opportunity, i.e. a sense of purpose, as a niche organizer for greater meaning and 
purpose in life. This model would anticipate that the potency of such ﬁndings would help 
not only avoid social stressors, but oﬀer the resources with which to deal with them, 
lowering social and positional threats that drive existential angst and despair. 
Finally, with respect to a third level, this model predicts a variety of attributions 
to psychosocial determinants of mental health. For instance, for each of the niche 
domains, there is a class of societal problems (social mobility, social media, lack of 
meaningful work, etc.) that are etiologically more relevant than the individual 
diﬀerences typically given attribution, and that individual diﬀerences only modify this 
based on how a social problem aﬀects their speciﬁc niche specialization. This model 
would anticipate that toxic (agonic) versus nurturing (hedonic) environments predict 
diﬀerent impacts in individual mental health outcomes relative to one’s niche 
specialization, with the mediating variable being one’s individual congruence between 
individual and cultural strategy. This model suggests that access to altruistic opportunity 
would predict better mental well-being across the board, as a sense of purpose is an

514 
eﬀective niche organizer, and that those without altruistic opportunity would feel 
demoralized by the inability to access this niche organizer, as attempts to compensate 
by boosting happiness, is unsustainable and leads to niche imbalances and addiction. 
This model would suggest that mental health is fundamentally more unsustainable in 
toxic cultures as a consequence as they are more likely to exploit and less likely to 
provide altruistic opportunity, and this is only compounded for those who are ill-ﬁtting 
on top of this; furthermore, the moral injury of being complicit in systems that are 
mentally unsustainable for the community can be demoralizing, painful and 
overwhelming. 
Training Implications 
The dissertation involved a workshop training to deliver therapeutic insights in 
the treatment of neurodiverse people using a niche model of well-being. The 
information was derived from a consilience approach which synthesizes ﬁndings across 
ﬁelds for strong conclusions from converging facts. This means using a strong primary 
source approach for basing assumptions for a model of well-being and its treatment, 
which is surprisingly uncommon for psychotherapies and mental health research in 
general (see: medical model critiques for more). For instance, CBT has been criticized for 
going against mainstream psychological ﬁndings about the role of rationality in well-
being, and CBT contributor Paul Gilbert (2019) has echoed that the modality fails to 
incorporate key insights of modern psychology and human functioning. Similarly, the 
medical model has been criticized for lacking a strong theory of mental health, and 
while the constructs promoted are useful in coordinating interdisciplinary practitioners

515 
in an insurance-based model of healthcare, they may actually worsen mental health 
outcomes and contribute to helplessness and alienation when used as a frame for 
scientiﬁc communication (see: autobiographical information). In both cases, the lack of a 
grounding with mainstream social science may be partially responsible as a system of 
mental health treatment that lacks such grounding is more likely to ﬁll in the gaps with 
cultural values and assumptions, which are routinely unsustainable for many and 
marginalized groups in particular. By contrast, a consilience model may achieve many 
things at once, including a) constructive relationships to meaning and well-being; b) 
compatibility with primary science, c) centering social justice issues, and d) incentivizing 
prosocial and sustainable behavior for the individual and society. To the contrary, the 
medical model and CBT have been criticized for creating a managerial style of mental 
health with high dropout rates, diminishing clinical returns and an oppressive stigma 
that discourages help-seeking and worsens outcomes (see: medical model critiques). 
Models moving in the right direction may include PTMF (Johnstone & Boyle, 2018) and 
dimensional diagnostic taxonomies (Kreuger et al., 2018). 
One way to ground treatment is to ﬁnd useful frameworks that orient people to 
important aspects of the human condition. Recent evolutionary frames are useful for 
creating a contextualized, universal, functional and biopsychosocial framework (Gilbert, 
2019). These frames grapple with the longstanding challenges that people face as a 
diverse social species across many environments, cultures and eras. Grounding the 
“meaning” of mental health treatment in the implications of such frames may yield 
multiple beneﬁts relevant to current problems in the ﬁeld. For instance, these modern

516 
evolutionary frames normalize, universalize, contextualize and validate mental health 
challenges as intrinsic to the human condition; they have room for diversity that 
connect strengths and challenges as a basis for self-belief, self-respect and self-
compassion; they give us tools to legitimize certain “social facts” such as the reality of 
psychosocial determinants of mental unsustainability, so as to stop blaming individuals 
for their suﬀering; and they instead identify important attributions for constructive social 
change as a “target of selection” for altruistic purpose. Arguably, these frames go some 
way to capturing the root causes of mental distress not as being in the genes, but as a 
kind of “feedback” about unsustainable problems of social life, which not only ravage 
individual well-being en masse, but levy millions of dollars in costly mental treatments to 
the collective “bottom line” each year in doing so. 
All of these would not be possible without consilience as a strategy to “crowd 
source” insights from across social sciences to capture important wisdom based on 
more than the current cultural zeitgeist. Consilience favors ideas that integrate with one 
another to make sense across disciplines and thereby lend a robust truth content 
regardless of perspective. This helps to create frameworks for thinking about big picture 
issues with complexity and nuance, useful to therapists trying to understand complex 
human lives in context. Consilience is arguably a highly strategic way to approach 
learning about complex, contextual, biopsychosocial human beings. Multilevel selection 
theory, and its ability to integrative theories such as gene-culture coevolution, 
integrative personality research, life history research, and moral psychological 
metatheories, creates conﬁdence that their signiﬁcant overlap creates a fully realized,

517 
culturally independent vision of human nature and well-being that can be fruitful to 
invest in and optimize going forward. It is useful for practitioners to ally with the data 
against the potential for cultural misframing when it may be important to client 
outcomes, even if that means becoming agents for prosocial change when problems 
clearly originate at the social level. 
Consilient eﬀorts begin with the need to heavily weigh the ideas that “ﬁt” across 
sciences and models, identify theories and models that overlap on such ideas, and 
create discourse regarding how to use these patterns and implications to intervene on 
multi-level well-being. Next, a challenge remains in how to distill key concepts for the 
purposes of framing, communicating and understanding such information at the 
“ground level” of helping diverse individuals seek sustainable well-being. Finally, there is 
a need for a ﬁnal layer of translation into meaningful and useful metaphors and tools 
that further condense the wisdom into client-facing tools. A constructive paradigm that 
succeeds at all three levels of translation may be of suﬃciently broad utility to make 
itself spreadable in the way psychologist George Miller envisioned “giving psychology 
away” to society at large. This dissertation has attempted a ﬁrst pass on some of these 
objectives, and has been used clinically to promising eﬀect. Consilience is encouraging as 
a way of organizing prosocial and sustainable eﬀorts in therapy going forward. There are 
several challenges with using this approach in clinical training. It has no precedent with 
which to build upon in the establishment training culture, and would need experimental 
support in graduate programs. Second, having focused on a base layer of strategic utility 
in this dissertation, there are likely higher-level implications that are not yet as fully

518 
developed - many tools are implicated, for instance, but only few currently exist. Third, 
the complexity may be a hindrance to those seeking a practice-oriented education, 
though we should emphasize, the reward is potentially high - a ﬂexible world model that 
can be tailored to the complex individual needs of diﬀerent clients, rather than a 
reductive approach optimized to focusing on narrow issues, and bogged down at the 
complex intersections of real lives. 
This theory, though, shows some promising ﬁrst pass implications that may 
already be useful to a next generation of therapies. The idea of evolutionary 
psychological tools in orienting people to a compassionate understanding of how their 
struggles are functional, sensical and contextual to push back on stigma and take control; 
the concept of sustainability as a framework for constructive questions that incentivize 
long-term, prosocial wellness strategies; and the niche as a multi-dimensional way to 
frame individual and diverse needs based not on the transient standards of the culture, 
but on deep evolutionary wisdom about what a full, healthy life needs. That includes 
elements that may be missing, and forms of conﬂict, coercion and tension that are 
normalized, but shouldn’t be. It is thought that this model, with three distinct parts - the 
biosocial niche, individual diﬀerences, and environments of injury or support - can prove 
the potential for dense information to be organized, distilled and ultimately 
communicated in ways that are ideologically empowering. 
Clinical Implications 
To quote a poem by John Donne, “no man is an island.” A central dynamic of a 
social animal therapy is that despite the individual being the locus of intervention, the

519 
mental lives of individuals are enmeshed in a multitude of social dynamics - roles, 
identities, relationships and environments - that may or may not sustain at far deeper 
levels than once believed. While therapy is an individual intervention, individuals are not 
problems. Humans as a species are a special type of social animal that are intrinsically 
rife with vulnerabilities, trade oﬀs and unsustainable dynamics, yet some individuals are 
relatively better positioned to attain resources and avoid injuries. That means that 
mental suﬀering does not come from the lack of therapist interventions, bad genes, 
rational frames, or childhood traumas because good mental health is never a given for 
social animals. In fact, cultures commonly expect people to endure scenarios that are 
considered “ﬁne” by the cultural standards, even as those roles and environments are 
deeply unsustainable according to the niche needs of most social animals, and some 
neurotypes in particular. Indeed, toxic systems and cultures may even be motivated to 
gaslight people into believing they are the problem for burning out in such systems, 
particularly when they are incentivized to exploit those people. Let’s review a few 
bullets about human well-being as a special type of social animal: 
Level 1: Biosocial niches 
A social niche is where people can ﬁnd sustainable meaning and transient 
happiness, both of which moderate the frequency and impact of existential social pain. 
Niches are composed of a multitude of embodied relationships with diﬀerent aspects of 
one’s social environment. Social animals like humans require various connections with 
their environments - a hopeful future, social connection, status and respect, an 
enriching environment and so on - or else they begin to break down. Niches activate

520 
social mentalities to provide the atomic elements of a meaningful life, which shapes 
one’s worldview and lifestyle to be more or less sustainable following the evolutionary 
“logic” of what makes for a meaningful and purposeful niche. The following is not an 
exhaustive or systematic list: 
a. The meaningful and rewarding aspects of niches engender embodied psychosocial 
resources that are necessary for one’s “social survival” - i.e. positioning oneself for a 
prosocial role in a social ecology. Resources include hope, control, trust, safety, 
conﬁdence, etc., and they function to create diverse and necessary forms of energy, 
strength, pleasure and resilience to help maintain self-control toward one’s goals. 
b. Threats to social survival can erode one’s resources and create psychosocial 
“injuries” that are inherently destructive to the body-mind. Injuries and threats de-
energize, weaken, hurt and disempower, proving unsustainable. Common dynamics 
are lose-lose scenarios or self-reinforcing spiral dynamics that hurt resources and 
social positions.  
c. “Social trauma” comes from overwhelming, unbuﬀered and seemingly catastrophic 
social threats that damage social positions. Complex social trauma is likely 
signiﬁcant. 
d. Environments can be full of threats, especially toxic environments and 
environments that are mismatched to one’s neurocognitive strategy. 
e. Social buﬀering is a natural way to ameliorate stressors and boost resources, because 
the default state for humans is to a) have a baseline of social resources, and b) 
encounter stressors in teams and relationships. Buﬀering not only energizes

521 
resources, it minimizes embodied stressors encountered previously, currently and 
proactively. 
f. Social pain & social buﬀering. Social pain is diﬃcult to communicate about, receive 
support around, and be understood, largely because social pain can telegraph weak 
social positioning. This can be vulnerable (jeopardize social survival) particularly in 
competitive environments, and prevents help-seeking. Normal developmental issues 
compound with age, across multiple intersectional identities, positions, sub niches 
and life tasks, where it can be fundamentally diﬃcult for lay people to buﬀer 
someone. 
g. Social pain. Social pain rarely means what we fear it does. Compromised social 
positioning is common to the human experience. The most common cause of poor 
social positioning is likely from systemic issues that are unjust and unsustainable 
including issues of class, marginalization, etc. Therapeutic best practices come from 
the norms of healthy social environments, which help validate, normalize, 
contextualize, universalize and externalize social pain. The unhealthiest frames for 
social pain are enshrined in competitive environments where positive regard is 
highly conditional, vulnerability is weakness, and masking is a survival strategy. 
Epistemic injustices build on the latter to turn social pain into a signiﬁer of a natural 
social order, an intrinsic deﬁcit, and a source of shame and threat. Therapeutic 
microcultures must center frameworks with multilevel justiﬁcations for social pain at 
deep conceptual levels to oﬀset toxic ideologies.  
h. The antidote to social pain is discovering sustainable meaning in an altruistic

522 
prosocial niche, which is key to both gaining resources and coping with social pain. 
Discovering one’s niche is a life project. It requires data gathering, cognitive and 
emotional processing, and iterating plausible experiments in sub-niches. This 
requires an extended vulnerable period in the “wilds” outside of one’s niche. A lack 
of critical support in this period will fail to buﬀer against adversity and risk, 
particularly in environments of threat. In the wilds, one may ﬁnd an imbalance of 
injuries, threats, and spiral dynamics. Consequently, social and mental pain easily 
push people oﬀ of the life task of discovering their niches. This aﬀects poorly 
positioned people the most, who must make unfavorable trade oﬀs constantly, and 
can wind up far outside a supportive niche. 
i. Self-regulatory strength or resilience is when people gain enough resources to 
maintain self-control toward important goals, including control over one’s thoughts, 
emotions and behaviors. Perfect self-determination is a cultural myth, but those 
who are socially well-positioned relative to their niche of ﬁt have more resources for 
better self-regulatory strength. This phenomenon is highly linked to well-being. 
j. Happiness is diﬀerent from meaning, and they require diﬀerent factors in a niche. 
Access to psychosocial resources can create transient “happiness,” but only an 
“altruistic contribution” to “something bigger than one’s self” can create a 
sustainable sense of meaning and purpose. Meaning is a “niche organizer,” as it is 
not only required for niche elements like meaningful work and values alignment, it 
also oﬀers access to happiness promoting aspects of a niche - community, status, 
hope, and so on.

523 
Level 2: Neurodiversity 
Individual diﬀerences make up the second level of a niche model. Neurodiversity 
is a type of social niche specialization, where diﬀerent neuro-cognitive strategies are 
used to exploit diﬀerent social niches. In environments that are dangerous or 
competitive (win-lose), life history strategies are geared toward survival strategies, and 
success may create happiness but rarely meaning. In healthy, nurturing communities, 
neurocognitive strategies may oﬀer a win-win complementarity between other 
strategies in an interdependent milieu, and an evolved altruistic role can be fulﬁlled by 
aligning one’s strengths and values to a need in the moral commons; i.e. the evolved 
basis for a “sense of purpose” in “something bigger than one’s self.” In either case, each 
strategy has strengths associated with it, and its challenges are joined at the hip as trade-
oﬀs: competitiveness breeds callousness, openness breeds instability, etc. This drills 
down into risks for speciﬁc psychopathologies that likely account for much of the 
genetic components of mental health disorders. This changes the role of genes, by 
implicating the importance of ﬁnding a niche-of-ﬁt to align one’s trade oﬀs 
advantageously; to leverage one’s strengths, regulate one’s challenges, manage social 
pain, and ﬁnd healthy environments where one’s purpose can be used, rather than be 
exploited. Here are a few assumptions: 
a. Trade-oﬀs. Trade-oﬀs are constrained heritable strategies, made in advance of 
individual choice, that create strengths related to challenges: competitiveness at the 
cost of empathy, openness (creativity and intellect) at the cost of goal eﬃcacy, and 
so on. Trade-oﬀs create access to some mental resources over others, and a risk for

524 
some injuries over others. 
b. Niche strategies. Many moral, social, biological and psychological trade-oﬀs align to 
make up a strategy that makes sense in a speciﬁc social niche. Life strategies focus 
on neurotypes as promoting adaptive happiness, i.e. ﬁnding roles, relationships and 
environments that allow one to compete, cooperate and consume to maximize 
pleasure. Meaning strategies capitalize on “altruistic opportunity” to make a values-
aligned role contribution to the moral commons, i.e., to the social superorganism of 
which they are a part. Meaning is sustainable and can provide happiness, but the 
reverse is less often true. A well-rounded niche oﬀers some of both. 
c. Niches of ﬁt. Strategies often ﬁt a particular environment. “Fast” strategies thrive in 
unpredictable risk-reward environments, while “slow strategies” thrive in more 
structured environments, for instance. Aligning a strategy to the goals, roles, 
relationships and environments that oﬀer a niche of ﬁt can leverage a strategy’s 
strengths and minimize their weakness. For instance, creatives typically have less 
trait conscientiousness - role dependability - but creative subcultures are normed to 
value creative strengths and tolerate eccentricity. 
d. Mismatches. Strategies can be punished in the wrong environment, leveraging one’s 
challenges outside of their niche. For instance, creativity isn’t valued in corporate 
environments, while creative eccentricity may be punished. Mismatches create 
environments of injury, where stressors/injuries are more prevalent, and buﬀers are 
harder to attain, creating an increased risk of spiral dynamics and speciﬁc clinical 
psychopathological risk.

525 
e. Strategies and self-regulatory resilience. All people require mental resources for 
optimal self-regulatory control, but diﬀerent strategies gain or lose it in diﬀerent 
ways. Fast strategies can become more impulsive, for instance, while slow strategies 
will become more inhibited. Niches of ﬁt are critical for leveraging strengths to 
maintain one’s developmental goals and positions toward a meaningful life. 
f. Clinical neurodiversity. ADHD and ASD likely represent extreme parameters of more 
“normal neurodiversity” traits, which are normally distributed. Here, the underlying 
strategy itself is not the problem, but it does not guarantee social success. The 
problem with heightening the strengths and challenges of a life strategy trade oﬀ is 
that it ampliﬁes the risk-reward trade-oﬀ. Increasing both the strengths and 
challenges of a strategy turns individuals into niche “specialists” who only function 
optimally in rare and speciﬁc social niches. The role of genes is not to create deﬁcits, 
it is to increase the sensitivity of a person to their niche of ﬁt, which can be highly 
challenging. 
Level 3: Toxic and nurturing environments 
Many individual issues come from environments which organize the logic of 
social interaction in advance. Agonic (toxic) and hedonic (nurturing) styles of social living 
favor either win-lose power, or win-win community as the dominant logic of social 
living. Nurturing environments are more sustainable to mental health because they 
oﬀer more “altruistic opportunity.” There is more “surface area” for win-win 
cooperative games to create a lower conﬂict environment, and wider access to shared 
meaning and purpose allows diverse people to harmonize contributions to the moral

526 
commons, i.e. be a part of “something greater than one’s self.” Toxic environments 
foster values in self-interest, competition and high conﬂict, which creates an 
environment of defeat for many, and an environment of privilege for a few, who must 
then defend their gains against the rest. The very experience of “meaning” likely 
evolved as an altruistic reward system to incentivize the creation of hedonic nurturing 
environments as a function of inclusive ﬁtness. Hedonic systems therefore oﬀer a 
“direction” to social evolution that aligns with the individual need for sustainable access 
to meaning. This oﬀers an altruistic opportunity for “a sense of purpose” to align our 
agency with this prosocial direction to life. Depending on one’s meaning strategy, one 
may either support improvement to healthy systems, or change unhealthy ones. This is 
an important social-level layer to the meaning of distress: suﬀering can give us feedback 
about our collective niche and way of life. 
a. Cultural standards. Cultures evolve diﬀerent expectations for what should make 
someone feel happy, ﬁnd meaning or create purpose, and those standards are often 
unrealistic to the detriment of their members. Toxic ideologies may even be 
incentivized to get this wrong if it helps scapegoat individuals for collective problems, 
oppress marginalized groups, or motivate behavior that is economically or politically 
expedient. A niche model seeks a tool to step outside such obfuscation by grounding 
the science of a sustainable life and diverse ways of attaining it. The integrative 
frame can frame social facts non-politically, and appeal to reason; building useful 
tools that empower may spread the frameworks’ messaging. Adding the layer of 
social sustainability as a healthy “niche of niches” can curate praxis about the need

527 
to align the individual and collective good. 
b. Healthy environments. Meaning and purpose require critical social alignments that 
are common in healthy, nurturing, and prosocial environments such as the Nordic 
countries, which are set up to oﬀer widespread “altruistic opportunity.” This is 
diﬃcult in domineering, toxic and coercive environments where few beneﬁt from 
many, where toxic narratives coerce a survival mindset force of threat, and power 
and strength become valued over altruistic contribution. Nurturing systems are those 
that constrain competition and hierarchy within an overall win-win social contract; 
toxic systems are those that constrain win-win alignment to a privileged few while 
the rest compete to survive. Systems that ﬁt the latter description may cause 
depression, not the least of which because they force people to compete for 
materialistic hedonism and fail to provide sustainable meaning, a critical aspect of a 
well-rounded niche (M. Larsen et al., 2023). 
c. Social determinants of mental health. For every niche area that can lead to distress, 
there is a corresponding social problem that is implicated. Problems include lack of 
social mobility as a lack of hope; the loneliness epidemic as a lack of social 
connection; social comparison from social media as a lack of status and respect; toxic 
social values and populism; suburban blight as a disconnection from nature; 
epistemic injustices that pathologize brain diﬀerences; and others. These mental 
problems are not individual in nature, but implicate unsustainability in our shared 
way of life. They require mental health professionals to be able to authoritatively 
link mental unsustainability to social determinants to create social change, allying

528 
with people against toxic narratives and systems, rather than allying with toxic 
systems against individual well-being. 
d. High conﬂict, meaning-poor environments. Hierarchical and competitive 
environments conserve power and resist change, creating toxicity at the group-level. 
They create poor access to good social positions, oﬀer less access to mental 
resources, unfairly distribute injuries, and polarize life strategies against one another 
as a win-lose ﬁght over the moral commons. These systems are brittle in nature, and 
promote mental environments of defeat, isolation and uncertainty for all. 
e. Impoverished niche environments. Systems geared toward resource exploitation do 
not create roles for exploratory-oriented neurodiverse people. These niches are a 
luxury of social environments that create more “altruistic opportunities,” which 
creates more room for specialists along the fringe. Cognitive specialists are more 
abundant in systems that prioritize collective ﬂourishing (such as the Nordic 
countries), as suﬃciently prosocial infrastructure a) supports more specialist roles, 
and b) is open to social change to use the experimental and exploratory ﬁndings 
provided. These systems also foster less conﬂict stress through a “complementarity” 
of cognition, and create a less injurious social ecology friendly to neurodiversity. 
Systems without altruistic opportunities are more marginalizing and defeating to 
neurodiverse people. 
f. Narrative oppression. Toxic systems create the polarized thinking of absolute good 
and bad, smart and stupid, right and wrong. These epistemic injustices create 
ideological winners and losers that fuel self-criticism for those who do not thrive in

529 
exploitation-oriented environments, which is in turn reiﬁed by concepts like 
“weakness,” “disorder” and “deﬁcit.” The medical model unwittingly reinforces 
these concepts through biological, genetic and cognitive reductionism. 
g. Multi-niche narratives. A healthy pluralistic view might instead see deﬁcits framed as 
tradeoﬀs at the population level. For instance, consider intelligence versus 
ideological conformity: “Intelligence” fosters cognitive realism at the cost of social 
friction, while ideological conformity may engender mass delusions, but the upside 
is mental group cohesion among members, and widespread access to ideological 
resources like hope, trust and conﬁdence. Both are valid according to inclusive 
ﬁtness, as both play a role in socially evolving sustainable meaning by serving 
diﬀerent roles - one toward social progress and truth, the other to maintain what 
works in existing social systems (Haidt, 2013). The point here is that we can 
celebrate strengths and align them to a shared reality through seeing them through 
their respective prosocial niches, which brings out the meaning of these trade-oﬀs in 
someone’s favor. To do this, we must also free people from oppressive narratives of 
shame and guilt, winners and losers, and that means changing the social discourse 
to be less injurious. 
In summary, humans evolved the ability to be coregulated by a multifactor social niche, 
and there they can be protected from the social and existential struggles of life when 
sustainable wellness factors align with a role of meaning and purpose in a healthy 
culture. Mental health qualia and psychopathology represent a kind of data feedback 
about one’s relationship to their social world, including the sustainability of the ecology

530 
itself. A social animal frame is about learning how to listen to such feedback, individually 
and collectively. Poor mental health may say something about the need for individual 
growth, but also constrained opportunities and unhealthy social environments; it may 
even be common for seemingly individual problems to originate from a lack of 
sustainable commitments. 
Niche Tools  
Let us address a few clinical tools tailored to both levels of a social animal model. 
First, with respect to niche logic: 
a. Niche construction. The feedback of life is not written in logic, and the mind is not 
separate from the environment. Emotional and intuitive data register patterns of 
positive and negative feedback that helps us to evolve our frames, strategies and 
resources to curate the good and minimize the bad. We seek niches of positive social 
positions to access the good, and avoid the bad, by creating an infrastructure of 
biological, mental, social and structural elements. Niches are optimized along a 
number of hidden variables: ﬂexibility versus structure, resources versus threats, 
short-term versus long-term, and overall balance between sub-niches. Optimizing 
these concerns against one another is about harmonizing the alignment of trade-oﬀs 
in one’s favor: for instance, getting meaningful work in a job that ﬁts one’s life 
strategy, to have values-aligned community, to be respected for one’s strengths and 
not judged for one’s challenges, and so on. The niche construction framework sees 
these issues to constructively process and interpret the feedback of life across niche 
domains to wisely and strategically balance factors in their development. Goals may

531 
include aligning sub-niches for life balance, making healthy commitments or 
changing unhealthy ones, accessing more resources or preventing injuries and 
oﬀsetting stressors, strategizing for long-term sustainability over immediate 
gratiﬁcation, and others. Generally speaking, the truism that happiness is transient 
and meaning is sustainable means supporting niches to optimally organize around 
sustainable meaning, must include processing, experimenting and exploring avenues 
that help develop this potential. 
b. Sustainability. Sustainability starts with understanding the embodied costs of losing 
psychosocial resources or accumulating social injuries in eroding sustainable 
meaning. Many normalized social arrangements, including toxic relationships or 
workplace environments, can be psychically unsustainable even when the culture is 
comfortable asking people to endure them. Asking people about the sustainability of 
various strategies and commitments in their world can empower them against this 
fact by bringing awareness and wisdom to problematic niche dynamics in their own 
life, and may even promote awareness of the need to align their interests to 
supporting healthy organizations, communities and cultures as an externality. As a 
tool, priming “sustainability” can help people frame the cost of bad commitments to 
make diﬃcult choices about change, or alternatively accept strategies that are only 
impeded by bad frames. The concept orients one to intangible costs, longer time 
horizons, and niche logic not about what can be endured daily (which may a toxic 
need to maintain a sense of “strength”), but what one is optimizing their life for in 
the big picture (a nurturing, process-based, and longevity-oriented frame). This may

532 
involve roles, relationships or environments to frame the balance of resources 
versus injuries, frictions and alignments, and so forth. Clinical “symptoms” can be 
seen as a short-hand that the current balance of factors in one’s life is unsustainable. 
Orienting clients to their life as a meaningful data-gathering approach requires 
tracking, and not dismissing, patterns of social, emotional and intuitive data to 
update their proﬁle of sustainability over time and across environments. This takes 
“mindfulness” to new levels of intentionality , using information consciously and 
strategically. We shift the work of cognitive therapies to use rational inquiry at the 
correct level of holistic niche psychology, by using the rational mind to understand 
the evolutionary psychology of irrational human needs and motives. Human nature 
is not optimized for rational self-control, but a niche that provides self-regulatory 
resilience is one that empowers intelligence, creativity and prosociality as 
externalities. 
c. Epistemic Justice and anti-gaslighting. Psychoeducation oﬀers evolutionary 
psychology from a social animal perspective: trade-oﬀs, mismatches, injuries, 
resources, self-regulatory resilience, and more. These concepts can help to construct 
empowering heuristics while deconstructing epistemic injustices in the same breath; 
for instance, the social injuries (defeat, rejection and entrapment) create embodied 
consequences from social causes, and naturally refute biologically reductive stigma. 
Alternatively, therapists should avoid causing damage by attributing the meaning of 
weak social positions and social pain to absolute deﬁcits , which is a property of toxic 
narratives and systems. The medical model is guilty of this at the highest level by

533 
framing mental health issues as “in someone’s head” or “irrational,” and implying 
that social pain and positioning are derived from ﬁxed properties, ﬂaws or deﬁcits. 
The reverse is often true: the most unfairly positioned people face the most social 
pain, and this is not natural or just. Oppressive narratives enshrine social pain as 
innate, which worsens mental health, as advocates of autobiographical information 
tells us. The niche model gives many ways to frame distress as a property of human 
nature, while giving us tools to learn, strategize and reposition. It is crucial therapists 
help one make sense of and externalize social pain, without accidentally implying 
that one’s social positioning is in some way natural, inevitable, or derived from 
innate inequities; doing so is an advantage of this model, and creating hope and 
control at this level is possible. 
d. Evolutionary psychological mechanisms as empowerment. High-level frames 
implicate a psychoeducational language built on multilevel evolutionary psychology. 
These frames carry the subtext that biopsychosocial mechanisms of social pain (i.e. 
defeat, loneliness and entrapment) create positional angst that is often universal, 
valid, external and predictable , which is therapeutic on multiple levels. This undoes 
stigmatizing narratives, while creating hope and control. Psychoeducation need only 
be suﬃciently detailed, while retaining key subtexts of the destigmatizing qualities. 
For instance, one might validate and attribute pain to unsustainable commitments 
and patterns of defeat, which builds motivation for changing those commitments; or 
evolutionary psychoeducation can be used to proactively anticipate a loss of self-
regulation following an isolating move to a new city, reducing the self-stigma of

534 
feeling “crazy” and allowing for realistic goals of self-care. Generally speaking, 
orienting to embodied social dynamics helps make one “mindful” of the 
sustainability of their circumstances, which validates disquieting distress in 
destigmatizing ways, and empowers new levels of intervention. 
e. Functional analysis. Evolutionary functional analysis can be used to help people 
identify and frame their particular niche problems using social animal mechanisms. 
This may begin with tools to help people imagine their niche goals with 
intentionality, and bibliotherapy (such as Hari’s book as a niche model) may provide 
an immediate shorthand. Next, we can identify issues and barriers relative to one’s 
ideal niche, including dynamics that impede resources, social injuries, spiral 
dynamics, and more. This is helpful to ally with someone against their issue , which 
sets the clinician-client relational stance. This grounds social buﬀering as a 
therapeutic alliance to buﬀer stress and re-moralize resources against a problem. 
Framing niche issues also facilitates in-session processing to guide conversations 
using a perpetual frame with multiple levels and dynamics to explore. As a 
strengths-based frame oriented toward a positive future premised on belief in the 
client, this frame maintains the therapeutic alliance proactively. A sense of being 
understood in a strengths-based way counters social threats and removes judgment, 
while leveraging resources and problem-solving. 
f. Framing trade-oﬀs. Functional analysis can be used in a variety of ways, and the 
concept of trade-oﬀs can be applied here as well. For instance, framing tradeoﬀs at 
the heart of unsustainable decisions can validate one’s motivations for making the

535 
decision, while creating motivation to change (“yeah, us novelty-seekers sometimes 
use cannabis to be stimulated and feel free after a day of the grind, but the 
downside is that it can lead to anxiety and inertia in other areas of our life if we use 
it too frequently”). Tradeoﬀs can also be used to frame communication challenges in 
a relationship, helping to align people in a win-win instead of a win-lose or lose-lose 
(“you have negative feelings that you don’t want to burden your partner with, but 
avoiding talking about them is preoccupying you and preventing you from 
connecting. Sounds like a lose-lose. Can you frame a conversation around the 
tension itself? Something like ‘I’m feeling crappy and I don’t want to bring you down, 
but I also don’t want to be unavailable to you all weekend?’”). Functional analysis can 
also be a tool of reﬂection, meaning-making and active listening. A therapist might 
enumerate the various resources and threats one hears in a conversation, and the 
tensions inherent in their circumstance, framed by sustainability (“you like your 
friends at work and the money is good, but the culture is toxic; if you try to switch 
jobs, you may face defeat, rejection and disappointment from multiple interview 
rejections, and even then, there is no certainty that the new job is less toxic because 
you don’t have enough information to judge. The new situation may be more 
sustainable, but it is a bigger risk at a time when you don’t have the resources to 
deal with it - do I have that right?”). 
g. Social trauma. This model can expand clinical trauma to include non-Criterion A 
experiences of social trauma , with its robust relationship to acute stress disorders, 
complex traumatic stress or racial trauma. This is particularly useful in marginalized

536 
groups, such as with neurodiversity, who may also be sensitive to social traumas and 
face more of them. Trauma treatment can address and frame the social stressors 
that are likely to be triggers, while building up resources to gradually deescalate 
activating events (“each time you are activated it is easier to get activated again, and 
that makes you feel less safe, makes it harder to connect to others, and makes you 
less socially motivated. Yet, paradoxically, you need to be around your safest 
relationships right now to restore safety and trust in order to deescalate - who are 
those people for you?”). 
h. Integrative framing. A biosocial niche model helps organize new clinical concepts, and 
older therapeutic modalities, under a common scientiﬁc rubric. For instance, moral 
injury makes sense in interdependent social animals like humans, who evolved a 
motivation to help others in their community as a source of meaning and moral 
purpose; to instead feel complicit in hurting those people is unsustainably painful 
and guilt-inducing. Existential dread should be expanded to include social threats 
that attack “social survival,” as losing status or being ostracized are common mental 
projections of primal human fears as social conditions become precarious. 
Attachment work can be subsumed under social baseline theory as a general 
understanding of all social resources in relationship to others. Adlerian inferiority is 
relevant to status, respect and competitive injuries. Cognitive therapies can be 
reoriented to understanding the evolutionary logic of biosocial niches. Mindfulness 
therapies can more intentionally harness intuitive data in niche-construction. 
Psychosocial determinants of mental health address the social justice wave of

537 
therapy. 
Neurodiversity Tools  
Let us add some potential neurodiversity tools. 
a. Talking about neurodiversity trade-oﬀs. Trade-oﬀs are heritable and embodied, and 
functionally point toward speciﬁc roles, environments and niche strategies. “Normal 
neurodiversity” includes the sub-clinical traits of neurodiversity that are shared by 
those with clinical neurodiversity, are normally distributed in the population, and 
have clear strengths. The obvious archetypes in the neurodiverse temperaments are 
thinker and creative, though a variety of subdivisions within each of those “types” 
include sub-archetypes that strain such neat connotations. Still, given that the traits 
shared by clinical and non-clinical neurodiversity is so obviously the connective tissue 
of the “disorder,” rather than, say, clinical “symptoms,” clinical neurodiversity can’t 
be said to be a disability, strictly speaking. Neurodiversity can certainly be disabling 
the further one gets from their niche, or the more one has had their self-narrative 
oppressed as being deﬁned by deﬁcits. That said, there are evolutionarily accurate 
ways of framing neurodiversity that seem realistic and cathartic. Accurately tying 
strengths to challenges as a base-layer frame for what neurodiversity is, can remove 
stigma to help evaluate costs and opportunities with more clarity (“you aren’t an 
“overthinker,” you are someone who is perceptive, intelligent and analytical, which 
is obviously a strength that beneﬁts you in life and work; the downside of those 
things is a neurotic potential to put you ‘in your head,’ ruminating and spiraling 
while trying to game out every scenario. We have to parse out how to optimize the

538 
balance to get the utility and avoid the costs.”) 
b. Addressing genes. The genetic component of mental health can be accounted for by 
life history strategies, as certain diagnoses are more prevalent to certain neurotype 
proﬁles (Del Giudice, 2018). The strong implication is that these strategies are not 
inherent predispositions to disorder. Rather, genes for life strategies are designed to 
exploit certain social niches, including unique proﬁles of risk and reward. By 
extension, the genetic disposition is to encounter unique patterns of resources, 
injuries, strategies and environments, and it is the embodied trade-oﬀs that create 
unique downside risks as a byproduct of these strategies. For instance, some 
temperaments are sensitive to social information to heighten their general 
responsiveness to the environment, but high sensitivity to the environment can 
backﬁre when it heightens the dysphoria of social injuries, a particular risk in toxic 
environments with a high distribution of stressors. This account is consistent with 
the evidence on schizophrenia, including both the heritable components, and the 
social defeat hypothesis, which shows that environments that promote excessive 
defeats in a critical developmental window are implicated. Examples of multilevel 
evolutionary psychological mechanisms like this are important because they 
challenge the very foundation of mental health stigma and the assumption that 
mental health may reﬂect a natural social order to justify poor social positions as an 
innate quality. This is the promise of a “purpose, not pathology” lens, and it oﬀers 
tools about how to face and frame social injuries, social pain and social positions 
constructively.

539 
c. Neurodiversity and niches. Neurodiversity and niches intersect to provide diﬀerent 
“recipes” for an ideal niche of ﬁt. This means identifying the most likely paths to 
sustainable meaning and social success, building a life that meets a client’s unique 
needs, and creating a lifestyle that can buﬀer their biggest risks for social pain. Niche 
frames help deal with the challenges of things like ADHD or ASD in a future-oriented, 
strengths-based way. For instance, the goal is not to accommodate a disability, but 
to create an environment to align with one’s strengths and strategize around one’s 
challenges. In relationships, culture change is needed to understand and respect 
normal diﬀerences across cognitive diversity, and to empower and support an equal 
with diﬀerent needs. This positions the therapist as not having a power imbalance of 
being healthy and normal relative to the unhealthy, abnormal client; both equally 
face unsustainability factors in their lives, and have individual diﬀerences in how 
they show up. 
d. Evolutionary strengths. Evolutionary frames can matter-of-factly boost strengths-
based resources. For instance, ADHD “impulsivity” is more accurately reframed as 
“responsivity,” and it is commonly a strength found in dynamic work environments 
like hospital ERs, crisis response units, restaurant kitchens, and socially-facing ﬁelds 
like consulting, counseling, journalism or teaching. With ASD, social frictions are a 
trade oﬀ of values in ethics and truth that lead to rational ethical maximization, 
which can generate conﬂict in social settings when truth is prioritized over social 
connection. Orienting individuals to their strengths as a way to frame trade-oﬀs to 
gauge new ways of optimizing the beneﬁts versus the costs, creates more

540 
constructive strategies and motivations for doing so. It also helps people self-
advocate from a place of conﬁdence against unfair relational or political dynamics 
that prevent equity and empowerment. 
e. Niche structuring. The “recipe” for neurodiverse people will often be similar to those 
who share sub-clinical traits in their family or community. That involves mental, 
behavioral and social ways to structure neurodiverse trade-oﬀs to support 
sustainable, values-aligned meaning with fewer threats. The clinically neurodiverse 
may seek more tools to scaﬀold the bigger challenges. Ways of organizing 
themselves against decision-fatigue, unstructured time, lack of eﬃcacy, task 
prioritization, and so on, all of which can reduce the resources of meaning and 
amplify the threats of friction. Addressing niche factors at this ﬁner grain of 
cognitive costs and resources can help build healthy niches for all clients on the 
neurodiversity spectrum, however, and may generally be useful to oﬀsetting the 
costs of cognitive trade-oﬀs such as the exploitation-exploration trade-oﬀ which can 
compromise eﬃciency in thinkers and creatives. 
f. Neurodiversity and evolutionary psychology. Framing unique therapeutic challenges 
for diﬀerent neurodiverse strategies, regardless of where they fall relative to their 
clinical status, can help frame problems for the purpose of goals and alliance. For 
instance, mood volatility (high emotional reactivity/responsivity) is common in 
creatives, as is social friction and annoyance-sensitivity for thinkers; justice 
sensitivity aﬀects both. These have a variety of mechanistic ways of being explained 
depending on the audience. Diﬀerent neurocognitive strategies also have a range of

541 
diﬀerent social, cognitive, behavioral and meaning needs, and can face threats in 
their social world. For instance, neurodiverse strategies are often “explorer” 
strategies and are built for “complexity, not speed,” which can create painful 
challenges in personal eﬃcacy in areas like decision-making, task-organization, 
prioritization, life direction, and so forth. Help does not have to be framed in terms of 
deﬁcits, but leveraging strengths tied to challenges. Creatives (and those with ADHD) 
commonly have a social processing style (the need to “talk things out”) that leads to 
struggle when it isn’t well-supported. Thinkers (and ASD clients) may be slower and 
more deliberative and well-researched, but need to build up tools to build on 
previous work. Creatives may build and learn complex models but struggle to 
communicate their complexity and depth; thinkers may suﬀer moral injury when 
they “feel like the asshole” by sticking to what is right, not what is kind. Trade-oﬀs 
are more constructive for ﬁnding ways to balance one’s needs, motivations and 
goals, with exposure to threats, punishers and injuries. Practical tools should be 
mentally-optimized to the underlying evolutionary psychological mechanisms, such 
as reducing ratio-strain and boosting reward motivation. 
Purpose Tools  
Finally, here are some tools to address the third level of the model. 
a. Therapeutic microcultures and hedonic acculturation. Orienting people to 
microcultures that are more nurturing than can be typically found in the rest of 
society, allows modeling the norms, values and practices of sustainable social living 
as a kind of acculturation to hedonic ways of being. For many clients, that means

542 
reframing therapy away from hypermasculine notions of “complaining,” and instead 
seeing it as a vehicle to explore the sustainability of diﬀerent aspects of their life; for 
instance, the reality of social buﬀering as a de-stressor, or the need to energize 
mental resources against one’s problems in a natural relational context. Hedonic 
acculturation is seeing how one can move from a judgment and pessimistic frame to 
one of being clear-eyed and strategic in working toward something positive in one’s 
life and social world. As a laboratory of sorts, this milieu may help people to grapple 
with the unsustainability of coercive, conﬂict-ridden, and threat-driven ways of life 
and their costs, while feeling the beneﬁts of a win-win, mutually respectful, positive 
relationships and social dynamics. As a worldview and practice, the goal is to 
facilitate the power of holistic understanding, smart intentionality, and integrative 
problem-solving strategy. 
b. Taking on social problems. This frame may bring a lens to a variety of social issues 
that manifest in the client setting. For instance, the growing radicalization of young 
men, and the “incel” community, may be sympathetically framed as an agonic 
(competitive) mindset being activated in the chapter of life when young men 
“compete” for life partners, which becomes exacerbated in hypercompetitive 
societies with poor dating markets and toxic cultures. Additionally, many young men 
fail to access hedonic mentalities that are increasingly gated oﬀ as a luxury of stable 
partnerships, societies with “altruistic opportunity,” and child rearing in communal 
settings, all of which require good social positioning that is exponentially 
inaccessible in unregulated capitalist economies. Generally speaking, this model may

543 
contextualize individual problems with diverse social problems with lots of room for 
nuance, which helps externalize, normalize, validate and universalize mental 
distress. Consequently, this model seeks to ally with individuals against toxic 
inﬂuences in the social world over which they may have little control, and represents 
a political goal of framing the historical problem of humanity’s “agonic” or “toxic” 
nature as an impediment to the more hedonic social conditions that allows cultures 
to evolve sustainably as part of a multilevel direction to life. 
c. Social commitments and allying against toxicity. Alignment , the tool for harmonizing 
sub-niches to support one another, can also be used to identify the alignment of 
elements within social environments to assess the probabilities of ﬁt, mismatch, 
altruistic opportunities, conﬂict stress, sustainability, and more. Identifying when to 
change unsustainable commitments and make more sustainable ones requires a) 
making attributions to social etiologies of mental distress, b) tools for identifying the 
variables of more sustainable environments, and c) building up patterns of data to 
create risk-tolerance and motivation for change. In this work, it is important not to 
dismiss “irrational” thoughts and fears, as social and experiential “data” is rich with 
signiﬁers of sustainability, and can be an important source of patterns of feedback. 
There is data in mental health struggles, which also makes them meaningful. At the 
societal level, this sometimes implicates the need to purposefully foster change in 
unhealthy social systems, including attributing problems to social unsustainability, 
and allying with clients against toxic inﬂuences. Win-win vs win-lose and toxic vs 
nurturing frames may be helpful. This implicates the need for political goals to

544 
challenge unsustainable power dynamics that lead to powerlessness, coercion and 
entrapment, and bolstering systems that support altruistic opportunity as a source 
of sustainable meaning. 
d. Addressing real problems. A challenge of this model is that problems are not in 
people’s heads , and distress captures real factors in social ecologies . If someone is 
demotivated, alienated or defeated, we assume these to be dynamics of a client’s 
relationship to their social world , even when they cannot articulate the problem 
cogently. Relevant variables may be, among others, the frequency and magnitude of 
injuries across time and environments; an inadequate ratio of buﬀers to injuries; and 
factors predicting the loss of self-regulatory resilience, among others. These root 
causes lay in evolutionary psychology, evolved social dynamics, and the barriers to 
sustainable meaning and purpose. Mental pain should not be implicated as 
“irrational,” “in one’s head,” or “mental illness,” as this punishes victims of niche 
oppression with the reputational injury of being an unreliable narrator (see: 
epistemic injustice). Instead, we optimize for the evolutionary root causes 
threatening meaning and purpose, and externalize attributions to the predictable 
triggers of “threat mode” or the delusions of “motivated fantasies.” This approach 
allows new tools to control cognitive faculties more fruitfully and with less stigma at 
a deeper level. A clinical trade-oﬀ may be that the stakes are higher and more 
daunting for therapists. Clinicians must ally with the client against poor positioning in 
a social world over which the therapist has little control. However, therapeutic 
alliance only increases by engaging the client in this space, where the client has felt

545 
alone for some time. Said another way, this approach empowers social buﬀering, 
and seeks real tools to make tangible progress on a more realistic time scale, by 
helping people change their circumstances as often as it helps to accept them. 
e. Prosocial purpose. An implication of the neurodiversity literature is that there is an 
evolutionary basis for evolved neurotypes not just as adaptive strategies, but as 
“purposive” roles contributing unique goods to the moral commons. These diverse 
sets of ideals - to conserve diﬀerent aspects of what works and make progress 
against the many things that do not - evolved as key foundations for diﬀerent ways 
of being in the world. Theories like “complimentary cognition” and “moral 
foundations theory” hold that only together can these diverse strategies eﬀectively 
coregulate the moral commons and maintain the sustainability of our collective 
ﬁtness. Mental health struggles are a canary in the coal mine, telling us when we are 
denied these recipes for a meaningful life, and forcing us to change - if we listen to 
it. Each neurotype has a potential to align to a diﬀerent evolved role in “something 
bigger than ourselves,” where we can experience this win-win alignment as a sense 
of meaning and purpose in tandem with other empowered people. Multilevel 
selection theory is increasingly seeing this as a direction in life, to create the 
sustainable hedonic conditions that allows humans to ﬂexibly experiment with 
growth toward new “levels” of evolution, and the science tells us that we each have 
a part to play to align to this direction as a kind of cosmic purpose.

546 
 
This model ascribes to the notion that important and constructive messages 
about mental health should be “baked” into the very assumptions, values and tools of a 
modality. A model built on sustainable meaning is prosocial, altruistic, long-term 
oriented, and values diverse stakeholders. The model doesn’t believe we should manage 
the worst in people, but seeks to align people to: a) their best potential futures, b) to 
each other, and c) to the best potential environments for human ﬂourishing. Framing 
clinical conversations accordingly should theoretically have tangible returns: in 
facilitating mental resources for clients, building strong alliances, and orienting people 
to the important aspects of individual and collective sustainability in our time. This 
requires the mental health ﬁeld to be able to attribute unsustainable mental costs to 
unhealthy social systems, and ideally, to help people embrace their conscious agency to 
restore the balance. Therapy can be an important vehicle for important conversations. It 
is important that people begin to grapple with the toxic social inﬂuences that cyclically 
seek to corrode society if we do not ﬁnd a way to frame this problem constructively. It is 
important we begin to align neurotypes in a multiniche world where they can harmonize 
their strengths and oﬀset their respective blinders. It is important that we see the crisis 
of meaning and purpose in the modern world, and help people solve it to build a 
sustainable future for themselves and those around them. It is important we listen to 
psychological distress as a call to arms to create a saner world. 
Future Directions 
From this workshop, there have been a few things to learn and evolve the

547 
direction of the research. First, this workshop was a qualitative exploration, and 
therefore has limited transferability (the equivalent of generalizability in quantitative 
research). It is possible to extrapolate out some of the precepts of this model both 
quantitatively and empirically, including testing assumptions of the model itself, of 
which there are many; this could include anything from exploring the clinical beneﬁts of 
using these ideas and practices in session on training, to the received beneﬁt of 
aﬃrming ideas and practices on client outcomes as a form of empowerment and de-
stigmatization. Second, because of information oﬀered on barriers outlined in question 
6, this clinician has already beneﬁted tremendously from the feedback presented, and 
can imagine multiple ways of signiﬁcantly reducing the size and complexity of the 
material in line with the notes oﬀered by respondents. This includes lessons about 
delivering workshops such as to expect signiﬁcant attrition based on the low cost of 
expressing interest in a workshop, and the beneﬁts of getting feedback on those who 
drop out to improve participant retention up front. Third, as a basis for evolving the 
current neurodiversity discourse, it would be useful to see if consilience research can 
ﬁnd some practical purchase in the research landscape. From harmonizing stakeholders 
to creating dynamic and rich models that take value-based stances that are pro-justice 
and diversity, to creating room for exploring how diﬀerent approaches and perspectives 
can mutually-validate one another to create complex, contextual, biopsychosocial, 
functional paradigms. The result is a rich integrative framework that is useful and 
empowering, accurate and rich, prosocial and just. This may stand as a diﬀerent 
approach to solving more narrow, proscribed problems that result in incompatible,

548 
fragmented, narrow and reductive views that arguably carry unintended externalities of 
a second-order cybernetic nature (i.e., stigma or power-imbalances) when they turn 
people into problems.

549 
References 
Abou-El-Soud, F. A., Mohamed, H. F., & Prince, J. (2018). The Eﬀectiveness of Training  
Workshop in Changing the Tutors’ Knowledge and Attitude towards the  
Integration of Problem Based Learning into Nursing Curriculum. International  
Journal of Nursing, 5 (2), 100-107. https://doi.org/10.15640/jns.v5n2a9 
Adan, R. A. H., van der Beek, E. M., Buitelaar, J. K., Cryan, J. F., Hebebrand, J., Higgs, S.,  
Schellekens, H., & Dickson, S. L. (2019). Nutritional psychiatry: Towards improving  
mental health by what you eat. European Neuropsychopharmacology, 29 (12),  
1321–1332. 
Albee, G. W. (2005). Introduction to the special issue on Social Darwinism. Journal of 
Primary Prevention, 17 , 3-16. 
Alloy, L. B., & Abramson, L. Y. (1988). Depressive realism: Four theoretical perspectives.  
In L. B. Alloy (Ed.), Cognitive processes in depression (pp. 223–265). The Guilford  
Press. 
Alvares, G. A., Bebbington, K., Cleary, D., Evans, K., Glasson, E. J., Maybery, M. T., Pillar, 
S., Uljarević, M., Varcin, K., Wray, J., & Whitehouse, A. J. (2020). The misnomer of 
“high functioning autism”: Intelligence is an imprecise predictor of functional 
abilities at diagnosis. Autism: The International Journal of Research and Practice,  
24(1), 221–232. https://doi.org/10.1177/1362361319852831  
American Psychiatric Association. (1994). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental 
disorders (4th ed.). 
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of

550 
Mental Disorders (5th ed.; text rev.).  
Armstrong, T. (2010). Neurodiversity: Discovering the extraordinary gifts of autism, 
ADHD, dyslexia, and other brain diﬀerences. Da Capo Lifelong. 
Arnold, L. E., Lofthouse, N., & Hurt, E. (2012). Artiﬁcial food colors and attention- 
deﬁcit/hyperactivity symptoms: conclusions to dye for. Neurotherapeutics: The  
Journal of the American Society for Experimental NeuroTherapeutics, 9(3), 599– 
609. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13311-012-0133-x 
Assaf, M., Jagannathan, K., Calhoun, V. D., Miller, L., Stevens, M. C., Sahl, R., O'Boyle, J.  
G., Schultz, R. T., & Pearlson, G. D. (2010). Abnormal functional connectivity of  
default mode sub-networks in autism spectrum disorder patients. NeuroImage,   
53(1), 247–256. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.05.067 
Bailin, A. (2019, June). Clearing Up Some Misconceptions about Neurodiversity.  
Scientific American.  Retrieved March 12, 2022, from  
https://blogs.scientificamerican.com/observations/clearing-up-some- 
misconceptions-about-neurodiversity/ 
Barker, J. L., Barclay, P., & Reeve, H. K. (2012). Within-group competition reduces  
cooperation and payoﬀs in human groups. Behavioral Ecology: Oﬃcial Journal of  
the International Society for Behavioral Ecology, 23(4), 735–741.  
https://doi.org/10.1093/beheco/ars020 
Barkley, R. A. (2003). Issues in the diagnosis of attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder in  
children. Brain and development, 25 (2), 77-83. 
Barkley, R. A. (2015). Concentration Deﬁcit Disorder (sluggish cognitive tempo). In R.A.

551 
Barkley (Ed.), Attention deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder: A handbook for diagnosis 
and treatment (pp. 267-313). Guildford. 
Barkley, R. (2018). Attention-deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder (4th  Ed.). Guilford  
Publications. 
Bartholomew, N. G., Joe, G. W., Rowan-Szal, G. A., & Simpson, D. D. (2007). Counselor 
assessments of training and adoption barriers. Journal of Substance Abuse 
Treatment, 33,  193–199. 
Baron-Cohen S. (2002). The extreme male brain theory of autism.  Trends in cognitive  
sciences, 6(6), 248–254. https://doi.org/10.1016/s1364-6613(02)01904-6 
Baron-Cohen, S. (2003). The essential diﬀerence: The truth about the male and female  
brain. Basic Books. 
Baron-Cohen, S. (2019, April). The Concept of Neurodiversity Is Dividing the Autism  
Community  [Blog post]. Retrieved March 15, 2022, from  
https://blogs.scientificamerican.com/observations/the-concept-of- 
neurodiversity-is-dividing-the-autism-community/ 
Baron-Cohen, S., Ring, H. A., Bullmore, E. T., Wheelwright, S., Ashwin, C., & Williams, S.  
C. (2000). The amygdala theory of autism. Neuroscience and biobehavioral  
reviews, 24(3), 355–364. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0149-7634(00)00011-7 
Barrera, M. (1988). Models of social support and life stress: Beyond the buﬀering 
hypothesis. In L. H. Cohen (Ed.), Life events and psychological functioning (pp. 
211–236). Sage. 
Barrett, L. F. (2017). How emotions are made: The secret life of the brain. Houghton

552 
Miﬄin Harcourt. 
Bauer, I. M., & Baumeister, R. F. (2011). Self-regulatory strength. In K. D. Vohs & R. F. 
Baumeister (Eds.), Handbook of self-regulation: Research, theory, and 
applications (pp. 64–82). Guilford Press. 
Bauermeister, J. J., Barkley, R. A., Bauermeister, J. A., Marinez, J. V., & McBurnett, K.  
(2012). Validity of the sluggish cognitive tempo, inattention, and hyperactivity  
symptom dimensions: neuropsychological and psychosocial correlates. Journal of  
abnormal child psychology, 40 (5), 683–697. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10802-
011-9602-7 
Baughman, F. (2006). There is no such thing as a psychiatric disorder/disease/chemical  
imbalance. PLoS medicine, 3 (7), e318. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.0030318 
Baumeister, R. F. (2016). Limited resources for self-regulation: A current overview of the  
strength model. In E. R. Hirt, J. J. Clarkson, & L. Jia (Eds.), Self-regulation and ego  
control (pp. 1–17). Elsevier Academic Press. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12- 
801850-7.00001-9 
Baumeister, R. F., & Leary, M. R. (1995). The need to belong: Desire for interpersonal  
attachments as a fundamental human motivation. Psychological Bulletin, 117 (3),  
497–529. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.117.3.497 
Beaton, D. M., Sirois, F., & Milne, E. (2022). Experiences of criticism in adults with ADHD:  
A qualitative study. PloS One, 17(2), e0263366. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0263366

553 
Becker, S. P., & Langberg, J. M. (2013). Sluggish cognitive tempo among young  
adolescents with ADHD: relations to mental health, academic, and social  
functioning. Journal of attention disorders , 17(8), 681–689.  
https://doi.org/10.1177/1087054711435411 
Beckes, L., & Coan, J. A. (2011). Social baseline theory: The role of social proximity in 
emotion and economy of action. Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 
5(12), 976-988. 
Beckes, L., Coan, J. A., & Hasselmo, K. (2013). Familiarity promotes the blurring of self 
and other in the neural representation of threat. Social cognitive and aﬀective 
neuroscience, 8 (6), 670-677. 
Belsky, J., Jonassaint, C., Pluess, M., Stanton, M., Brummett, B., & Williams, R. (2009).  
Vulnerability genes or plasticity genes? Molecular Psychiatry, 14 (8), 746-754. 
Belsky, J., & Pluess, M. (2009). The nature (and nurture?) of plasticity in early human  
development. Perspectives on Psychological Science: A Journal of the Association  
for Psychological Science, 4 (4), 345–351. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1745- 
6924.2009.01136.x 
Belsky, J., Steinberg, L., & Draper, P. (1991). Childhood experience, interpersonal  
development, and reproductive strategy: An evolutionary theory of socialization.  
Child Development,  62(4), 647–670. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467- 
8624.1991.tb01558.x 
Bengtsson, M. (2016). How to plan and perform a qualitative study using content  
analysis. NursingPlus Open, 2 , 8–14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.npls.2016.01.001

554 
Benight, C. C., Harwell, A., & Shoji, K. (2018). Self-regulation shift theory: A dynamic  
personal agency approach to recovery capital and methodological suggestions.  
Frontiers in Psychology, 9 . https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2018.01738 
Berelson, B. (1952). Content analysis in communication research. Free Press.  
Berenson, K. R., Gyurak, A., Ayduk, O., Downey, G., Garner, M. J., Mogg, K., Bradley, B.  
P., & Pine, D. S. (2009). Rejection sensitivity and disruption of attention by social  
threat cues. Journal of research in personality, 43 (6), 1064–1072.  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jrp.2009.07.007 
Berger-Tal, O., Nathan, J., Meron, E., & Saltz, D. (2014). The exploration-exploitation  
dilemma: A multidisciplinary framework. PloS One,  9(4), e95693.  
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0095693 
Bergmüller, R., & Taborsky, M. (2010). Animal personality due to social niche  
specialisation. Trends in ecology & evolution,  25(9), 504– 
511. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tree.2010.06.012 
Berke, J. D. (2018). What does dopamine mean? Nature neuroscience, 21 (6), 787–793.  
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-018-0152-y 
Bernhardt, P. C., Dabbs, J. M., Jr., Fielden, J. A., & Lutter, C. D. (1998). Testosterone  
changes during vicarious experiences of winning and losing among fans at  
sporting events. Physiology & behavior, 65 (1), 59–62.  
https://doi.org/10.1016/s0031-9384(98)00147-4 
Bertrams, A. (2022). From autistic pragmatic language problems to a negative attitude  
toward human nature-a serial multiple mediation model. Journal of Psychiatric

555 
Research, 152 , 139–143. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpsychires.2022.06.022 
Bervoets, J., & Hens, K. (2020). Going beyond the Catch-22 of autism diagnosis and  
research. The moral implications of (not) asking “What is Autism?” Frontiers in  
Psychology. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.529193. 
Biglan, A., Flay, B. R., Embry, D. D., & Sandler, I. N. (2012). The critical role of nurturing  
environments for promoting human well-being. The American psychologist, 67 (4),  
257–271. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0026796 
Biglan, A., Johansson, M., Van Ryzin, M., & Embry, D. (2020). Scaling up and scaling out:  
Consilience and the evolution of more nurturing societies. Clinical psychology  
review, 81 , 101893. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpr.2020.101893 
Birt, L., Scott, S., Cavers, D., Campbell, C., & Walter, F. (2016). Member Checking: A tool  
to enhance trustworthiness or merely a nod to validation? Qualitative Health  
Research, 26 (13), 1802–1811. https://doi.org/10.1177/1049732316654870 
Björkqvist, K. (2001). Social defeat as a stressor in humans. Physiology & Behavior, 73 (3),  
435–442. 
Bjornsson, A. S., Hardarson, J. P., Valdimarsdottir, A. G., Gudmundsdottir, K.,  
Tryggvadottir, A., Thorarinsdottir, K., Wessman, I., Sigurjonsdottir, Ó.,  
Davidsdottir, S., & Thorisdottir, A. S. (2020). Social trauma and its association with 
posttraumatic stress disorder and social anxiety disorder. Journal of Anxiety 
Disorders , 72(102228), 102228. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.janxdis.2020.102228 
Blanchard, R. J., McKittrick, C. R., & Blanchard, D. C. (2001). Animal models of social  
stress: eﬀects on behavior and brain neurochemical systems. Physiology &

556 
behavior, 73 (3), 261–271. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0031-9384(01)00449-8 
Blume, H. (1998, September). Neurodiversity. The Atlantic.  
https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/1998/09/neurodiversity/305909/ 
Boehm, C. (2012). Moral Origins: The Evolution of Virtue, Altruism, and Shame.  Basic  
Books. 
Bondü, R., & Esser, G. (2015). Justice and rejection sensitivity in children and adolescents  
with ADHD symptoms. European child & adolescent psychiatry , 24(2), 185–198.  
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00787-014-0560-9 
Bonino, J. L. (2018). Counselor Characteristics, Counseling Style and Beliefs towards the  
Medical Model of Mental Illness: A Correlational Analysis  (Publication No. 
10973273) [Doctoral dissertation, Adler University]. ProQuest Dissertations & 
Theses Global. https://www.proquest.com/dissertations-theses/counselor-
characteristics-counseling-style/docview/2132456118 
Bonino, J. L., & Hanna, F. J. (2018). Who Owns Psychopathology? The DSM: Its Flaws, Its  
Future, and the Professional Counselor. The Journal of Humanistic Counseling , 
57(2), 118–137. 
Boot, N., Nevicka, B., & Baas, M. (2020). Creativity in ADHD: Goal-Directed Motivation  
and Domain Speciﬁcity. Journal of attention disorders , 24(13), 1857–1866. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/1087054717727352 
Booth, A., Granger, D. A., Mazur, A., & Kivlighan, K. T. (2006). Testosterone and Social  
Behavior. Social Forces, 85 (1), 167–191. http://www.jstor.org/stable/3844412 
Booth, A., Shelley, G., Mazur, A., Tharp, G., & Kittok, R. (1989). Testosterone, and winning

557 
and losing in human competition. Hormones and Behavior, 23 (4), 556–571. 
Boswell, R. S. (2020). Neurodiversity, Inclusive Pedagogy and the Need for Peer Support  
in Postsecondary Education. Thesis. From https://www.academia.edu/43108444  
/Neurodiversity_Inclusive_Pedagogy_and_the_Need_for_Peer_Support_in_Post 
secondary_Education 
Bouvard, M., Sigel, L., & Laurent, A. (2012). Étude du tempérament et de la personnalité  
chez l’enfant souﬀrant d’un trouble déﬁcit d’attention/hyperactivité (TDAH).  
L’Encephale, 38 (5), 418–425. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.encep.2012.01.004 
Bowlby, J. (1969). Attachment. Attachment and Loss  (Vol. I). Hogarth Press.  
Bowlby, J. (1973). Separation, Anxiety and Anger. Attachment and Loss  (Vol. 2). 
Hogarth Press. 
Bowlby, J. (1980). Loss: Sadness and Depression. Attachment and Loss  (Vol. 3). Hogarth  
Press. 
Brand, C. O., & Mesoudi, A. (2019). Prestige and dominance-based hierarchies exist in  
naturally occurring human groups, but are unrelated to task-speciﬁc knowledge.  
Royal Society Open Science, 6 (5), 181621. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsos.181621 
Brandman, T., Malach, R., & Simony, E. (2021). The surprising role of the default mode  
network in naturalistic perception. Communications Biology, 4 (1), 79.  
https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-020-01602-z 
Brasini, M., Tanzilli, A., Pistella, J., Gentile, D., Marco, I.D., Mancini, F., Lingiardi, V., &  
Baiocco, R. (2020). The Social Mentalities Scale: A new measure for assessing the  
interpersonal motivations underlying social relationships. Personality and

558 
Individual Diﬀerences, 167 , 110236. 
Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2013). Successful Qualitative Research: A Practical Guide for  
Beginners.  SAGE Publications. 
Brody, J. F. (2001). Evolutionary recasting: ADHD, mania and its variants. Journal of  
aﬀective disorders, 65 (2), 197–215. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0165- 
0327(00)00170-1 
Brook, C. A., & Schmidt, L. A. (2008). Social anxiety disorder: a review of environmental  
risk factors. Neuropsychiatric disease and treatment, 4 (1), 123–143. 
Brooks, R. C., Russo-Batterham, D., & Blake, K. R. (2022). Incel Activity on Social 
Media Linked to Local Mating Ecology. Psychological Science, 33 (2), 249-258. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/09567976211036065 
Bromberg-Martin, E. S., Matsumoto, M., & Hikosaka, O. (2010). Dopamine in  
motivational control: rewarding, aversive, and alerting. Neuron, 68 (5), 815–834.  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2010.11.02 
Brosnan, M., Chapman, E., & Ashwin, C. (2014). Adolescents with autism spectrum  
disorder show a circumspect reasoning bias rather than “jumping-to-
conclusions.” Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders , 44(3), 513–520. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-013-1897-5 
Brown, G. W., & Harris, T. (1978). Social Origins of Depression: A Study of Psychiatric  
Disorder in Women. Tavistock Publications. 
Bruce, L. C. (2015). Social Anxiety in Context: The Eﬀects of Social Structure [Doctoral  
dissertation, Temple University]. Temple University Theses and Dissertations.

559 
https://scholarshare.temple.edu/handle/20.500.12613/2639?show=full  
Bryant, R. (2016). Social attachments and traumatic stress. European Journal of  
Psychotraumatology. 7. 
Buckner, R. L. (2012). The serendipitous discovery of the brain’s default network.  
NeuroImage, 62(2), 1137–1145. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.10.035 
Buckner, R. L., Andrews-Hanna, J. R., & Schacter, D. L. (2008). The brain's default 
network: Anatomy, function and relevance to disease. Annals of the New York 
Academy of Sciences, 1124 , 1–38. 
Budding, D., & Chidekel, D. (2012). ADHD and giftedness: A neurocognitive consideration  
of twice exceptionality. Applied Neuropsychology Child, 1 (2), 145–151. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/21622965.2012.699423 
Burns, J. K. (2004). An evolutionary theory of schizophrenia: cortical connectivity,   
metarepresentation, and the social brain. The Behavioral and brain sciences, 
27(6), 831–885. https://doi.org/10.1017/s0140525x04000196 
Burns, J. (2007). The Descent of Madness: Evolutionary Origins of Psychosis and the  
Social Brain. Taylor & Francis. 
Burns, J. K. (2009). Reconciling 'the new epidemiology' with an evolutionary genetic basis  
for schizophrenia. Medical hypotheses, 72 (3), 353–358. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mehy.2008.09.046 
Cacioppo, J. T., Fowler, J. H., & Christakis, N. A. (2009). Alone in the crowd: The structure  
and spread of loneliness in a large social network. Journal of Personality and

560 
Social Psychology, 97 (6), 977–991. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0016076 
Cacioppo, J. T., Cacioppo, S., & Boomsma, D. I. (2013). Evolutionary mechanisms for  
loneliness. Cognition and Emotion, 28 (1), 3–21. 
Cacioppo, J. T., & Patrick, W. (2008). Loneliness: Human nature and the need for social  
connection. W.W. Norton & Company. 
Cacioppo, S., Grippo, A. J., London, S., Goossens, L., & Cacioppo, J. T. (2015). Loneliness:  
Clinical import and interventions. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 10 (2),  
238-249. 
Canli, T., Omura, K., Haas, B. W., Fallgatter, A., Constable, R. T., & Lesch, K. P. (2005). 
Beyond aﬀect: A role for genetic variation of the serotonin transporter in neural 
activation during a cognitive attention task. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences, 102 (34), 12224–12229. 
Carnevali, L., Montano, N., Tobaldini, E., Thayer, J. F., & Sgoifo, A. (2020). The contagion  
of social defeat stress: Insights from rodent studies. Neuroscience &  
Biobehavioral Reviews, 111 , 12–18.15 
Carr, G. V., & Lucki, I. (2011). The role of serotonin receptor subtypes in treating  
depression: a review of animal studies. Psychopharmacology, 213 (2-3), 265–287. 
Carroll, J. (2020). Imagination, the brain’s default mode network, and imaginative verbal  
artifacts. In Evolutionary Perspectives on Imaginative Culture (pp. 31–52). 
Springer International Publishing. 
Carter, R. T. (2007). Racism and Psychological and Emotional Injury: Recognizing and  
Assessing Race-Based Traumatic Stress. The Counseling Psychologist, 35 (1), 13–

561 
105. 
Caspi, A. (2003). Inﬂuence of Life Stress on Depression: Moderation by a Polymorphism  
in the 5-HTT Gene. Science, 301 (5631), 386–389. 
Caspi, A., McClay, J., Moﬃtt, T. E., Mill, J., Martin, J., Craig, I. W., Taylor, A., & Poulton, R.  
(2002). Role of genotype in the cycle of violence in maltreated children. Science, 
297(5582), 851–854. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1072290 
Cavanagh, S. (1997). Content analysis: concepts, methods and applications. Nurse  
researcher, 4 (3), 5–16. https://doi.org/10.7748/nr.4.3.5.s2 
Cénat, J. M. (2023). Complex Racial Trauma: Evidence, Theory, Assessment, and  
Treatment. Perspectives on psychological science: a journal of the Association for 
Psychological Science, 18 (3), 675–687. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/17456916221120428 
Chance, M. R. A., & Jolly, C. J. (1970). Social groups of monkeys, apes and men. Jonathan  
Cape. Chance, M. (1980). An ethological assessment of emotion. In R. Plutchik &  
H. Kellerman (Eds.), Emotion: Theory, research, and experience  (pp. 81-111).  
Academic Press. 
Chance, M. R. (1984). Biological systems synthesis of mentality and the nature of the  
two modes of mental operation: Hedonic and agonic. Man-Environment Systems, 
14(4), 143–157. 
Chance, M. (1988). Social fabrics of the mind. Psychology Press. 
Chandler, M. J., & Lalonde, C. (1998). Cultural continuity as a hedge against suicide in  
Canada's First Nations.  Transcultural Psychiatry , 35(2), 191–219.

562 
https://doi.org/10.1177/136346159803500202 
Chang, F. M., Kidd, J. R., Livak, K. J., Pakstis, A. J., & Kidd, K. K. (1996). The world-wide  
distribution of allele frequencies at the human dopamine D4 receptor locus. 
Human genetics, 98 (1), 91–101. 
Chapman, R. (2021a, August 18). Negotiating the Neurodiversity Concept. Psychology 
Today. https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/neurodiverse-
age/202108/negotiating -the-neurodiversity-concept 
Chapman, R. (2021b, July 22). Neurodiversity and Natural Selection: Why I Identify as 
Unselected. Psychology Today.  https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/ 
neurodiverse-age/202107/ neurodiversity-and-natural-selection-why-i-identify-
unselected 
Chapman, R. (2021c, August 23). Neurodiversity and the Pathology Paradigm . 
https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/neurodiverse-age/202108/ 
neurodiversity-and-the-pathology-paradigm 
Chapman, R., & Botha, M. (2023). Neurodivergence-informed therapy. Developmental 
Medicine and Child Neurology , 65(3), 310–317. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/dmcn.15384 
Chapman, R., & Carel, H. (2021). Neurodiversity, Epistemic Injustice, and the Good 
Human Life. ResearchGate. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/ 
357174375_Neurodiversity_Epistemic_Injustice_and_the_Good_Human_Life 
Charuvastra, A., & Cloitre, M. (2008). Social bonds and posttraumatic stress disorder.  
Annual review of psychology, 59,  301–328.

563 
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.psych.58.110405.085650 
Chauhan, N., Shah, R., Padhy, S., Malhotra, S., & Kohli, A. (2022). Is the temperamental  
trait of high persistence protective in siblings? - A comparative, exploratory study  
of healthy siblings, and attention deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder probands. Indian  
Journal of Psychiatry,  64(2), 164–170. 
Chen, C., Burton, M., Greenberger, E., & Dmitrieva, J. (1999). Population Migration and  
the Variation of Dopamine D4 Receptor (DRD4) Allele Frequencies Around the 
Globe. Evolution and Human Behavior, 20 (5), 309-324. 
Chen, M. H., Chen, Y. S., Hsu, J. W., Huang, K. L., Li, C. T., Lin, W. C., Chang, W. H., Chen, T.  
J., Pan, T. L., Su, T. P., & Bai, Y. M. (2015). Comorbidity of ADHD and subsequent  
bipolar disorder among adolescents and young adults with major depression: a  
nationwide longitudinal study. Bipolar disorders, 17 (3), 315–322.  
https://doi.org/10.1111/bdi.12266 
Chiao, J. Y., & Blizinsky, K. D. (2009). Culture-gene coevolution of individualism- 
collectivism and the serotonin transporter gene (5-HTTLPR). PsycEXTRA Dataset, 
277(1681): 529–537 
Chitty, J. (2003). Feather plucking in psittacine birds 2. Social, environmental and  
behavioural considerations. In Practice, 25 (9), 550–555. 
Choi, H., & Shin, H. (2023). Entrapment, Hopelessness, and Cognitive Control: A  
Moderated Mediation Model of Depression. Healthcare (Basel, Switzerland), 
11(8), 1065. https://doi.org/10.3390/healthcare11081065 
Choi, J., Jeong, B., Lee, S. W., & Go, H. J. (2013). Aberrant development of functional

564 
connectivity among resting state-related functional networks in medication-naive 
ADHD children. PLoS One , 8(12), e83516. 
Christakis, N. A., & Fowler, J. H. (2011). Connected: The surprising of our social networks  
and how they shape our lives, how your friends’ friends’ friends aﬀect everything  
you feel, think, and do. Back Bay Books. 
Christensen, M.B., Hallum, C., Maitland, A., Parrinello, Q., & Putaturo, C. (2023). Survival  
of the Richest. Oxfam International. 
https://www.oxfam.org/en/research/survival-richest 
Christian, D. (2011). Maps of Time: An Introduction to Big History. University of California  
Press. 
Clark, A. (2016). Surﬁng Uncertainty: Prediction, Action, and the Embodied Mind. Oxford  
University Press. 
Coan, J. A., & Sbarra, D. A. (2015). Social Baseline Theory: The Social Regulation of Risk  
and Eﬀort. Current opinion in psychology, 1 , 87–91.  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.copsyc.2014.12.021 
Cochran, D. M., Fallon, D., Hill, M., & Frazier, J. A. (2013). The role of oxytocin in  
psychiatric disorders: A review of biological and therapeutic research ﬁndings. 
Harvard Review of Psychiatry, 21 (5), 219–247. 
https://doi.org/10.1097/hrp.0b013e3182a75b7d 
Cohen, D., Nisbett, R. E., Bowdle, B. F., & Schwarz, N. (1996). Insult, aggression, and the  
southern culture of honor: An “experimental ethnography.” Journal of Personality  
and Social Psychology, 70 (5), 945–960. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-

565 
3514.70.5.945      
Cole, E. F., & Quinn, J. L. (2014). Shy birds play it safe: personality in captivity predicts 
risk responsiveness during reproduction in the wild. Biology Letters,  10(5), 
20140178. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsbl.2014.0178 
Conrad, P. (1992). Medicalization and Social Control. Annual Review of Sociology, 18,  
209–232. http://www.jstor.org/stable/2083452 
Coppens, C. M., de Boer, S. F., & Koolhaas, J. M. (2010). Coping styles and behavioural  
flexibility: towards underlying mechanisms.  Philosophical Transactions of the 
Royal Society of London B,  365(1560), 4021–4028. 
https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2010.0217 
Correia, T. (2017). Revisiting Medicalization: A Critique of the Assumptions of What  
Counts As Medical Knowledge. Frontiers in Sociology , 2(2). 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fsoc.2017.00014 
Cosgrove, L., & Krimsky, S. (2012). A comparison of DSM-IV and DSM-5 panel members'  
ﬁnancial associations with industry: a pernicious problem persists. PLoS 
medicine, 9 (3), e1001190. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1001190 
Cosmides, L. (1989). The logic of social exchange: Has natural selection shaped how  
humans reason? Studies with the Wason selection task. Cognition, 31 (3), 187– 
276. 
Costa, V. D., Tran, V. L., Turchi, J., & Averbeck, B. B. (2014). Dopamine modulates novelty  
seeking behavior during decision making. Behavioral neuroscience, 128 (5), 556–
566. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0037128

566 
Costello, C. G. (1982). Social factors associated with depression: a retrospective  
community study. Psychological Medicine, 12 (2), 329–339. 
Craig, A. D. B. (2009). How do you feel--now? The anterior insula and human awareness. 
Nature Reviews. Neuroscience, 10 (1), 59–70. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn2555 
Crenshaw, K. (1989). Demarginalizing the Intersection of Race and Sex: A Black Feminist 
Critique of Antidiscrimination Doctrine, Feminist Theory and Antiracist Politics. 
University of Chicago Legal Forum, 1989 (8). 
Črepinšek, M., Liu, S. H., & Mernik, M. (2013). Exploration and exploitation in  
evolutionary algorithms: A survey. ACM computing surveys (CSUR), 45(3), 1-33. 
Crespi, B., & Badcock, C. (2008). Psychosis and autism as diametrical disorders of 
the social brain. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 31 (3), 241-261. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X08004214 
Creswell, J. (2007). Data analysis and representation. In J. Creswell (Ed.), Qualitative 
inquiry and research design: Choosing among five approaches  (2nd ed., pp. 179–
212). Sage. 
Creswell, J. W., & Miller, D.L. (2000) Determining Validity in Qualitative Inquiry. Theory 
into Practice,  39, 124-130. https://doi.org/10.1207/s15430421tip3903_2 
Crockford, C., Deschner, T., & Wittig, R. M. (2017). The Role of Oxytocin in Social 
Buﬀering: What Do Primate Studies Add? In Behavioral Pharmacology of 
Neuropeptides: Oxytocin (pp. 155–173). Springer International Publishing. 
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1990). Flow: The psychology of optimal experience. Harper & Row. 
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2014). Toward a psychology of optimal experience. In M.

567 
Csikszentmihalyi (Ed.), Flow and the Foundations of Positive Psychology  (pp. 209-
226). Springer. 
Cummins, D. (2005). Dominance, Status, and Social Hierarchies. In D. M. Buss (Ed.), The 
handbook of evolutionary psychology (pp. 676–697). John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Curry, O. S. (2016) Morality as Cooperation: A Problem-Centred Centered? Approach. In: 
Shackelford T., Hansen R. (Eds.). The Evolution of Morality. Evolutionary 
Psychology. Springer, Cham. 
Curry, O. S., Jones Chesters, M., & Van Lissa, C. J. (2019). Mapping morality with a  
compass: Testing the theory of ‘morality-as-cooperation’ with a new 
questionnaire. Journal of Research in Personality, 78 , 106–124. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jrp.2018.10.008 
Dalton, N. S. (2013). Neurodiversity HCI. Interactions,  20(2), 72–75. Association 
for Computing Machinery (ACM). https://doi.org/10.1145/2427076.2427091  
David, E. J. R., & Derthick, A. O. (2013). What is internalized oppression, and so what? In 
Internalized Oppression. Springer Publishing Company. 
Davies, J. (2017). How voting and consensus created the diagnostic and statistical manual  
of mental disorders (DSM-III). Anthropology & Medicine, 24 (1), 32-46. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/13648470.2016.1226684 
Dawkins, R. (1976). The selﬁsh gene. Oxford University Press. 
Dean, T. (2012). Evolution and Moral Diversity. Baltic International Yearbook of Cognition, 
Logic and Communication, 7 (1). https://doi.org/10.4148/BIYCLC.V7I0.1775 
Decker, S. E., Jameson, M. T., & Naugle, A. E. (2011). Therapist Training in Empirically

568 
Supported Treatments: A Review of Evaluation Methods for Short- and Long- 
Term Outcomes. Administration and Policy in Mental Health and Mental Health  
Services Research , 38(4), 254-86. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10488-011-0360-1 
Declerck, C. H., Boone, C., & Kiyonari, T. (2014). The eﬀect of oxytocin on cooperation in  
a prisoner's dilemma depends on the social context and a person's social value  
orientation. Social cognitive and aﬀective neuroscience , 9(6), 802–809. 
De Dreu, C. K. W., Greer, L. L., Van Kleef, G. A., Shalvi, S., & Handgraaf, M. J. J. (2011). 
Oxytocin promotes human ethnocentrism. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences of the United States of America, 108 (4), 1262–1266. 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1015316108 
de Lacy, N., Doherty, D., King, B. H., Rachakonda, S., & Calhoun, V. D. (2017). Disruption  
to control network function correlates with altered dynamic connectivity in the 
wider autism spectrum. NeuroImage: Clinical , 15, 513–524. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nicl.2017.05.024 
Del Giudice, M. (2018). Evolutionary psychopathology: A uniﬁed approach. Oxford 
University Press. 
Del Giudice, M., Ellis, B. J., & Shirtcliff, E. A. (2011). The Adaptive Calibration Model of  
stress responsivity. Neuroscience and biobehavioral reviews,  35(7), 1562–1592.  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2010.11.007 
De Martino, B., Harrison, N. A., Knafo, S., Bird, G., & Dolan, R. J. (2008). Explaining  
enhanced logical consistency during decision making in autism. The Journal of  
Neuroscience: The Official Journal of the Society for Neuroscience,  28(42),

569 
10746–10750. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2895-08.2008 
Demurie, E., Roeyers, H., Baeyens, D., & Sonuga-Barke, E. (2012). Temporal discounting  
of monetary rewards in children and adolescents with ADHD and autism 
spectrum disorders. Developmental science, 15 (6), 791–800. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-7687.2012.01178.x 
De Neve, J. E. (2015). Personality, Childhood Experience, and Political Ideology. Political  
psychology, 36 (1), 55–73. https://doi.org/10.1111/pops.12075 
Dennis, R. M. (1995). Social Darwinism, Scientiﬁc Racism, and the Metaphysics of Race.  
The Journal of Negro Education, 64 (3), 243–252. 
https://doi.org/10.2307/2967206 
Denzin, N. K., & Lincoln, Y. S. (2011). The SAGE handbook of qualitative research . SAGE. 
Devereux, C. (2014). Hysteria, feminism, and gender revisited: The case of the second  
wave. ESC English Studies in Canada,  40(1), 19–45.  
https://doi.org/10.1353/esc.2014.0004 
de Waal, F. B. M. (1982). Chimpanzee politics: Power and sex among apes. HarperCollins. 
de Waal, F. (2013). The Bonobo and the Atheist: In Search of Humanism Among the  
Primates. W. W. Norton.  
DeYoung, C. G. (2006). Higher-order factors of the Big Five in a multi-informant sample. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 91 (6), 1138–1151. 
DeYoung, C. G. (2015). Cybernetic Big Five Theory. Journal of Research in Personality, 56, 
33–58. 
DeYoung, C. G., Cicchetti, D., Rogosch, F. A., Gray, J. R., Eastman, M., & Grigorenko, E. L.

570 
(2011). Sources of Cognitive Exploration: Genetic Variation in the Prefrontal 
Dopamine System Predicts Openness/Intellect. Journal of research in personality, 
45(4), 364–371. 
DeYoung, C. G., & Krueger, R. (2021). A cybernetic perspective on the nature of  
psychopathology: Transcending conceptions of mental illness as statistical 
deviance and brain disease. Center for Open Science. 
DeYoung, C. G., Quilty, L. C., & Peterson, J. B. (2007). Between facets and domains: 10 
aspects of the Big Five. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 93 (5), 880–
896. 
Dickerson, S. S., Gable, S. L., Irwin, M. R., Aziz, N., & Kemeny, M. E. (2009). Social- 
evaluative threat and proinﬂammatory cytokine regulation: an experimental 
laboratory investigation. Psychological science, 20 (10), 1237–1244. 
Dieterich, A., Liu, T., & Samuels, B. A. (2021). Chronic non-discriminatory social defeat  
stress reduces eﬀort-related motivated behaviors in male and female mice.  
Translational Psychiatry, 11 (1). 
Digman, J. M. (1997). Higher-order factors of the Big Five. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 73 (6), 1246–1256. 
Dimeff, L. A., Koerner, K., Woodcock, E. A., Beadnell, B., Brown, M. Z., Skutch, J. M.,  
Paves, A. P., Bazinet, A., & Harned, M. S. (2009). Which training method works  
best? A randomized controlled trial comparing three methods of training  
clinicians in dialectical behavior therapy skills. Behaviour Research and  
Therapy, 47(11), 921–930. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brat.2009.07.011

571 
Dimitriu, A. (2022, January). ADHD Is All About Power, Paradox, and Pain. Psychology  
Today. https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/psychiatry-and-sleep/  
202201/adhd-is-all-about-power-paradox-and-pain 
Ding, Y.-C., Chi, H.-C., Grady, D. L., Morishima, A., Kidd, J. R., Kidd, K. K., Flodman, P.,  
Spence, M. A., Schuck, S., Swanson, J. M., Zhang, Y.-P., & Moyzis, R. K. (2001). 
Evidence of positive selection acting at the human dopamine receptor D4 gene 
locus. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 99 (1), 309–314. 
Dixon, A. K., & Fisch, H. U. (1998). Animal models and ethological strategies for early 
drug-testing in humans. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 23 (2), 345–
358. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0149-7634(98)00036-0 
Dobbs, D. (2012). Are you an orchid or a dandelion? New Scientist, 213 (2849), 42–45. 
Donfrancesco, R., Di Trani, M., Porﬁrio, M. C., Giana, G., Miano, S., & Andriola, E. (2015). 
Might the temperament be a bias in clinical study on attention-deﬁcit  
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD)?: Novelty Seeking dimension as a core feature of 
ADHD. Psychiatry research, 227 (2-3), 333–338. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psychres.2015.02.014 
Downe-Wamboldt, B. (1992). Content analysis: method, applications, and issues. Health  
care for women international, 13 (3), 313-321. 
Doyle, N. (2020). Neurodiversity at work: a biopsychosocial model and the impact on  
working adults. British medical bulletin, 135 (1), 108–125. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/bmb/ldaa021 
Drew, A. J., & Kriz, A. P. (2012). Towards a Theoretical Framework for Examining

572 
Societal-Level Institutional Change. In Institutional Theory in International 
Business and Management (pp. 65–98). Emerald Group Publishing Limited. 
Dunbar, R. I. M. (1992). Neocortex size as a constraint on group size in primates. Journal 
of Human Evolution, 22 (6), 469–493. 
Ehlers, A., Maercker, A., & Boos, S. (2000). Post traumatic stress disorder following  
imprisonment: role of mental defeat, alienation, and perceived permanent  
change. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 109 , 45–55 
Ekblad, L. (2012). Autism, Personality, and Human Diversity: Deﬁning Neurodiversity in an 
Iterative Process Using Aspie Quiz. Sage Open, 3. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/2158244013497722 
Eliassen, S., Jørgensen, C., Mangel, M., & Giske, J. (2007). Exploration or exploitation: life  
expectancy changes the value of learning in foraging strategies. Oikos  
(Copenhagen, Denmark), 116(3), 513–523. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2006.0030- 
1299.15462.x 
Elhai, J. D., Miller, M. E., Ford, J. D., Biehn, T. L., Palmieri, P. A., & Frueh, B. C. (2012). 
Posttraumatic stress disorder in DSM-5: Estimates of prevalence and symptom 
structure in a nonclinical sample of college students. Journal of Anxiety 
Disorders, 26 (1), 58–64. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.janxdis.2011.08.013 
Ellis, B. J., & Del Giudice, M. (2014). Beyond allostatic load: rethinking the role of stress  
in regulating human development. Development and Psychopathology,  26(1), 1– 
20. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0954579413000849 
Ellis, B. J., Del Giudice, M., Dishion, T. J., Figueredo, A. J., Gray, P., Griskevicius, V., Hawley,

573 
P. H., Jacobs, W. J., James, J., Volk, A. A., & Wilson, D. S. (2012). The evolutionary  
basis of risky adolescent behavior: Implications for science, policy, and practice.  
Developmental Psychology, 48 (3), 598–623. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0026220 
Elstad, J. I. (1998). The Psycho-social Perspective on Social Inequalities in Health. 
Sociology of Health & Illness, 20 , 598-618. 
Eriksen, K., & Kress, V. E. (2006). The DSM and the professional counseling identity:  
Bridging the gap. Journal of Mental Health Counseling , 28(3), 202-217. 
https://doi.org/10.17744/mehc.28.3.4f39a6wr1n3fceh2 
Erickson, R. C., Post, R. D., & Paige, A. B. (1975). Hope as a psychiatric variable. Journal of 
Clinical Psychology, 31 (2), 324–330. 
Felitti, V. J., Anda, R. F., Nordenberg, D., Williamson, D. F., Spitz, A. M., Edwards, V., 
Koss, M. P., & Marks, J. S. (1998). Relationship of childhood abuse and household 
dysfunction to many of the leading causes of death in adults. American Journal of 
Preventive Medicine,  14(4), 245–258. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0749-
3797(98)00017-8 
Fischer, B. A. (2012). A review of American psychiatry through its diagnoses: The history  
and development of the diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders. 
Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 200 (12), 1022-1030. 
https://doi.org/10.1097/NMD.0b013e318275cf19 
Fitzgerald, M. (2020). Neurodiversity is an attitude of mind to deal with stigma—A re- 
evaluation of the concept. ResearchGate.  
https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.2.18597.73448

574 
Fleeson, W. (2001). Toward a structure- and process-integrated view of personality: Traits 
as density distributions of states. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
80(6), 1011–1027. 
Flores, E. C., Fuhr, D. C., Bayer, A. M., Lescano, A. G., Thorogood, N., & Simms, V. (2018). 
Mental health impact of social capital interventions: a systematic review. Social 
psychiatry and psychiatric epidemiology, 53 (2), 107–119. 
Fox, R. (1986). Fitness by any other name. Behavioral and brain sciences, 9 , 192-193. 
Fraenkel, J. R., & Wallen, N. E. (2006). How to design and evaluate research in education 
(6th ed.). McGraw-Hill.  
Frances, A. (2010). The ﬁrst draft of DSM-V. BMJ, 340. 
Frances, A. (2012). DSM-5 is a guide, not a bible: Simply ignore its 10 worst changes.  
Huﬃngton Post , Dec. 3. http://www.huﬃngtonpost.com/allen-frances/dsm- 
5_b_2227626.html  
Frances, A. (2014). Saving normal: An insider's revolt against out-of-control psychiatric 
diagnosis, DSM-5, big pharma, and the medicalization of ordinary life. Harper 
Collins. 
Fraser, J. S., & Solovey, A. D. (2007). Second-order Change in Psychotherapy: The 
Golden Thread That Uniﬁes Eﬀective Treatments. American Psychological 
Association. 
Fricker, M. (2007). Epistemic Injustice: Power and the Ethics of Knowing.  Clarendon  
Press. 
Fries, A. B., Shirtcliﬀ, E. A., & Pollak, S. D. (2008). Neuroendocrine dysregulation following

575 
early social deprivation in children. Developmental psychobiology, 50 (6), 588–
599. https://doi.org/10.1002/dev.20319 
Friston, K. (2010). The free-energy principle: a uniﬁed brain theory? Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience, 11 (2), 127–138. 
Friston, K. J., Lawson, R., & Frith, C. D. (2013). On hyperpriors and hypopriors: 
comment on Pellicano and Burr. Trends in Cognitive Sciences , 17(1), 1. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2012.11.003 
Fuermaier, A. B., Tucha, L., Koerts, J., Mueller, A. K., Lange, K. W., & Tucha, O. (2012).  
Measurement of stigmatization towards adults with attention deficit 
hyperactivity disorder.  PloS one,  7(12), e51755. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0051755 
Fugard, A. J. B., & Potts, H. W. W. (2015). Supporting thinking on sample sizes for  
thematic analyses: A quantitative tool. International Journal of Social Research  
Methodology: Theory & Practice, 18 (6), 669–684.  
https://doi.org/10.1080/13645579.2015.1005453 
Gega, L., Norman, I. J., & Marks, I. M. (2007). Computer-aided vs. tutor-delivered  
teaching of exposure therapy for phobia/panic: Randomized controlled trial with 
pre-registration nursing students. International Journal of Nursing Studies, 44 , 
397–405. 
Gelfand, M. J., Raver, J. L., Nishii, L., Leslie, L. M., Lun, J., Lim, B. C., Duan, L., Almaliach,  
A., Ang, S., Arnadottir, J., Aycan, Z., Boehnke, K., Boski, P., Cabecinhas, R., Chan,  
D., Chhokar, J., D’Amato, A., Subirats Ferrer, M., Fischlmayr, I. C., … Yamaguchi,

576 
S. (2011). Differences between tight and loose cultures: a 33-nation study. 
Science, 332(6033), 1100–1104. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1197754 
Ghaemi, S. N. (2018). After the failure of DSM: clinical research on psychiatric diagnosis.  
World psychiatry: oﬃcial journal of the World Psychiatric Association (WPA), 
17(3), 301–302. https://doi.org/10.1002/wps.20563 
Gilbert, P. (1989). Human nature and suﬀering. Erlbaum. 
Gilbert, P. (1992a). Defense, safe(ty) and biosocial goals in relation to the agonic and  
hedonic social modes. World Futures, 35 , 31-70. 
Gilbert, P. (1992b). Depression: The evolution of powerlessness. Guilford Press. 
Gilbert, P. (1995). Biopsychosocial approaches and evolutionary theory as aids to 
integration in clinical psychology and psychotherapy. Clinical Psychology & 
Psychotherapy , 2(3), 135–156. https://doi.org/10.1002/cpp.5640020302 
Gilbert, P. (2000a). The relationship of shame, social anxiety and depression: The role of 
the evaluation of social rank. Clinical Psychology & Psychotherapy, 7 (3), 174–189. 
Gilbert, P. (2000b). Social mentalities: Internal "social' conﬂict and the role of inner 
warmth and compassion in cognitive therapy. In P. Gilbert & K. G. Bailey (Eds.), 
Genes on the couch: Explorations in evolutionary psychotherapy (pp. 118–150). 
Brunner-Routledge. 
Gilbert, P. (2001a). Depression and stress: a biopsychosocial exploration of evolved  
functions and mechanisms. Stress (Amsterdam, Netherlands), 4(2), 121–135. 
https://doi.org/10.3109/10253890109115726 
Gilbert, P. (2001b). Evolution and social anxiety. The role of attraction, social competition,

577 
and social hierarchies. The Psychiatric clinics of North America, 24 (4), 723–751. 
Gilbert, P. (2004). Depression: a biopsychosocial, integrative and evolutionary approach. 
In M. Power (Ed.), Mood Disorders: A Handbook of Science and Practice (pp. 99–
142). J. Wiley. 
Gilbert, P. (2005a). Compassion: Conceptualisations, Research and Use in Psychotherapy.  
Routledge. 
Gilbert, P. (2005b). Evolution and depression: issues and implications. Psychological  
Medicine, 36 (3), 287–297. 
Gilbert, P. (2005c). Social Mentalities: A Biopsychosocial and Evolutionary Approach to  
Social Relationships. In M. W. Baldwin (Ed.), Interpersonal cognition (pp. 299–
333). Guilford Press. 
Gilbert, P. (2009). Moving beyond cognitive behaviour therapy. Psychologist. 22. 400- 
403. 
Gilbert, P. (2014). The origins and nature of compassion focused therapy. The British 
journal of clinical psychology, 53 (1), 6–41. 
Gilbert, P. (2017). Compassion as a social mentality: An evolutionary approach. In P. 
Gilbert (Ed.), Compassion: Concepts, research and applications (pp. 31–68). 
Routledge/Taylor & Francis Group. 
Gilbert, P. (2018). Living Like Crazy (2nd ed.). Annwyn House. 
Gilbert, P. (2019). Psychotherapy for the 21st century: An integrative, evolutionary,  
contextual, biopsychosocial approach. Psychology and Psychotherapy: Theory,  
Research, & Practice, 92 , 164-189.

578 
Gilbert, P., & Allan, S. (1994). Assertiveness, submissive behaviour and social  
comparison. British Journal of Clinical Psychology , 33(3), 295–306. 
Gilbert, P., & Allan, S. (1998). The role of defeat and entrapment (arrested ﬂight) in  
depression: an exploration of an evolutionary view. Psychological medicine, 
28(3), 585–598. 
Gilbert, P., & Basran, J. (2019). The Evolution of Prosocial and Antisocial Competitive  
Behavior and the Emergence of Prosocial and Antisocial Leadership Styles. 
Frontiers in psychology, 10 , 610. 
Gilbert, P., & Irons, C. (2004). A pilot exploration of the use of compassionate images in a  
group of self-critical people. Memory (Hove, England),  12(4), 507–516.  
https://doi.org/10.1080/09658210444000115 
Gilman, S. L., King, H., Porter, R., Rousseau, G.S., Showalter, E. (1993). Hysteria Beyond  
Freud. University of California Press. 
Gladden, P., & Cleator, A. (2018). Slow Life History Strategy Predicts Six Moral 
Foundations. EvoS Journal: The Journal of the Evolutionary Studies Consortium. 9 , 
43-63. 
Gold, M. S., Blum, K., Oscar-Berman, M., & Braverman, E. R. (2014). Low dopamine  
function in attention deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder: should genotyping signify  
early diagnosis in children? Postgraduate medicine, 126 (1), 153–177. 
https://doi.org/10.3810/pgm.2014.01.2735 
Gold, S. D., Marx, B. P., Soler-Baillo, J. M., & Sloan, D. M. (2005). Is life stress more  
traumatic than traumatic stress? Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 19 (6), 687–698.

579 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.janxdis.2004.06.002 
Gonda, X., Fountoulakis, K. N., Juhasz, G., Rihmer, Z., Lazary, J., Laszik, A., Akiskal, H. S.,  
& Bagdy, G. (2008). Association of the s allele of the 5-HTTLPR with neuroticism-
related traits and temperaments in a psychiatrically healthy population. European 
Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience, 259 (2), 106–113. 
Gøtzsche, P. C., Young, A. H., & Crace, J. (2015). Does long term use of psychiatric drugs  
cause more harm than good?. BMJ (Clinical research ed.), 350, h2435. 
https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.h2435 
Graeber, D., & Wengrow, D. (2021). The dawn of everything the dawn of everything: A  
new history of humanity. Farrar, Straus and Giroux. 
Graeﬀ, F. G., & Zangrossi, H., Jr. (2010). The dual role of serotonin in defense and the mode 
of action of antidepressants on generalized anxiety and panic disorders. Central 
nervous system agents in medicinal chemistry , 10(3), 207–217. 
Graham, J., Haidt, J., Koleva, S., Motyl, M., Iyer, R., Wojcik, S. P., & Ditto, P. H. (2013).  
Moral Foundations Theory. In Advances in Experimental Social Psychology  (pp.  
55–130). Elsevier. 
Gramer, M., & Saria, K. (2007). Eﬀects of social anxiety and evaluative threat on  
cardiovascular responses to active performance situations. Biological psychology, 
74(1), 67–74. 
Gray, J. A., & McNaughton, N. (2003). The Neuropsychology of Anxiety. Oxford University 
Press. 
Greenberg, G. (2013). The Book of Woe: The DSM and the unmaking of psychiatry. Scribe

580 
Publications. 
Griﬃths, A. W., Wood, A. M., Maltby, J., Taylor, P. J., & Tai, S. (2014). The prospective role  
of defeat and entrapment in depression and anxiety: A 12-month longitudinal 
study. Psychiatry Research, 216 (1), 52–59. 
Guest, G., Bunce, A., & Johnson, L. (2006). How many interviews are enough?: An  
experiment with data saturation and variability. Field Methods , 18(1), 59–82.  
https://doi.org/10.1177/1525822x05279903 
Guo, X., Yao, D., Cao, Q., Liu, L., Zhao, Q., Li, H., Huang, F., Wang, Y., Qian, Q., Wang, Y.,  
Calhoun, V. D., Johnstone, S. J., Sui, J., & Sun, L. (2020). Shared and distinct resting 
functional connectivity in children and adults with attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity 
disorder. Translational Psychiatry, 10 (1), 65. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41398- 
020-0740-y  
Habe, K., Biasutti, M., & Kajtna, T. (2019). Flow and Satisfaction With Life in Elite  
Musicians and Top Athletes. Frontiers in psychology, 10, 698.  
Hagenauer, M. H., Perryman, J. I., Lee, T. M., & Carskadon, M. A. (2009). Adolescent  
changes in the homeostatic and circadian regulation of sleep. Developmental 
neuroscience, 31 (4), 276–284. 
Haidt, J. (2007). The new synthesis in moral psychology. Science, 316, 998–1002. 
Haidt, J. (2008). Morality. Perspectives on Psychological Science,  3(1), 65–72. 
Haidt, J. (2013). The Righteous Mind: Why Good People Are Divided by Politics and  
Religion. Vintage Books, a division of Random House. 
Haidt, J., & Kesebir, S. (2010). Morality. In S. Fiske, D. Gilbert, & G. Lindzey (Eds.)

581 
Handbook of Social Psychology (5th ed., pp. 797-832). Wiley. 
Hall, E. T. (1983). The dance of life: The other dimension of time. Anchor Books. 
Hall, M. L., van Asten, T., Katsis, A. C., Dingemanse, N. J., Magrath, M. J. L., & Mulder, R. 
A. (2015). Animal personality and pace-of-life syndromes: do fast-exploring fairy-
wrens die young?  Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution,  3. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fevo.2015.00028 
Hanna, F. J., Talley, W. B., & Guindon, M. H. (2000). The Power of Perception: Toward a 
Model of Cultural Oppression and Liberation. Journal of Counseling & 
Development, 78 (4). 
Happé, F., & Frith, U. (2006). The weak coherence account: Detail-focused cognitive  
style in autism spectrum disorders. Journal of Autism and Developmental  
Disorders , 36(1), 5–25. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-005-0039-0 
Haraldsson, G. D., & Kellam, J. (2021). Going Public: Iceland’s journey to a shorter  
working week. Alda, Association for Democracy and Sustainability. 
https://en.alda.is/wp-content/uploads/2021/07/ICELAND_4DW.pdf  
Harari, Y. N. (2015). Sapiens: a brief history of humankind. Harper. 
Hare, B. (2017). Survival of the friendliest: Homo sapiens evolved via selection for  
prosociality. Annual Review of Psychology , 68, 155–186. 
Hari, J. (2018). Lost Connections: Uncovering the Real Causes of Depression and The 
Unexpected Solutions. Bloomsbury. 
Hariri, A. R. (2002). Serotonin Transporter Genetic Variation and the Response of the  
Human Amygdala. Science, 297 (5580), 400–403.

582 
Harlow, H. F., Dodsworth, R. O., & Harlow, M. K. (1965). Total social isolation in monkeys. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 54 (1), 90–97. 
Harris, M. (1974). Cows, pigs, wars & witches: The riddles of culture. Random House. 
Harrison, C., & Tanner, K. D. (2018). Language Matters: Considering Microaggressions in  
Science. CBE life sciences education,  17(1), fe4. https://doi.org/10.1187/cbe.18- 
01-0011 
Hawkins, J., & Blakeslee, S. (2005). On intelligence. Henry Holt and Co. 
Hayes, S. C., Hofmann, S. G., & Wilson, D. S. (2020). Clinical psychology is an applied  
evolutionary science. Clinical psychology review, 81,  101892. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpr.2020.101892 
Healy, D., & Williams, J. M. G. (1988). Dysrhythmia, dysphoria, and depression: The  
interaction of learned helplessness and circadian dysrhythmia in the 
pathogenesis of depression. Psychological Bulletin, 103,  163–178. 
Heinrichs, M., Baumgartner, T., Kirschbaum, C., & Ehlert, U. (2003) Social support and  
oxytocin interact to suppress cortisol and subjective responses to psychosocial 
stress. Biological Psychiatry, 54,  1389–1398. 
Henggeler, S. W., Chapman, J. E., Rowland, M. D., Halliday-Boykins, C. A., Randall, J., 
Shackelford, J., & Schoenwald, S. K. (2008). Statewide adoption and initial 
implementation of contingency management for substance-abusing adolescents. 
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 76 (4), 556–567. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-006X.76.4.556 
Henrich, J. (2004). Cultural group selection, coevolutionary processes and large-scale

583 
cooperation. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 53 (1), 3–35. 
Henrich, J. (2016). The secret of our success: How culture is driving human evolution, 
domesticating our species, and making us smarter. Princeton University Press. 
Henrich, J. (2020). The weirdest people in the world: How the west became 
psychologically peculiar and particularly prosperous. Farrar, Straus and Giroux. 
Henrich, J., & Gil-White, F. J. (2001). The evolution of prestige: Freely conferred  
deference as a mechanism for enhancing the beneﬁts of cultural transmission. 
Evolution and Human Behavior, 22 (3), 165–196. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1090-
5138(00)00071-4 
Herman, J. L. (1992a). Complex PTSD: A syndrome in survivors of prolonged and 
repeated trauma. Journal of Traumatic Stress,  5(3), 377–391.  
https://doi.org/10.1002/jts.2490050305 
Herman, J. (1992b). Trauma and recovery. From domestic abuse to political terror. 
Pandora. 
Herschell, A. D., McNeil, C. B., Urquiza, A. J., McGrath, J. M., Zebell, N. M., Timmer, S. G.,  
& Porter, A. (2009). Evaluation of a treatment manual and workshops for  
disseminating, parent-child interaction therapy. Administration and Policy in  
Mental Health , 36(1), 63–81. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10488-008-0194-7 
Heslop, B., Bailey, K., Stojanovski, E., Paul, J., & Drew, A. (2021). Anthropological 
Prosociality via Sub-Group Level Selection. Integrative psychological & behavioral 
science, Advance online publication. 
Heslop, B., Stojanovski, E., Paul, J., & Bailey, K. (2018). PILAR: A Model of Collaboration to

584 
Encapsulate Social Psychology. Review of General Psychology, 22 , 321-333. 
Heylighen, F. (2000). Evolutionary Transitions: How Do Levels of Complexity Emerge? 
Complexity, 6(1). 
Heylighen, F. (2005). Towards an anticipation control theory of mind.  Technical Report.  
Vrije Universiteit, Brussel. 
Heylighen, F. (2013) Self-organization in Communicating Groups: The Emergence of  
Coordination, Shared References and Collective Intelligence . In A. Massip-Bonet 
& A. Bastardas-Boada A. (Eds.), Complexity Perspectives on Language, 
Communication and Society . Understanding Complex Systems.  Springer. 
Heylighen, F. (2023). A contemporary interpretation of Teilhard’s law of complexity- 
consciousness. Religion, Brain & Behavior , 1–3. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/2153599x.2022.2143404 
Heylighen, F., & Joslyn, C. (2003). Cybernetics and Second-Order Cybernetics. In 
Encyclopedia of Physical Science and Technology (pp. 155–169). Elsevier. 
Heym, N., Kantini, E., Checkley, H. L. R., & Cassaday, H. J. (2015). Gray’s revised  
Reinforcement Sensitivity Theory in relation to Attention-Deﬁcit/Hyperactivity  
and Tourette-like behaviors in the general population. Personality and Individual  
Diﬀerences, 78 , 24–28. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.paid.2015.01.012 
Hibbing, J. R., Smith, K. B., & Alford, J. R. (2014). Diﬀerences in negativity bias underlie  
variations in political ideology. The Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 37 (3), 297–307.  
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X13001192 
Hilger, K., & Fiebach, C. J. (2019). ADHD symptoms are associated with the modular

585 
structure of intrinsic brain networks in a representative sample of healthy adults.  
Network neuroscience (Cambridge, Mass.), 3(2), 567–588. 
https://doi.org/10.1162/netn_a_00083  
Hilger, K., Sassenhagen, J., Kühnhausen, J., Reuter, M., Schwarz, U., Gawrilow, C., &  
Fiebach, C. J. (2020). Neurophysiological markers of ADHD symptoms in typically-
developing children. Scientiﬁc Reports, 10 (1), 22460. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-80562-0 
Hock, K., & Feﬀerman, N. H. (2011). Extending the Role of Social Networks to Study  
Social Organization and Interaction Structure of Animal Groups. Annales Zoologici 
Fennici, 48 (6), 365–370. 
Hofstede, G. (2001). Culture's Consequences: Comparing Values, Behaviors, Institutions  
and Organizations Across Nations. SAGE Publications. 
Hofstede, G. (2011). Dimensionalizing Cultures: The Hofstede Model in Context. Online 
Readings in Psychology and Culture, 2 (1). https://doi.org/10.9707/2307-
0919.1014 
Hollis, F., & Kabbaj, M. (2014). Social Defeat as an Animal Model for Depression. ILAR  
Journal, 55 (2), 221–232. 
Hoogman, M., Stolte, M., Baas, M., & Kroesbergen, E. (2020). Creativity and ADHD: A  
review of behavioral studies, the eﬀect of psychostimulants and neural 
underpinnings. Neuroscience and biobehavioral reviews, 119 , 66–85. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2020.09.029 
Horvitz, J. C. (2000). Mesolimbocortical and nigrostriatal dopamine responses to salient

586 
non-reward events. Neuroscience , 96(4), 651-6. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0306-
4522(00)00019-1 
Hsieh, H.-F., & Shannon, S. E. (2005). Three approaches to qualitative content analysis. 
Qualitative Health Research, 15 (9), 277–1288. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/1049732305276687 
Hublin, J. J., Ben-Ncer, A., Bailey, S. E., Freidline, S. E., Neubauer, S., Skinner, M. M., 
Bergmann, I., Le Cabec, A., Benazzi, S., Harvati, K., & Gunz, P. (2017). New fossils 
from Jebel Irhoud, Morocco and the pan-African origin of Homo sapiens. Nature, 
546(7657), 289–292. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature22336 
Hudson, V. M., & Den Boer, A. M. (2005). Bare Branches: The Security Implications of 
Asia's Surplus Male Population.  MIT Press.  
Hughes, J. A. (2020). Does the heterogeneity of autism undermine the neurodiversity 
paradigm? Bioethics,  35(1), 47–60. https://doi.org/10.1111/bioe.12780 
Hull, T. H. (2006). [Review of Bare Branches: The Security Implications of Asia’s Surplus  
Male Population, by V. M. Hudson & A. M. den Boer]. Journal of East Asian 
Studies, 6 (2), 310–313. http://www.jstor.org/stable/23417908 
Humphries, M., Khamassi, M., & Gurney, K. (2012). Dopaminergic control of the  
exploration-exploitation trade-oﬀ via the basal ganglia. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 
6. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2012.00009 
Hunt, A., & Jaeggi, A. (2022). Specialised minds: Extending adaptive explanations of  
personality to the evolution of psychopathology. Evolutionary Human Sciences,  
4, E26. https://doi.org.10.1017/ehs.2022.23

587 
Iyer, R., Koleva, S., Graham, J., Ditto, P., & Haidt, J. (2012). Understanding libertarian  
morality: The psychological dispositions of self-identiﬁed libertarians. PloS ONE, 
7(8), e42366. 
Jablonka, E., & Lamb, M. J. (2014). Evolution in four dimensions, revised edition:  
Genetic, epigenetic, behavioral, and symbolic variation in the history of life . MIT 
press. 
Janssen, L. K., Sescousse, G., Hashemi, M. M., Timmer, M. H., ter Huurne, N. P., Geurts, D.  
E., & Cools, R. (2015). Abnormal modulation of reward versus punishment  
learning by a dopamine D2-receptor antagonist in pathological gamblers.  
Psychopharmacology, 232 (18), 3345–3353. 
Jensen-Doss, A., Hawley, K. M., Lopez, M., & Osterberg, L. D. (2009). Using evidence-
based treatments: The experiences of youth providers working under a mandate. 
Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 40 , 417–424. 
Jeschke, J. M., Gabriel, W., & Kokko, H. (2008). r-Strategist/K-Strategists. In Encyclopedia 
of Ecology  (pp. 3113–3122). Elsevier. 
John, O. P., Naumann, L. P., & Soto, C. J. (2008). Paradigm shift to the integrative big five 
trait taxonomy: History, measurement, and conceptual issues. In O. P. John, R. 
W. Robbins & L. A. Pervin (Eds.), Handbook of personality: Theory and research  
(pp.114-158). Guilford Press. 
Johnstone, L. & Boyle, M. with Cromby, J., Dillon, J., Harper, D., Kinderman, P., Longden, 
E., Pilgrim, D., & Read, J. (2018). The Power Threat Meaning Framework: 
Towards the identiﬁcation of patterns in emotional distress, unusual experiences

588 
and troubled or  troubling behaviour, as an alternative to functional psychiatric 
diagnosis. British Psychological Society. 
Joober, R., & Tabbane, K. (2019). From the neo-Kraepelinian framework to the new 
mechanical philosophy of psychiatry: regaining common sense. Journal of 
psychiatry & neuroscience: JPN, 44 (1), 3–7. 
Jost, J., Glaser, J., Kruglanski, A., & Sulloway, F. J. (2003). Political conservatism as  
motivated social cognition. Psychological bulletin, 129 , 3, 339-75. 
Jost, J. T., & Hunyady, O. (2002). The psychology of system justiﬁcation and the 
palliative function of ideology. European Review of Social Psychology, 13 , 111–
153. 
Junger, S. (2016). Tribe: on homecoming and belonging. HarperCollins Publishers. 
Kaniasty, K., & Norris, F. H. (1993). A test of the social support deterioration model in the 
context of natural disaster. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 64 (3), 
395–408. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.64.3.395  
Kasser, T. (2002). The high price of materialism. MIT Press. 
Kaufman, S. B., DeYoung, C. G., Gray, J. R., Jiménez, L., Brown, J., & Mackintosh, N.  
(2010). Implicit learning as an ability. Cognition, 116 (3), 321–340.  
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2010.05.011 
Kawa, S., & Giordano, J. (2012). A brief historicity of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual  
of Mental Disorders: Issues and implications for the future of psychiatric canon 
and practice. Philosophy, Ethics, and Humanities in Medicine, 7 (1), 2. 
Keeler, J. F., Pretsell, D. O., & Robbins, T. W. (2014). Functional implications of dopamine

589 
D1 vs. D2 receptors: A ‘prepare and select’ model of the striatal direct vs. indirect 
pathways. Neuroscience, 282 , 156–175. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroscience.2014.07.021 
Keller, J. (2005). In genes we trust: the biological component of psychological  
essentialism and its relationship to mechanisms of motivated social cognition.  
Journal of personality and social psychology, 88 (4), 686. 
Kessler, R. C., Berglund, P., Demler, O., Jin, R., Merikangas, K. R., & Walters, E. E. (2005).  
Lifetime prevalence and age-of-onset distributions of DSM-IV disorders in the 
National Comorbidity Survey Replication.  Archives of general psychiatry,  62(6), 
593-602. 
Kessler, R. C., McGonagle, K. A., Zhao, S., Nelson, C. B., Hughes, M., Eshleman, S.,  
Wittchen, H. U., & Kendler, K. S. (1994). Lifetime and 12-month prevalence of  
DSM-III-R psychiatric disorders in the United States. Results from the National  
Comorbidity Survey. Archives of general psychiatry,  51(1), 8–19.  
https://doi.org/10.1001/archpsyc.1994.03950010008002 
Kessler, R. C., & Merikangas, K. R. (2004). The national comorbidity survey replication  
(NCS-R): background and aims. International journal of methods in psychiatric 
research, 13(2), 60-68. 
Khoury, B., Langer, E. J., & Pagnini, F. (2014). The DSM: mindful science or mindless  
power? A critical review. Frontiers in Psychology, 5. 
Kidd, I. J., Medina, J., & Pohlhaus, G. M. (2017). The Routledge handbook of epistemic 
injustice. Routledge.

590 
Kiehl, K., (2017). The Psychopath Whisperer.  One World. 
Kikusui, T., Winslow, J. T., & Mori, Y. (2006). Social buﬀering: relief from stress and  
anxiety. Philosophical transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B,  
Biological sciences, 361 (1476), 2215–2228. 
Kilner, J. M., & Lemon, R. N. (2013). What we know currently about mirror neurons.  
Current biology: CB, 23 (23), R1057–R1062. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2013.10.051 
Kilpatrick, D. G., Resnick, H. S., Milanak, M. E., Miller, M. W., Keyes, K. M., & 
Friedman, M. J. (2013). National estimates of exposure to traumatic events 
and PTSD prevalence using DSM-IV and DSM-5 criteria. Journal of traumatic 
stress, 26(5), 537–547. https://doi.org/10.1002/jts.21848 
King, D. W., Taft, C., King, L. A., Hammond, C., & Stone, E. R. (2006). Directionality of the  
association between social support and Posttraumatic Stress Disorder: A 
longitudinal investigation 1. Journal of applied social psychology,  36(12), 2980-
2992. 
Kirkpatrick, L. A., & Ellis, B. J. (2001). An evolutionary-psychological approach to self- 
esteem: multiple domains and multiple functions. In G. J. O. Fletcher & M. S. Clark  
(Eds.), Blackwell handbook of social psychology: Interpersonal processes  (pp. 411-
436). Blackwell Publishers. 
Kirschner, M., & Gerhart, J. (1998). Evolvability. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences of the United States of America, 95 (15), 8420–8427. 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.95.15.8420

591 
Klinger, E. (1975). Consequences of commitment to and disengagement from incentives. 
Psychological Review, 82 (1), 1–25. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0076171 
Klinger, E. (1993). Loss of interest. In C. G. Costello (Ed.), Symptoms of Depression (p. 
4342). New York. 
Knight, E. L., & Mehta, P. H. (2017). Hierarchy stability moderates the eﬀect of status on 
stress and performance in humans. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 114 (1), 78–83. 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1609811114 
Kortmulder, K., & Robbers, Y. (2005). The agonic and hedonic styles of social behaviour.  
Edwin Mellen Press. 
Kosfeld, M., Heinrichs, M., Zak, P. J., Fischbacher, U., & Fehr, E. (2005). Oxytocin increases  
trust in humans. Nature, 435 (7042), 673–676. 
Krueger, R. F., Kotov, R., Watson, D., Forbes, M. K., Eaton, N. R., Ruggero, C. J., Simms, L.  
J., Widiger, T. A., Achenbach, T. M., Bach, B., Bagby, R. M., Bornovalova, M. A.,  
Carpenter, W. T., Chmielewski, M., Cicero, D. C., Clark, L. A., Conway, C.,  
DeClercq, B., DeYoung, C. G., … Zimmermann, J. (2018). Progress in achieving  
quantitative classification of psychopathology. World Psychiatry: Official Journal  
of the World Psychiatric Association  (WPA), 17 (3), 282–293.  
https://doi.org/10.1002/wps.20566 
Kudlow, P. (2013). The perils of diagnostic inﬂation. CMAJ : Canadian Medical Association 
journal = journal de l'Association medicale canadienne, 185 (1), E25–E26. 
https://doi.org/10.1503/cmaj.109-4371

592 
Kuhlman, T., & Farrington, J. (2010). What is Sustainability? Sustainability, 2 (11), 3436– 
3448. https://doi.org/10.3390/su2113436 
Kuhn, T. S. (1996). The structure of scientiﬁc revolutions. University of Chicago Press. 
Kukreja, S., Kalra, G., Shah, N., & Shrivastava, A. (2013). Polypharmacy in psychiatry: a  
review. Mens sana monographs, 11 (1), 82–99. 
Laland, K., Matthews, B., & Feldman, M. W. (2016). An introduction to niche construction  
theory. Evolutionary Ecology, 30 (2), 191–202. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10682-016-9821-z 
Laland, K. N., Uller, T., Feldman, M. W., Sterelny, K., Müller, G. B., Moczek, A., Jablonka,  
E., & Odling-Smee, J. (2015). The extended evolutionary synthesis: its structure,  
assumptions and predictions. Proceedings. Biological sciences, 282 (1813),  
20151019. https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2015.1019 
Larkings, J. S., & Brown, P. M. (2018). Do biogenetic causal beliefs reduce mental illness  
stigma in people with mental illness and in mental health professionals? A 
systematic review. International Journal of Mental Health Nursing , 27, 928–941. 
Larsen, M., Witoszek, N., & Yeung, J. C. (2023). A multilevel selection model for prosocial  
well-being. Frontiers in psychology, 14 , 1068119. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1068119 
Larsen, S. E., & Berenbaum, H. (2018). Did the DSM-5 improve the traumatic stressor 
criterion?: Association of DSM-IV and DSM-5 criterion a with posttraumatic 
stress disorder symptoms. Psychopathology , 50(6), 373-378. 
Larsen, S. E., & Pacella, M. L. (2016). Comparing the effect of DSM-congruent traumas

593 
vs. DSM-incongruent stressors on PTSD symptoms: A meta-analytic review. 
Journal of  Anxiety Disorders , 38, 37–46. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.janxdis.2016.01.001 
Lavin, C., Melis, C., Mikulan, E., Gelormini, C., Huepe, D., & Ibañez, A. (2013). The 
anterior cingulate cortex: an integrative hub for human socially-driven 
interactions. Frontiers in Neuroscience,  7, 64. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2013.00064 
Leahy, R. L. (1997) An investment model of depressive resistance. Journal of Cognitive 
Psychotherapy: An International Quarterly, 11 , 3-19. 
Leahy, R. L. (2000). Sunk costs and resistance to change. Journal of Cognitive  
Psychotherapy: An International Quarterly, 14 , 355-371 
Leary, M. R. (1999). Making sense of self-esteem. Current Directions in Psychological 
Science, 8(1), 32–35. https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-8721.00008 
Leary, M. R. (2004). The sociometer, self-esteem, and the regulation of interpersonal  
Behavior. In R. F. Baumeister & K. D. Vohs (Eds.), Handbook of Self-Regulation. 
Guilford. 
Leary, M. R., & Baumeister, R. F. (2000). The nature and function of self-esteem:  
Sociometer theory. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology , 32, 1–62. 
Leary, M. R., & Downs, D. L. (1995). Interpersonal functions of the self-esteem motive:  
The self-esteem system as a sociometer. In M. H. Kernis (Ed.), Efficacy, Agency, 
and Self-Esteem  (pp. 123-144). Plenum Press. 
Lebowitz, M. S., & Appelbaum, P. S. (2019). Biomedical Explanations of Psychopathology

594 
and Their Implications for Attitudes and Beliefs About Mental Disorders. Annual 
review of clinical psychology , 15, 555–577. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-
clinpsy-050718-095416 
Lee, H. Y., Jamieson, J. P., Reis, H. T., Beevers, C. G., Josephs, R. A., Mullarkey, M. C.,  
O’Brien, J. M., & Yeager, D. S. (2020). Getting Fewer “Likes” Than Others on 
Social Media Elicits Emotional Distress Among Victimized Adolescents. Child 
Development, 91 (6), 2141–2159. https://doi.org/10.1111/cdev.13422 
Lee, S., Jeong, J., Kwak, Y., & Park, S. K. (2010). Depression research: Where are we now?  
Mol Brain, 3 (8). 
Lehmann, M. L., & Herkenham, M. (2011). Environmental Enrichment Confers Stress  
Resiliency to Social Defeat through an Infralimbic Cortex-Dependent 
Neuroanatomical Pathway. The Journal of Neuroscience, 31 , 6159–6173. 
Lesch, K.-P., Bengel, D., Heils, A., Sabol, S. Z., Greenberg, B. D., Petri, S., Benjamin, J.,  
Muller, C. R., Hamer, D. H., & Murphy, D. L. (1996). Association of Anxiety-Related  
Traits with a Polymorphism in the Serotonin Transporter Gene Regulatory Region.  
Science, 274 (5292), 1527–1531. 
Levenson, J. C., Wallace, M. L., Anderson, B. P., Kupfer, D. J., & Frank, E. (2015). Social 
rhythm disrupting events increase the risk of recurrence among individuals with 
bipolar disorder. Bipolar Disorders, 17 (8), 869–879. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/bdi.12351 
Lewis, K. R. (2020). Autism is an identity, not a disease: Inside the neurodiversity  
movement . https://elemental.medium.com/autism-is-an-identity-not-a-disease-

595 
inside-the-neurodiv ersity-movement-998ecc0584cd 
Li, S., Demenescu, L. R., Sweeney-Reed, C. M., Krause, A. L., Metzger, C. D., & Walter, M.  
(2017). Novelty seeking and reward dependence-related large-scale brain 
networks functional connectivity variation during salience expectancy. Human 
brain mapping, 38 (8), 4064–4077. https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.23648 
Lincoln, Y., & Guba, E. G. (1985). Naturalistic inquiry . Sage. 
Lo, M.-T., Hinds, D. A., Tung, J. Y., Franz, C., Fan, C.-C., Wang, Y., Smeland, O. B., Schork,  
A., Holland, D., Kauppi, K., Sanyal, N., Escott-Price, V., Smith, D. J., O’Donovan, 
M., Stefansson, H., Bjornsdottir, G., Thorgeirsson, T. E., Stefansson, K., McEvoy, L. 
K., Dale, A. M., … Chen, C.-H. (2017). Genome-wide analyses for personality traits 
identify six genomic loci and show correlations with psychiatric disorders. Nature 
Genetics, 49 (1), 152–156. https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.3736 
Locke, J. L., & Bogin, B. (2006). Language and life history: A new perspective on the  
development and evolution of human language. Behavioral and Brain Sciences,  
29(3), 259–325. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X0600906X 
Lonsdorf, T. B., Weike, A. I., Nikamo, P., Schalling, M., Hamm, A. O., & Öhman, A. (2009). 
Genetic Gating of Human Fear Learning and Extinction. Psychological Science, 
20(2), 198–206. 
Loughman, A., & Haslam, N. (2018). Neuroscientiﬁc explanations and the stigma of  
Mental disorder: a meta-analytic study. Cognitive Research: Principles and  
Implications, 3 (1). https://doi.org/10.1186/s41235-018-0136-1 
Luberti, F. R., Blake, K. R., & Brooks, R. C. (2022). Changes in positive aﬀect due to

596 
popularity in an experimental dating context inﬂuence some of men’s, but not 
women’s, Socio-political attitudes. Adaptive Human Behavior and Physiology, 
8(2), 202–237. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40750-022-00188-6 
Luhrmann, T. M. (2007). Social defeat and the culture of chronicity: or, why schizophrenia  
does so well over there and so badly here. Culture, Medicine and Psychiatry, 
31(2), 135–172. 
Ma, Y., Liu, Y., Rand, D. G., Heatherton, T. F., & Han, S. (2015). Opposing Oxytocin Eﬀects  
on Intergroup Cooperative Behavior in Intuitive and Reﬂective Minds. 
Neuropsychopharmacology, 40 (10), 2379–2387. 
MacDuﬃe, K. E., & Strauman, T. J. (2017a). Do beliefs about biology matter for mental  
health? Society of Clinical Psychology Division 12 of the APA.  
https://div12.org/do-beliefs-about-biology-matter-for-mental-health/ 
MacDuﬃe, K. E., & Strauman, T. J. (2017b). Understanding Our Own Biology: The  
Relevance of Auto-Biological Attributions for Mental Health. Clinical  
Psychology: Science and Practice, 24(1), 50–68.  
https://doi.org/10.1111/cpsp.12188 
MacNamara, J. (2018). Content analysis. In P.M. Napoli (Ed.), Mediated communication   
(pp. 191-212). De Gruyter Mouton. https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110481129-01 
Mahadevan, N., Gregg, A. P., Sedikides, C., & de Waal-Andrews, W. G. (2016). Winners,  
Losers, Insiders, and Outsiders: Comparing Hierometer and Sociometer Theories  
of Self-Regard. Frontiers in Psychology, 7. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00334

597 
Maines, R. P. (2001). The technology of orgasm: “Hysteria,” the vibrator, and women’s 
sexual satisfaction. Johns Hopkins University Press. 
Malkovsky, E., Merriﬁeld, C., Goldberg, Y., & Danckert, J. (2012). Exploring the  
relationship between boredom and sustained attention. Experimental Brain 
Research, 221 (1), 59–67. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-012-3147-z 
Manning, K. J., & Steﬀens, D. C. (2016). Systems Neuroscience in Late-Life Depression. In 
Systems Neuroscience in Depression (pp. 325–340). Elsevier. 
Marazziti, D., & Dell’Osso, M. (2008). The Role of Oxytocin in Neuropsychiatric Disorders. 
Current Medicinal Chemistry, 15 (7), 698–704. 
https://doi.org/10.2174/092986708783885291 
Markram, K., & Markram, H. (2010). The intense world theory - a unifying theory of the  
neurobiology of autism. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience,  4, 224.  
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2010.00224 
Marmot, M. (2006). Status Syndrome. Jama, 296 (4), 391. 
Marmot, M. (2015). Status syndrome: How your place on the social gradient directly 
aﬀects your health. Bloomsbury Publishing PLC. 
Marmot, M., & Sapolsky, R. M. (2014). Of Baboons and Men: Social Circumstances,  
Biology, and the Social Gradient in Health. 
Marmot, M. G., Shipley, M. J., & Rose, G. (1984). Inequalities in Death—Speciﬁc  
Explanations of a General Pattern? The Lancet, 323 (8384), 1003–1006. 
Marmot, M. G., Smith, G. D., Stansfeld, S., Patel, C., North, F., Head, J., White, I.,  
Brunner, E., & Feeney, A. (1991). Health inequalities among British civil servants:

598 
the Whitehall II study. Lancet (London, England), 337(8754), 1387–1393.  
https://doi.org/10.1016/0140-6736(91)93068-k 
Marshall, S. A., Evans, S. W., Eiraldi, R. B., Becker, S. P., & Power, T. J. (2014). Social and  
academic impairment in youth with ADHD, predominantly inattentive type and 
sluggish cognitive tempo. Journal of abnormal child psychology, 42 (1), 77–90. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10802-013-9758-4 
Martinez, M. (2016). The mindbody code: how to change the beliefs that limit your 
health, longevity, and success. Sounds True. 
Mayr, E. (1974). Teleological and teleonomic: A new analysis. Boston Studies in the 
Philosophy of Science , 14, 133–159. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-009-5345-
1_10 
Mayseless, N., Uzefovsky, F., Shalev, I., Ebstein, R. P., & Shamay-Tsoory, S. G. (2013). The  
association between creativity and 7R polymorphism in the dopamine receptor 
D4 gene (DRD4). Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 7. 
Mazur, A., & Booth, A. (1998). Testosterone and dominance in men. Behavioral and Brain 
Sciences, 21 (3), 353-363. 
McCrae, R. (1996). Social consequences of experiential openness. Psychological bulletin, 
120(3), 323-37. 
McDonough, M., & Marks, I. M. M. (2002). Teaching medical students exposure therapy  
for phobia/panic—Randomized, controlled comparison of face-to-face tutorial in 
small groups vs. solo computer instruction. Medical Education, 36 , 412–417. 
McGuire, M. T., Raleigh, M. J., & Johnson, C. (1983). Social dominance in adult male

599 
vervet monkeys: Behavior-biochemical relationships. Social Science Information,  
22(2), 311–328. 
McGuire-Snieckus, R. (2014). Hope, optimism and delusion. The Psychiatric Bulletin, 
38(2), 49–51. 
Meadows, J. (2020, August 12). You’re Using the Word “Neurodiversity” Wrong.  
Medium. https://jessemeadows.medium.com/youre-using-the-word- 
neurodiversity-wrong-e579ﬀa816a8 
Mehta, M. A., Golembo, N. I., Nosarti, C., Colvert, E., Mota, A., Williams, S. C. R., Rutter,  
M., & Sonuga-Barke, E. J. S. (2009). Amygdala, hippocampal and corpus callosum  
size following severe early institutional deprivation: The English and Romanian  
Adoptees Study Pilot. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry,  50(8), 943–951.  
https://doi.org/10.1111/J.1469-7610.2009.02084.X 
Mehta, S., & Farina, A. (1997). Is being "sick" really better? Eﬀect of the disease view of  
mental disorder on stigma. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 16 (4), 405–
419. https://doi.org/10.1521/jscp.1997.16.4.405 
Menon, V. (2015) Salience Network. In A. W. Toga (Ed.), Brain Mapping: An  
Encyclopedic Reference (Vol. 2, pp. 597-611). Academic Press: Elsevier.  
Milioni, A. L. V., Chaim, T. M., Cavallet, M., de Oliveira, N. M., Annes, M., Dos Santos, B., 
Louzã, M., da Silva, M. A., Miguel, C. S., Serpa, M. H., Zanetti, M. V., Busatto, G., 
& Cunha, P. J. (2017). High IQ may “mask” the diagnosis of ADHD by 
compensating for deficits in executive functions in treatment-naïve adults with 
ADHD. Journal of Attention Disorders , 21(6), 455–464.

600 
https://doi.org/10.1177/1087054714554933 
Miller, W. R., & Mount, K. A. (2001). A small study of training in motivational 
interviewing: Does one workshop change clinician and client behavior? 
Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 29 , 457–471. 
Mills, B. D., Miranda-Dominguez, O., Mills, K. L., Earl, E., Cordova, M., Painter, J.,  
Karalunas, S. L., Nigg, J. T., & Fair, D. A. (2018). ADHD and attentional control:  
Impaired segregation of task positive and task negative brain networks. Network  
Neuroscience (Cambridge, Mass.), 2(2), 200–217.  
https://doi.org/10.1162/netn_a_00034  
Mirowsky, J., & Ross, C. E. (1983). Paranoia and the structure of powerlessness. American 
Sociology Review, 48 (2), 228-239. 
Moncrieﬀ, J., Cooper, R. E., Stockmann, T., Amendola, S., Hengartner, M. P., & Horowitz,  
M. A. (2022). The serotonin theory of depression: a systematic umbrella review of  
the evidence. Molecular Psychiatry. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41380-022-01661- 
0 
Montiglio, P. O., Ferrari, C., & Réale, D. (2013). Social niche specialization under  
constraints: personality, social interactions and environmental heterogeneity. 
Philosophical transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological 
sciences, 368(1618), 20120343. 
Mottron, L., Dawson, M., Soulières, I., Hubert, B., & Burack, J. (2006). Enhanced  
perceptual functioning in autism: an update, and eight principles of autistic 
perception. Journal of  Autism and Developmental Disorders, 36 (1), 27–43.

601 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-005-0040-7 
Morgenstern, J., & McCrady, B. S. (1992). Curative factors in alcohol and drug treatment:  
Behavioral and disease model perspectives. British Journal of Addiction, 87 , 901– 
912. 
Morgenstern, J., Morgan, T. J., McCrady, B. S., Keller, D. S., & Carroll, K. M. (2001). 
Manual-guided cognitive-behavioral therapy training: A promising method for 
disseminating empirically supported substance abuse treatments to the practice 
community. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 15 , 83–88. 
Moyers, T. B., & Miller, W. R. (1993). Therapists’ conceptualizations of alcoholism:  
Measurement and implications for treatment decisions. Psychology of Addictive  
Behaviors, 7 , 238–245. 
Mrazek, A. J., Chiao, J. Y., Blizinsky, K. D., Lun, J., & Gelfand, M. J. (2013). The role of  
culture–gene coevolution in morality judgment: examining the interplay 
between tightness–looseness and allelic variation of the serotonin transporter 
gene. Culture and Brain, 1 (2–4), 100–117. 
Munafò, M. R., Clark, T., & Flint, J. (2004). Does measurement instrument moderate the  
association between the serotonin transporter gene and anxiety-related 
personality traits? A meta-analysis. Molecular Psychiatry, 10 (4), 415–419. 
Muncke, J. (2021). Tackling the toxics in plastics packaging. PLoS biology, 19 (3),  
e3000961.  
Muthukrishna, M., Doebeli, M., Chudek, M., & Henrich, J. (2018). The Cultural Brain  
Hypothesis: How culture drives brain expansion, sociality, and life history. PLoS

602 
Computational Biology, 14(11), e1006504.  
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006504 
Nair, A., Jolliffe, M., Lograsso, Y. S. S., & Bearden, C. E. (2020). A review of default mode  
network connectivity and its association with social cognition in adolescents with 
autism spectrum disorder and early-onset psychosis. Frontiers in Psychiatry,  11, 
614. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyt.2020.00614 
Natsheh, J. Y., & Shiﬂett, M. W. (2018). Dopaminergic modulation of goal-directed  
behavior in a rodent model of attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder. Frontiers 
in Integrative Neuroscience, 12 . https://doi.org/10.3389/fnint.2018.00045 
Nelson, C. A., III, Bos, K., Gunnar, M. R., & Sonuga-Barke, E. J. (2011). The Neurobiological 
Toll of Early Human Deprivation. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child 
Development , 76(4), 127–146. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-
5834.2011.00630.x 
Nesse, R. M. (2000). Is depression an adaptation?. Archives of general psychiatry, 57 (1),  
14–20. 
Nesse, R. M. (2018). Tinbergen’s four questions. Evolution, Medicine, and Public Health,  
2019(1), 2–2. https://doi.org/10.1093/emph/eoy035 
Nesse, R. M. (2020). Good reasons for bad feelings: Insights from the frontier of 
evolutionary psychiatry. Penguin Books. 
Nesse, R., & Williams, G. (1996). Why we get sick. Vintage Books. 
Neuendorf, K. A. (2017). The Content Analysis Guidebook.  SAGE Publications. 
Nigg, J. T. (2016). Attention and impulsivity. In D. Cicchetti (Ed.), Developmental

603 
psychopathology: Maladaptation and psychopathology (3rd ed., pp. 591–646). 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc. https://doi.org/10.1002/9781119125556.devpsy314 
Nigg, J. T., & Barkley, R. A. (2014). Attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder. In E. J. Mash &  
R. A. Barkley (Eds.), Child psychopathology  (pp. 75–144). The Guilford Press. 
Nisbett, R. E. (1993). Violence and U.S. regional culture. American Psychologist, 48 (4),  
441–449. https://doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.48.4.441 
Noakes, T. D. (2007). The central governor model of exercise regulation applied to the  
marathon. Sports medicine, 37 , 374-377. 
Oh, H. (2015). Social Defeat and Psychotic Experiences in the United States: Findings from 
the Collaborative Psychiatric Epidemiological Surveys [Unpublished doctoral 
dissertation]. Columbia University. 
Olazagasti, M. A., Klein, R. G., Mannuzza, S., Belsky, E. R., Hutchison, J. A., Lashua- 
Shriftman, E. C., & Castellanos, F. X. (2013). Does childhood attention- 
deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder predict risk-taking and medical illnesses in  
adulthood? Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 
52(2), 153–162.e4. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaac.2012.11.012 
Oliveira, T., Gouveia, M., & Oliveira, R. (2009). Testosterone responsiveness to winning  
and losing experiences in female soccer players. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 
34(7), 1056-1064. 
Oller, D. K. (2019). Evolutionary-developmental modeling of neurodiversity and 
psychopathology. The Behavioral and brain sciences, 42 , e19. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X18001103

604 
Olson, K. R. (2005). Engagement and Self-Control: Superordinate dimensions of Big Five  
traits. Personality and Individual Diﬀerences , 38(7), 1689–1700. 
Olsson, K. A. R. E. N. (2007). Her autistic brothers. The New York Times Magazine , 42. 
Ortega, F. (2009). The cerebral subject and the challenge of neurodiversity. BioSocieties,   
4(4), 425-445. 
Oyserman, D., Coon, H. M., & Kemmelmeier, M. (2002). Rethinking Individualism and  
Collectivism: Evaluation of Theoretical Assumptions and Meta-Analyses. 
Psychological Bulletin, 128 (1), 3-72. 
Patten, S. B. (1991). Are the Brown and Harris "vulnerability factors" risk factors for 
depression? Journal of Psychiatry & Neuroscience, 16 (5), 267–271. 
Patton, M. Q. (2002).  Qualitative research and evaluation methods  (3rd ed.). Sage 
Publications. 
Perroud, N., Hasler, R., Golay, N., Zimmermann, J., Prada, P., Nicastro, R., Aubry, J. M.,  
Ardu, S., Herrmann, F. R., Giannakopoulos, P., & Baud, P. (2016). Personality 
proﬁles in adults with attention deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). BMC 
psychiatry, 16 , 199. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12888-016-0906-6 
Pickersgill, M. D. (2014). Debating DSM-5: diagnosis and the sociology of critique. Journal  
of medical ethics, 40 (8), 521–525. https://doi.org/10.1136/medethics-2013-
101762 
Pink, D. H. (2018). Drive: The surprising truth about what motivates us.  Canongate  
Books. 
Pinker, S. (2010). The cognitive niche: Coevolution of intelligence, sociality, and language.

605 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 
107(supplement_2), 8993–8999. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0914630107 
Pluess, M., & Belsky, J. (2009). Differential susceptibility to rearing experience: the case  
of childcare. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, and Allied Disciplines , 
50(4), 396–404. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-7610.2008.01992.x 
Pluess, M., & Belsky, J. (2010). Differential susceptibility to parenting and quality child  
care. Developmental Psychology,  46(2), 379–390. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0015203 
Plutynski, A. (2023). Four Ways of Going “Right” Functions in Mental Disorder.  
Philosophy, Psychiatry, & Psychology , 30(2), 181-191. 
https://doi.org/10.1353/ppp.2023.a899950. 
Pollan, M. (2008). In defense of food: An eater’s manifesto . Penguin Press. 
Poulton, A. (2015). Therapy for ADHD directed towards addressing the dual imbalances 
in mental eﬀort and reward as illustrated in the mental eﬀort-reward imbalances 
model (MERIM). In ADHD - New Directions in Diagnosis and Treatment. InTech. 
Power, M. (1986). The foraging adaptation of chimpanzees and the recent behaviour of  
the provisioned apes in Gombe and Mahale National Parks, Tanzania. Human  
Evolution, 1 , 251–266. 
Preiser, R., Biggs, R., De Vos, A., & Folke, C. (2018). Social-ecological systems as complex  
adaptive systems: organizing principles for advancing research methods and 
approaches. Ecology and Society, 23 (4). https://www.jstor.org/stable/26796889 
Price, D. (2021). Laziness Does Not Exist.  Atria Books.

606 
Price, D. (2022). Unmasking autism: Discovering the new faces of neurodiversity .  
Harmony Books. 
Price, J. S. (1992). The agonic and hedonic modes: Deﬁnition, usage, and the promotion  
of mental health. World Futures, 35 (1–3), 87–113. 
Price, J. S., & Sloman, L. (1987). Depression as yielding behavior: An animal model 
based on Schjelderup-Ebbe’s pecking order. Ethology and Sociobiology, 8 , 85-98. 
Price, J. S., & Stevens, A. (1998). The human male socialization strategy set. Evolution 
and Human Behavior: Oﬃcial Journal of the Human Behavior and Evolution 
Society, 19(1), 57–70. https://doi.org/10.1016/s1090-5138(97)00105-0 
Price, J., & Stevens, A. (1999). An evolutionary approach to psychiatric disorders: group  
splitting and schizophrenia. In  D. Rosen & M. Luebbert (Eds.),  The Evolution of 
the Psyche (pp. 196-207). Greenwood Publishing Group. 
Price, M. E. (2023). Teilhard’s teleology: his greatest spiritual strength, and greatest  
scientiﬁc weakness. Religion, Brain & Behavior, 1–3. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/2153599x.2022.2143408 
Priscott, T., & Allen, R. A. (2021). Human capital neurodiversity: an examination of 
stereotype threat anticipation. Employee Relations: The International Journal, 
43(5), 1067–1082. https://doi.org/10.1108/er-06-2020-0304 
Putnam, R. (2001). Bowling alone: The collapse and revival of American community. 
Simon & Schuster. 
Puts, D. A. (2010). Beauty and the beast: mechanisms of sexual selection in humans. 
Evolution and Human Behavior: Oﬃcial Journal of the Human Behavior and

607 
Evolution Society, 31 (3), 157–175. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2010.02.005 
Quilty, L. C., DeYoung, C. G., Oakman, J. M., & Bagby, R. M. (2013). Extraversion and  
Behavioral Activation: Integrating the Components of Approach. Journal of 
Personality Assessment, 96 (1), 87–94. 
Quinn, P. O., & Madhoo, M. (2014). A review of attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder  
in women and girls: uncovering this hidden diagnosis. The primary care 
companion for CNS disorders, 16 (3), PCC.13r01596. 
https://doi.org/10.4088/PCC.13r01596 
Rabinovitz, B. B., O’Neill, S., Rajendran, K., & Halperin, J. M. (2016). Temperament  
executive control, and attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder across early 
development. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 125 , 196-206. 
Radcliﬀ, B. (2013). The Political Economy of Human Happiness. Cambridge University  
Press.  
Radkiewicz, P., & Skarżyńska, K. (2021). Who are the "social Darwinists'? On 
dispositional determinants of perceiving the social world as competitive jungle. 
PLoS ONE,  16(8), e0254434. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0254434 
Raleigh, M. J., McGuire, M. T., Brammer, G. L., Pollack, D. B., & Yuwiler, A. (1991).  
Serotonergic mechanisms promote dominance acquisition in adult male vervet 
monkeys. Brain research, 559 (2), 181–190. https://doi.org/10.1016/0006-
8993(91)90001-c 
Raleigh, M. J., McGuire, M. T., Brammer, G. L. & Yuwiler, A. (1984). Social and

608 
environmental inﬂuences on blood 5-HT concentrations in monkeys. Archives of  
General Psychiatry, 41 , 405–410. 
Ratnayake, S. (2022, March). CBT May Be Mistaken About Mental Illness. Psychology 
Today. Retrieved April 20, 2022, from https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/ 
blog/what-therapy- is-and-isnt/20203/cbt-may-be-mistaken-about-mental-illness 
Ratts, M. J. (2009). Social Justice Counseling: Toward the Development of a Fifth Force  
Among Counseling Paradigms. The Journal of Humanistic Counseling, Education  
and Development, 48(2), 160–172. 
Raymaker, D. M., Teo, A. R., Steckler, N. A., Lentz, B., Scharer, M., Delos Santos, A.,  
Kapp, S. K., Hunter, M., Joyce, A., & Nicolaidis, C. (2020). “Having All of Your  
Internal Resources Exhausted Beyond Measure and Being Left with No Clean-Up  
Crew”: Defining Autistic Burnout. Autism in Adulthood, 2 (2), 132–143.  
https://doi.org/10.1089/aut.2019.0079 
Réale, D., Garant, D., Humphries, M. M., Bergeron, P., Careau, V., & Montiglio, P.-O.  
(2010). Personality and the emergence of the pace-of-life syndrome concept at 
the population level. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B , 
365(1560), 4051–4063. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2010.0208 
Richerson, P., Baldini, R., Bell, A. V., Demps, K., Frost, K., Hillis, V., Mathew, S., Newton, E.  
K., Naar, N., Newson, L., Ross, C., Smaldino, P. E., Waring, T. M., & Zeﬀerman, M. 
(2014). Cultural group selection plays an essential role in explaining human 
cooperation: A sketch of the evidence. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 39 . 
https://doi.org/10.1017/s0140525x1400106x

609 
Richerson, P. J., & Boyd, R. (2008). Not by genes alone: How culture transformed human  
evolution. University of Chicago Press. 
Robbins, P., & Shields, K. (2014). Explaining ideology: Two factors are better than one. 
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 37 (03), 326–328.  
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X13002719 
Roberts, A., Palermo, R., & Visser, T. A. W. (2019). Effects of dominance and prestige  
based social status on competition for attentional resources. Scientific  
Reports, 9(1), 2473. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-39223-0 
Robertson, S. M. (2009). Neurodiversity, quality of life, and autistic adults: Shifting  
research and professional focuses onto real-life challenges. Disability Studies  
Quarterly, 30(1). 
Robins, E., & Guze, S. B. (1970). Establishment of diagnostic validity in psychiatric  
illness: Its application to schizophrenia. The American Journal of Psychiatry,  
126(7), 983–986. https://doi.org/10.1176/ajp.126.7.983 
Robinson, A., Bonnette, A., Howard, K., Ceballos, N., Dailey, S., Lu, Y., & Grimes, T.  
(2019). Social comparisons, social media addiction, and social interaction: An 
examination of speciﬁc social media behaviors related to major depressive 
disorder in a millennial population. Journal of Applied Biobehavioral Research, 
24(1), e12158. 
Rocca, E., & Anjum, R. L. (2020) Complexity, Reductionism and the Biomedical Model. In: 
Anjum, R., Copeland, S., & Rocca, E. (eds) Rethinking Causality, Complexity and 
Evidence for the Unique Patient. Springer, Cham.

610 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-41239-5_5 
Rose, D. (2023, August). Diana Rose on Mad Knowledges and Epistemic Collisions.  
Psychiatry at the Margins.  https://awaisaftab.substack.com/p/mixed-bag-21-
diana-rose-on-mad-knowledges?utm_source=proﬁle&utm_medium=reader2 
Rose, N. (2007). Beyond medicalisation. Lancet, 369 (9562), 700–702.  
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(07)60319-5 
Rosenberg, M. B. (1999). Nonviolent Communication: A Language of Compassion.  
PuddleDancer Press. 
Rosenwasser, P. (2002). Exploring internalized oppression and healing strategies. New  
Directions for Adult and Continuing Education,  2002(94), 53–62.  
 https://doi.org/10.1002/ace.59 
Rüsch, N., Todd, A. R., Bodenhausen, G. V., & Corrigan, P. W. (2010a). Biogenetic models  
of psychopathology, implicit guilt, and mental illness stigma. Psychiatry research, 
179(3), 328–332. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psychres.2009.09.010 
Rüsch, N., Todd, A. R., Bodenhausen, G. V., & Corrigan, P. W. (2010b). Do people with  
mental illness deserve what they get? Links between meritocratic worldviews 
and implicit versus explicit stigma. European archives of psychiatry and clinical 
neuroscience, 260 (8), 617–625. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00406-010-0111-4 
Salamone, J. D., & Correa, M. (2012). The Mysterious Motivational Functions of  
Mesolimbic Dopamine. Neuron, 76(3), 470–485. 
Sanati, A., & Kyratsous, M. (2015). Epistemic injustice in assessment of delusions. Journal 
of Evaluation in Clinical Practice , 21, 479–485.

611 
Sapolsky, R. M. (1989). Hypercortisolism among socially subordinate wild baboons  
originates at the CNS level. Archives of General Psychiatry, 46 , 1047–1051. 
Sapolsky, R. M. (1993). The physiology of dominance in stable versus unstable social  
hierarchies. In W. A. Mason & S. P. Mendoza (Eds.), Primate social conﬂict (pp. 
171–204). State University of New York Press. 
Sapolsky, R. M. (1994). Why zebras don't get ulcers: A guide to stress, stress related 
diseases, and coping. W.H. Freeman. 
Sapolsky, R. M. (2004). Social Status and Health in Humans and Other Animals. Annual 
Review of Anthropology, 33 (1), 393–418. 
Sapolsky, R. M. (2017). Behave: The Biology of Humans at Our Best and Worst. Penguin  
Press. 
Sapolsky, R. M., Uno, H., Rebert, C. S., & Finch, C. E. (1990). Hippocampal damage 
associated with prolonged glucocorticoid exposure in primates. The Journal of 
neuroscience: the oﬃcial journal of the Society for Neuroscience, 10 (9), 2897–
2902. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.10-09-02897.1990 
Sarver, D. E., McCart, M. R., Sheidow, A. J., & Letourneau, E. J. (2014). ADHD and risky 
sexual behavior in adolescents: conduct problems and substance use as 
mediators of risk. Journal of child psychology and psychiatry, and allied 
disciplines, 55 (12), 1345–1353. https://doi.org/10.1111/jcpp.12249 
Saucier, G., Thalmayer, A. G., Payne, D. L., Carlson, R., Sanogo, L., Ole-Kotikash, L.,  
Church, A. T., Katigbak, M. S., Somer, O., Szarota, P., Szirmák, Z., & Zhou, X.  
(2013). A Basic Bivariate Structure of Personality Attributes Evident Across Nine

612 
Languages. Journal of Personality , 82(1), 1–14. 
Savitz, J. B., & Ramesar, R. S. (2004). Genetic variants implicated in personality: a review 
of the more promising candidates. American journal of medical genetics. Part B, 
Neuropsychiatric genetics: the oﬃcial publication of the International Society of 
Psychiatric Genetics, 131B (1), 20–32. 
Schäfer, T., & Kraneburg, T. (2015). The kind nature behind the unsocial semblance:  
ADHD and justice sensitivity-A pilot study. Journal of Attention Disorders, 19 (8), 
715–727. https://doi.org/10.1177/1087054712466914 
Schnall, S., Harber, K. D., Stefanucci, J. K., & Proffitt, D. R. (2008). Social support and the  
perception of geographical slant. Journal of experimental social psychology,  
44(5), 1246-1255. 
Schreiber, D., Fonzo, G., Simmons, A. N., Dawes, C. T., Flagan, T., Fowler, J. H., & Paulus,  
M. P. (2013). Red Brain, Blue Brain: Evaluative Processes Diﬀer in Democrats and  
Republicans. PLoS ONE, 8 (2), e52970.  
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0052970  
Schultz, W. (2016). Dopamine reward prediction error coding. Dialogues in clinical 
neuroscience, 18 (1), 23–32. https://doi.org/10.31887/DCNS.2016.18.1/wschultz  
Scull, A. (2015). Madness in civilization: A cultural history of insanity, from the Bible to  
Freud, from the madhouse to modern medicine. Princeton University Press. 
Segal, N. L., & Hur, Y.-M. (2022). Personality traits, mental abilities and other individual  
diﬀerences: Monozygotic female twins raised apart in South Korea and the United 
States. Personality and Individual Diﬀerences, 194 (111643), 111643.

613 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.paid.2022.111643 
Seligman, M. E. P. (1972). Learned helplessness. Annual Review of Medicine, 23 (1), 407– 
412. 
Selten, J., & Cantor-Graae, E. (2005). Social defeat: Risk factor for schizophrenia? British 
Journal of Psychiatry, 187 (02), 101-102. 
Sen, S., Burmeister, M., & Ghosh, D. (2004). Meta-analysis of the association between a  
serotonin transporter promoter polymorphism (5-HTTLPR) and anxiety-related 
personality traits. American Journal of Medical Genetics, 127B (1), 85–89. 
Sethi, A., Voon, V., Critchley, H. D., Cercignani, M., & Harrison, N. A. (2018). A  
neurocomputational account of reward and novelty processing and eﬀects of 
psychostimulants in attention deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder. Brain: a journal of 
neurology, 141 (5), 1545–1557. https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/awy048 
Settle, J. E., Dawes, C. T., Christakis, N. A., & Fowler, J. H. (2010). Friendships Moderate  
an Association Between a Dopamine Gene Variant and Political Ideology. The 
journal of politics, 72 (4), 1189–1198. 
Shackman, A. J., Tromp, D. P. M., Stockbridge, M. D., Kaplan, C. M., Tillman, R. M., &  
Fox, A. S. (2016). Dispositional negativity: An integrative psychological and  
neurobiological perspective. Psychological Bulletin, 142 (12), 1275–1314.  
https://doi.org/10.1037/bul0000073 
Sharma, A., Madaan, V., & Petty, F. D. (2006). Exercise for mental health. Primary care 
companion to the Journal of clinical psychiatry, 8 (2), 106. 
Sharot, T., Guitart-Masip, M., Korn, C. W., Chowdhury, R., & Dolan, R. J. (2012). How

614 
dopamine enhances an optimism bias in humans. Current biology: CB, 22 (16), 
1477–1481. 
Shedler, J. (2018). Where Is the Evidence for "Evidence-Based" Therapy? The Psychiatric 
clinics of North America, 41 (2), 319–329. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psc.2018.02.001 
Sherdell, L., Waugh, C. E., & Gotlib, I. H. (2012). Anticipatory pleasure predicts motivation  
for reward in major depression. Journal of abnormal psychology, 121 (1), 51–60. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0024945 
Shirayama, Y., Matsumoto, K., Hamatani, S., Muneoka, K., Okada, A., & Sato, K. (2022). 
Associations among autistic traits, cognitive and aﬀective empathy, and 
personality traits in adults with autism spectrum disorder and no intellectual 
disability. Scientiﬁc Reports , 12(1), 3125. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-
07101-x 
Sholomskas, D. E., Syracuse-Siewart, G., Rounsaville, B. J., Ball, S. A., Nuro, K. F., & Carroll,  
K. M. (2005). We don’t train in vain: A dissemination trial of three strategies of 
training clinicians in cognitive-behavioral therapy. Journal of Consulting and 
Clinical Psychology , 73, 106–115. 
Sholomskas, D. E., & Carroll, K. M. (2006). One small step for manuals: Computer-assisted  
training in twelve-step facilitation. Journal of Studies on Alcohol , 67, 939–945. 
Shorter, E. (2015). The history of nosology and the rise of the Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual of Mental Disorders. Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience,  17(1), 59–67. 
Sih, A., & Del Giudice, M. (2012). Linking behavioural syndromes and cognition: a

615 
behavioural ecology perspective.  Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society 
of London B, 367 (1603), 2762–2772. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2012.0216 
Silberman, S. (2016). Neurotribes: The legacy of autism and the future of neurodiversity. 
Avery Publishing Group. 
Silberstein, R. B., Pipingas, A., Farrow, M., Levy, F., & Stough, C. K. (2016). Dopaminergic  
modulation of default mode network brain functional connectivity in attention 
deﬁcit hyperactivity disorder. Brain and behavior, 6 (12), e00582. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/brb3.582 
Sinclair, J. (1993). Don’t mourn for us. https://philosophy.ucsc.edu/SinclairDontMourn 
ForUs.pdf 
Singer, D. G., Golinkoﬀ, R. M., & Hirsh-Pasek, K. (Eds.). (2006). Play = learning: How play 
motivates and enhances children’s cognitive and social-emotional growth. Oxford 
University Press. 
Singer, J. (2017). Neurodiversity: The Birth of an Idea. Judy Singer. 
Singer, J. (2021). Neurodiversity: It's politics, not science! ...or... It's the name of a social  
justice movement, not a diagnosis . https://neurodiversity2.blogspot.com/2021/ 
02/neurodiversity-its-political-not.html 
Sinn, J. S., & Hayes, M. W. (2017). Replacing the moral foundations: An evolutionary- 
coalitional theory of liberal-conservative diﬀerences. Political Psychology, 38 (6), 
1043-1064. 
Slavich, G. M., & Cole, S. W. (2013). The emerging ﬁeld of human social genomics. Clinical 
Psychological Science, 1,  331–348. https://doi.org/10.1177/2167702613478594

616 
Smillie, L. D., Cooper, A. J., Proitsi, P., Powell, J. F., & Pickering, A. D. (2010). Variation in  
DRD2 dopamine gene predicts Extraverted personality. Neuroscience letters,  
468(3), 234–237. 
Smith, E. E. (2013). Meaning Is Healthier Than Happiness. The Atlantic.  
https://www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2013/08/meaning-is-healthier-than- 
happiness/278250/ 
Sober, E., & Wilson, D. S. (1998). Unto others: The evolution and psychology of 
unselﬁsh behavior (No. 218). Harvard University Press. 
Social Defeat. (2020, October 16). In Wikipedia .  
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social_defeat  
Sonuga-Barke, E. J., & Castellanos, F. X. (2007). Spontaneous attentional ﬂuctuations in 
impaired states and pathological conditions: a neurobiological hypothesis. 
Neuroscience and biobehavioral reviews, 31 (7), 977–986. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2007.02.005 
South, M., Chamberlain, P. D., Wigham, S., Newton, T., Le Couteur, A., McConachie, H.,  
Gray, L., Freeston, M., Parr, J., Kirwan, C. B., & Rodgers, J. (2014). Enhanced  
decision making and risk avoidance in high-functioning autism spectrum  
disorder. Neuropsychology,  28(2), 222–228.  
https://doi.org/10.1037/neu0000016 
Spivak, G. C. (1988). Can the subaltern speak? In C. Nelson & L. Grossberg (Eds.),  
Marxism and the interpretation of culture  (pp.271–313). University of Illinois 
Press.

617 
Spence, R., Kagan, L., & Bifulco, A. (2019). A contextual approach to trauma experience:  
Lessons from life events research. Psychological Medicine, 49 (9), 1409-1413. 
Spreng, R. N. (2012). The fallacy of a “task-negative” network. Frontiers in Psychology, 3 ,  
145. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00145 
Stamatakis, E., Ekelund, U., Ding, D., Hamer, M., Bauman, A. E., & Lee, I.-M. (2018). Is  
the time right for quantitative public health guidelines on sitting? A narrative  
review of sedentary behaviour research paradigms and ﬁndings. British Journal 
of Sports Medicine, 53 (6), 377–382. 
Stamps, J. A. (2007). Growth-mortality tradeoffs and “personality traits” in animals.  
Ecology Letters, 10 (5), 355–363. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1461- 
0248.2007.01034.x 
Stassen, H. H., Bachmann, S., Bridler, R., Cattapan, K., Herzig, D., Schneeberger, A., &  
Seifritz, E. (2022). Detailing the eﬀects of polypharmacy in psychiatry: longitudinal  
study of 320 patients hospitalized for depression or schizophrenia. European  
Archives of Psychiatry and Clinical Neuroscience , 272(4), 603–619. 
Stenning, A., & Bertilsdotter-Rosqvist, H. (2021). Neurodiversity studies: mapping out  
possibilities of a new critical paradigm. Disability & Society , 36(9), 1532–1537.  
https://doi.org/10.1080/09687599.2021.1919503 
Sterling, P., & Platt, M. L. (2022). Why Deaths of Despair Are Increasing in the US and Not  
Other Industrial Nations—Insights From Neuroscience and Anthropology. JAMA 
Psychiatry, 79 (4), 368–374. https://doi.org/10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2021.4209 
Stevens, A., & Price J. (2000) Evolutionary Psychiatry: A New Beginning (2nd ed.).

618 
Routledge. 
Stumpf, R. E., Higa-McMillan, C. K., & Chorpita, B. J. (2009). Implementation of evidence- 
based services for youth: Assessing provider knowledge. Behavior Modiﬁcation,  
33, 48–65. 
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. (2020, May 5). Recovery 
and Recovery Support. SAMSHA. https://www.samhsa.gov/ﬁnd-help/recovery 
Sugiyama, L. S., & Sugiyama, M. S. (2003). Social roles, prestige, and health risk: Social  
niche specialization as a risk-buﬀering strategy. Human Nature, 14 , 165-190. 
Surís, A., Holliday, R., & North, C. (2016). The Evolution of the Classification of  
Psychiatric Disorders. Behavioral Sciences , 6(1), 5.  
https://doi.org/10.3390/bs6010005 
Szathmáry, E., & Smith, J. M. (1995). The major evolutionary transitions. Nature,  
374(6519), 227–232. https://doi.org/10.1038/374227a0 
Tamm, L., Garner, A. A., Loren, R. E. A., Epstein, J. N., Vaughn, A. J., Ciesielski, H. A., &  
Becker, S. P. (2016). Slow sluggish cognitive tempo symptoms are associated with 
poorer academic performance in children with ADHD. Psychiatry research, 242 , 
251–259. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psychres.2016.05.054 
Taylor, H., Fernandes, B., & Wraight, S. (2022). The evolution of Complementary  
Cognition: Humans cooperatively adapt and evolve through a system of collective 
cognitive search. Cambridge Archaeological Journal, 32 (1), 61–77. 
Taylor, L. E., Swerdfeger, A. L., & Eslick, G. D. (2014). Vaccines are not associated with  
autism: An evidence-based meta-analysis of case-control and cohort studies.

619 
Vaccine, 32 (29), 3623–3629. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2014.04.085 
Taylor, P. J., Gooding, P., Wood, A. M., & Tarrier, N. (2011). The role of defeat and  
entrapment in depression, anxiety, and suicide. Psychological bulletin, 137 (3), 
391–420. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0022935 
Taylor, S. E., Klein, L. C., Lewis, B. P., Gruenewald, T. L., Gurung, R. A., & Updegraﬀ, J. A.  
(2000). Biobehavioral responses to stress in females: tend-and-befriend, not 
ﬁght-or-ﬂight. Psychological review, 107 (3), 411–429. 
Teherani, A., Martimianakis, T., Stenfors-Hayes, T., Wadhwa, A., & Varpio, L. (2015).  
Choosing a Qualitative Research Approach. Journal of graduate medical  
education, 7 (4), 669–670. https://doi.org/10.4300/JGME-D-15-00414.1 
Thierry, B. (2013). Identifying constraints in the evolution of primate societies. 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 368 (1618), 
20120342. 
Thompson, D. (2019). Workism Is Making Americans Miserable. The Atlantic. 
https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/2019/02/religion-workism-making-
american s-miserable/583441/ 
Thunberg, G. (2019). No one is too small to make a difference.  Penguin. 
Tinbergen, N. (1963). On aims and methods of ethology. Zeitschrift für tierpsychologie, 
20(4), 410-433. 
Tooby, J., & Cosmides, L. (1990). The past explains the present: Emotional adaptations  
and the structure of ancestral environments. Ethology & Sociobiology , 11(4-5), 
375–424. https://doi.org/10.1016/0162-3095(90)90017-Z

620 
Tooby, J., & Cosmides, L. (1996). Friendship and the banker's paradox: Other pathways to  
The evolution of adaptations for altruism. In W. G. Runciman, J. M. Smith, & R. I.  
M. Dunbar (Eds.), Evolution of social behaviour patterns in primates and man  
(pp. 119–143). Oxford University Press. 
Tooby, J., & Cosmides, L. (2008). The evolutionary psychology of the emotions and their 
relationship to internal regulatory variables. In M. Lewis, J. M. Haviland-Jones, & 
L. F. Barrett (Eds.), Handbook of emotions  (3rd ed., pp. 114–137). The Guilford 
Press. 
Tooby J., & DeVore, I. (1987). The reconstruction of hominid behavioral evolution 
through strategic modeling. In W. Kinzey (Ed.), Primate Models of Hominid 
Behavior. SUNY Press. 
Traynor, B. J., & Singleton, A. B. (2010). Nature versus nurture: death of a dogma, and the  
road ahead. Neuron, 68 (2), 196–200. 
Trower, P., & Gilbert, P. (1989). New theoretical conceptions of social anxiety and social  
phobia. Clinical Psychology Review , 9(1), 19–35. 
Tyrer, P. (2018). The Importance of Nidotherapy and Environmental Change in the 
Management of People with Complex Mental Disorders. International Journal of 
Environmental Research and Public Health, 15 (5), 972. 
Uddén, J., Folia, V., & Petersson, K. M. (2010). The neuropharmacology of implicit  
learning. Current neuropharmacology, 8(4), 367–381.  
https://doi.org/10.2174/157015910793358178 
VanDaalen, R. (2021). Development and Validation of Neurodiversity Attitudes Scale

621 
(Publication No. 28415258) [Doctoral dissertation, Arizona State University] 
ProQuest Dissertations & Theses Global: The Sciences and Engineering Collection.  
https://www.proquest.com/dissertations-theses/development-validation-
neurodiversity-attitudes/docview/2532059766/se-2?accountid=26166 
van der Linden, D., Tops, M., & Bakker, A. B. (2021). The neuroscience of the flow state:  
Involvement of the locus coeruleus norepinephrine system. Frontiers in 
Psychology , 12. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2021.645498 
Van Dijk, F. E., Mostert, J., Glennon, J., Onnink, M., Dammers, J., Vasquez, A. A., Kan, C.,  
Verkes, R. J., Hoogman, M., Franke, B., & Buitelaar, J. K. (2017). Five factor model 
personality traits relate to adult attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder but not to 
their distinct neurocognitive proﬁles. Psychiatry research, 258 , 255–261. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psychres.2017.08.037 
Vasileiou, K., Barnett, J., Thorpe, S., & Young, T. (2018). Characterising and justifying  
sample size suﬃciency in interview-based studies: systematic analysis of  
qualitative health research over a 15-year period. BMC Medical Research 
Methodology, 18 (1), 148. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12874-018-0594-7 
Vidal, C. (2023). Reintroducing the direction of evolution. Religion, Brain & Behavior, 1–4. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/2153599x.2022.2143405 
Waal, F. D. (2007). Chimpanzee politics: power and sex among apes. Johns Hopkins 
University Press. 
Wagner, G. P., & Draghi, J. (2010). Evolution of Evolvability. In Evolution, the Extended  
Synthesis  (pp. 379–400). The MIT Press.

622 
Wakefield, J. C. (1992). Disorder as harmful dysfunction: A conceptual critique of DSM- 
III-R's definition of mental disorder.  Psychological Review,  99(2), 232–247.  
https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.99.2.232 
Wakeﬁeld, J. C. (2016). Diagnostic issues and controversies in DSM-5: Return of the false  
positives problem. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 12 (1), 105–132. 
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-clinpsy-032814-112800 
Walker, N. (2012). Throw away the master’s tools: Liberating ourselves from the 
pathology paradigm. In Loud hands: Autistic people, speaking  (pp. 225–237). The 
Autistic Press. 
Wampold, B. E., & Imel, Z. E. (2015). The great psychotherapy debate: The evidence for 
what makes psychotherapy work (2nd ed.). Routledge/Taylor & Francis Group. 
Warrender, D., & Milne, R. (2020). How use of social media and social comparison aﬀect  
mental health. Nursing Times [online] , 116(3), 56-59. 
Watanabe, N., & Yamamoto, M. (2015). Neural mechanisms of social dominance. 
Frontiers in neuroscience, 9,  154. 
Weathers, F. W., & Keane, T. M. (2007). The Criterion A problem revisited: Controversies  
and challenges in deﬁning and measuring psychological trauma. Journal of 
traumatic stress, 20 (2), 107-121. 
Weber, R. P. (1990). Basic content analysis. Sage. 
Weis, R., & Speridakos, E. C. (2011). A Meta-Analysis of hope enhancement strategies in 
clinical and community settings. Psychology of Well-Being: Theory, Research and 
Practice, 1 (1), 5.

623 
West, S. A., Fisher, R. M., Gardner, A., & Kiers, E. T. (2015). Major evolutionary 
transitions in individuality. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of 
the United States of America,  112(33), 10112–10119. 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1421402112 
Wheaton, B. (1985). Models for the stress-buﬀering functions of coping resources. Journal 
of health and social behavior, 352-364. 
Whitehouse, H. (2018). Dying for the group: Towards a general theory of extreme self- 
sacriﬁce. Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 41, E192.  
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X18000249  
Wilkerson, I. (2020). Caste: The origins of our discontents. Random House.  
Wilkinson, R. G., & Pickett, K. (2011). The Spirit Level: Why Greater Equality Makes  
Societies Stronger. Bloomsbury Press. 
Williams, J., & Taylor, E. (2006). The evolution of hyperactivity, impulsivity and cognitive 
diversity. Journal of The Royal Society Interface, 3 (8), 399-413. 
Williams, M. T., Metzger, I. W., Leins, C., & DeLapp, C. (2018). Assessing racial trauma  
within a DSM–5 framework: The UConn Racial/Ethnic Stress & Trauma Survey. 
Practice Innovations, 3 (4), 242–260. https://doi.org/10.1037/pri0000076 
Wilson, D. S. (1997). Altruism and organism: disentangling the themes of multilevel 
selection theory. The American Naturalist,  150 Suppl 1 (S1), S122-34.  
https://doi.org/10.1086/286053 
Wilson, D. S. (2002). Darwin's cathedral: evolution, religion, and the nature of society. 
University of Chicago Press.

624 
Wilson, D. S. (2008). Evolution for everyone: How Darwin’s theory can change the way we 
think about our lives. Delta Trade Paperbacks. 
Wilson, D. S. (2019). This view of life: Completing the Darwinian revolution.  
Pantheon Books. 
Wilson, D. S. (2023). Reintroducing Pierre Teilhard de Chardin to modern evolutionary 
science. Religion, Brain & Behavior, 1–15. 
Wilson, D. S., & Hayes, S. C. (2018). Evolution and contextual behavioral science an 
integrated framework for understanding, predicting, and inﬂuencing human 
behavior. Context Press. 
Wilson, D. S., Madhavan, G., Gelfand, M. J., Hayes, S. C., Atkins, P. W. B., & Colwell, R. R. 
(2023). Multilevel cultural evolution: From new theory to practical applications. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 
120(16). https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.221822212 
Wilson, D. S., & Sober, E. (1989). Reviving the superorganism. Journal of theoretical  
Biology, 136 (3), 337-356. 
Wilson, D. S., & Sober, E. (1994). Reintroducing group selection to the human behavioral 
sciences. Behavioral and brain sciences, 17 (4), 585-608. 
Wilson, D., & Wilson, E. (2007). Rethinking the Theoretical Foundation of Sociobiology. 
The Quarterly Review of Biology, 82 , 327-348. 
Wilson, E. O. (1998). Consilience: The unity of knowledge. Knopf. 
Wilson, M., & Daly, M. (1985). Competitiveness, risk taking, and violence: The young  
male syndrome. Ethology & Sociobiology, 6 (1), 59–73.

625 
https://doi.org/10.1016/0162-3095(85)90041-X 
Wise, R. (2004). Dopamine, learning and motivation. Nature Reviews Neuroscience , 5, 
483–494. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn1406 
Wolf, M., Van Doorn, G. S., & Weissing, F. J. (2008). Evolutionary emergence of 
responsive and unresponsive personalities. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences, 105 (41), 15825-15830. 
Wright, R. (1994). The moral animal: The new science of evolutionary psychology. 
Pantheon Books. 
Wright, R. (2000). NonZero: The logic of human destiny. Pantheon Books.  
Wright, R. (2009). The evolution of god. Little, Brown & Company. 
Wright, R. (2017). Why Buddhism is true: the science and philosophy of meditation and 
enlightenment. Simon & Schuster. 
Zadow, A. J., Dollard, M. F., Dormann, C., & Landsbergis, P. (2021). Predicting new major  
depression symptoms from long working hours, psychosocial safety climate and 
work engagement: a population-based cohort study. BMJ Open , 11(6), e044133. 
https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2020-044133 
Zak, P. J. (2012). The Moral Molecule: The Source of Love and Prosperity. Dutton.  
Zak P. J., Stanton, A. A., & Ahmadi, S. (2007) Oxytocin Increases Generosity in Humans.  
PLoS ONE, 2 (11), e1128. 
Zalla, T., & Sperduti, M. (2013). The amygdala and the relevance detection theory of  
autism: an evolutionary perspective. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience,  7, 894.  
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2013.00894

626 
Zhang, J., Paksarian, D., Lamers, F., Hickie, I. B., He, J., & Merikangas, K. R. (2017). Sleep  
Patterns and Mental Health Correlates in US Adolescents. The Journal of  
Pediatrics, 182 , 137–143. 
Zink, C. F., Tong, Y., Chen, Q., Bassett, D. S., Stein, J. L., & Meyer-Lindenberg, A. (2008). 
Know Your Place: Neural Processing of Social Hierarchy in Humans. Neuron, 58 (2), 
273–283.

627 
List of Tables 
Table 1  
Personality traits and their cybernetic functions. 
Trait Cybernetic function  
Metatraits  
Stability Protection of goals, interpretations, and strategies from disruption from impulses 
Plasticity Exploration: creation of new goals, interpretations, and strategies 
Big Five  
Extraversion Behavioral exploration; engagement with speciﬁc rewards (i.e. goals to approach) 
Neuroticism Defensive responses to uncertainty, threat, and punishment. 
Openness Cognitive exploration and engagement with information. 
Conscientiousness  Protection of non-immediate or abstract goals and strategies from disruption. 
Agreeableness Altruism and cooperation; coordinates goals, interpretations, and strategies 
Note. Adapted from "Cybernetic Big Five Theory" by C.G. DeYoung, 2015, Journal of Research in 
Personality, 56, 33–58. Copyright 2014 by Elsevier

628 
Table 2 
Psychological routes to conservatism and liberalism 
Negativity bias → security motivation → opposition to social change → social conservatism 
Low empathic concern → power motivation → comfort w/ inequality → economic conservatism 
Weak negativity bias → weak security motivation → comfort w/ social change → social liberalism 
Empathic concern → weak power motivation → opposition to inequality → economic liberalism 
Note. Adapted from "Explaining ideology: Two factors are better than one" by P. Robbins, & K. Shields, 
2014, Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 37(03), 326–328. Copyright 2014 by Academia.edu

629 
Table 3 
ADHD & ASD as functionally opposing poles in the cognitive  niches 
Note. Evidence (and speculations) of frames that suggest ADHD and ASD as complimentary poles across 
the cognitive niches characterized broadly by diﬀerences in DMN activation, aﬀect, scope and function of 
thought 
  
ASD 
●Aberrant precision (Del Giudice, 2018) 
●Present (low hyperpriors; Del Giudice, 2018) 
●Negativity bias (Del Giudice, 2018) 
●Mechanistic thinking (Del Giudice, 2018) 
●Systematizers (Baron-Cohen, 2013) 
●Analytical reductionism (Del Giudice, 2018) 
●Hypoactive DMN (de Lacy et al., 2017) 
●Autism risk (Del Giudice, 2018) 
●Back-brained (perceptual; Armstrong, 2010) 
●Specialism (restricted interests) 
●Change perception, data 
ADHD 
Aberrant salience (Hilder et al., 2020) 
Big-picture, past-future (Carrol, 2020) 
Optimism bias (Dimitriu, 2020) 
Mentalizing (Del Giudice, 2018) 
Empathizers (Baron-Cohen, 2003) 
Holistic thought (Carrol, 2016) 
Hyperactive DMN (Silberstein, 2016) 
Psychopathy risk (Del Giudice, 2018) 
Front-brained (narrative, self & other) 
Generalism (multi-interest) 
Change frames, ideas

630 
Table 4 
Age, Gender, Ethnicity & Neurodiversity status: pre- and post-workshop respondents 
ID Age Sex Gender Race Ethnicity Neurodiverse  
A 33 Female Woman White Don't 
identify w/ 
ethnicities ADHD 
B 49 Non-binary / 
trans (AFAB) Non-binary 
/ trans White Irish/Scottish  
/Dutch ADHD 
C 38 Female woman White Polish-Ameri 
can No 
D 79 Heterosexual  Male Caucasian Jewish No 
E 32 Male Male White Jewish Yes 
Note. Results for all respondents, i.e. those who completed both the pre- and post-workshop questionnaire

631 
Table 5 
Age, Gender, Ethnicity & Neurodiversity status: pre-workshop respondents 
ID Age Sex Gender Race Ethnicity Neurodiverse  
Z1 34 Female She/her White Hispanic No 
Z2 54 Female White White Non-Hispanic  No 
Z3 46 Female White White Macedonian, 
Irish Autistic, 
ADHD 
Z4 25 Female White White Caucasian ADHD 
Note. Results for the respondents who completed the pre-workshop questionnaire only

632 
Table 6 
Degree, Profession, Years of Experience and Theoretical Orientation: pre- and post-workshop questionnaire 
ID Degree Profession Certiﬁcations Years Licensed Theory 
A Master’s LCSW No 4 years Relational, 
Psychodynamic, 
Trauma- 
Informed 
B Master’s LCSW Sensorimotor 
Psychotherapy 
- Level 1, 
Emotionally 
Focused 
Therapy for 
Couples 
(completed 
externship 
and 2nd level) 8 years 
licensed, 19 
years with an 
MSW (didn't 
get fully 
licensed 
because I 
didn't need it 
to run housing 
programs for 
homeless 
youth) Sensorimotor 
Psychotherapy, 
Anti- 
Oppression, 
Feminist/Queer 
Theory 
C Master’s LCSW CYT 2017 Trauma- 
Informed, 
ACT, DBT 
D PhD (ABD) LCPC NBCC, CCMHC 27 years Attachment, 
EFT, CBT 
E Master’s LCSW No Fully licensed 
1.5 years, 5 
total Relational, 
Attachment- 
Based 
Note. Results for all respondents, i.e. those who completed both the pre- and post-workshop questionnaire

633 
Table 7 
Degree, Profession, Years of Experience and Theoretical Orientation: pre-workshop questionnaire 
ID Degree Profession Certiﬁcations Years Licensed Theory 
Z1 Doctorate PsyD, LPC Health 
Service 
Psychologist, 
NCC LPC (7 years), 
PsyD (<1 year) Humanistic, 
Relational 
Z2 MS Psychology PsyD, LPC AADC 30 years CBT 
Z3 Master’s LCSW NA 4 years Sensorimotor, 
Psychodynamic 
Z4 Master’s LPC CTP 8 months Relational- 
Cultural, 
Trauma- 
Informed, 
Feminist 
Note. Results for the respondents who completed the pre-workshop questionnaire only

634 
List of Figures 
Figure 1 
Plotting meta-traits as opposing poles 
Note. Adapted with modiﬁcations from "Cybernetic Big Five Theory” by C.G. DeYoung, 2015, Journal of 
Research in Personality, 56, 33–58. Copyright 2014 by Elsevier

635 
Figure 2 
Plotting life history strategies as a quadrant model 
 
Note. Adapted with modiﬁcations from “Evolutionary Psychopathology: A Uniﬁed Approach” by M. Del 
Giudice, 2018, Oxford University Press.

636 
Figure 3 
Autistic burnout conceptual model  
Note. From ““Having All of Your Internal Resources Exhausted Beyond Measure and Being Left with No 
Clean-Up Crew”: Deﬁning Autistic Burnout,” by D.M. Raymaker, A.R. Teo, N.A. Steckler, B. Lentz, M. 
Scharer, A. Delos Santos, S.K. Kapp, M. Hunter, A. Joyce, & C. Nicolaidis, 2020, Autism in Adulthood, 2 (2), 
132–143. CC-BY-NC-4.0 (http://creatvecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/)

637 
Figure 4 
Visualizing complimentary cognition as a social change process 
 
Note. Adapted with modiﬁcations from “The Evolution of Complementary Cognition: Humans 
Cooperatively Adapt and Evolve through a System of Collective Cognitive Search.” By H. Taylor, B. 
Fernandes, & S. Wraight, 2022, Cambridge Archaeological Journal, 32(1), 61-77. Copyright 2021 by 
Cambridge University Press.

638 
Figure 5 
Plotting the neurodiversity consilience as a quadrant  model

639 
Figure 6 
Revising the role of genes based on mediating variables: life strategies and biosocial niches

640 
Appendix A 
Letter of agreement/permission

641 
Appendix B1 
Call for Participants (email) 
Dear Prospective Participant,  
 
My name is Morgan Kinney. I am a Doctoral Candidate at Adler University in 
Chicago. I have developed a workshop to explore novel frames for de-stigmatizing and 
understanding neurodiverse individuals and their treatment by mental health 
practitioners, and I seek to study the impact of this model on mental health 
professionals. This study aims to assess the success of models that A) identify potential 
sources of stigma in how neurodiversity is currently framed, B) explore the roots of 
“normal” neurodiversity to ground a new vision of non-pathological understanding, and 
C) offer holistic treatments catering to strengths, challenges and niches for neurotypes 
facing social challenges in sometimes hostile social environments. The purpose of this 
study is to shift our lens on neurodiversity as a treatment in itself, as by helping to know 
communities in empowering, authentic ways, we help de-stigmatize mental health 
challenges that arise natural differences in ways of interacting with the world. Your 
participation in this project will help in these matters. In exchange for your participation 
in completing a brief questionnaire to provide feedback about the workshop, we can 
offer the workshop at no cost, including the continuing education units (CEUs) provided 
by Veduta Consulting (workshop host) necessary for professional development and 
licensure requirements.  
If you agree to assist in this project you will need to read and sign the consent 
form provided in your packet and fill out the two instruments included. Upon 
completion, forms will be collected and secured to protect confidentiality. If you have 
any further questions about this project you may contact me by mail, phone, or e-mail. 
The necessary contact information is provided below.  
 
Thanks for your consideration,  
 
 
Morgan Kinney, LCPC  
PhD Student  
Adler University  
(207)409-0183  
mkinney@adler.edu

642 
Appendix B2 
Recruitment Flyer 
Participants Needed  
 
Free workshop on neurodiversity and mental health  
with provided continuing education units (CEUs)  
 
You may be eligible if you:  are a mental health professional licensed in the field  
 
What you should expect:  
 Workshop developed by neurodiverse participant-researcher doctoral student 
on novel destigmatizing frames for understanding neurodiversity and treating 
neurodiverse individuals 
 A 7-question questionnaire about mental health and neurodiversity to be done 
before and after the completion of a workshop; CEUs contingent on receipt of 
questions. 
 Participation is completely voluntary and you may end participation at any time.  
 Your participation and information will be kept confidential. 
 
INTERESTED? INDIVIDUALS SHOULD CONTACT:  
Morgan Kinney ( mkinney@adler.edu ); Veduta Consulting 
(fgiordano@vedutaconsulting.com ) 
 
QUESTIONS? PLEASE CONTACT:  
Morgan Kinney ( mkinney@adler.edu ); Tsui-Yee Chow ( tchow@adler.edu ); or the Adler 
Institutional Review Board ( IRB@adler.edu )

643 
Appendix B3 
Permission to Recruit 
Dear Prospective Participant,  
 
My name is Morgan Kinney. I am a Doctoral Candidate at Adler University in 
Chicago. I have developed a workshop to explore novel frames for de-stigmatizing and 
understanding neurodiverse individuals and their treatment by mental health 
practitioners, and I seek to study the impact of this model on mental health 
professionals.  This study aims to assess the success of models that A) identify potential 
sources of stigma in how neurodiversity is currently framed, B) explore the roots of 
“normal” neurodiversity to ground a new vision of non-pathological understanding, and 
C) offer holistic treatments catering to strengths, challenges and niches for neurotypes 
facing social challenges in sometimes hostile social environments. The purpose of this 
study is to shift our lens on neurodiversity as a treatment in itself, as by helping to know 
communities in empowering, authentic ways, we help de-stigmatize mental health 
challenges that arise natural differences in ways of interacting with the world. More 
information can be facilitated by contacting the PI (information below).  
Your participation in this recruitment for this project will help in these matters. 
Participants will complete a questionnaire (7 questions) before and after the workshop 
to gauge attitudes, beliefs and reactions. We will be offering the workshop at no cost, 
and providing continuing education units (CEUs) necessary for professional 
development and licensure requirements.  
If you have any questions or would like more information, please see the contact 
information below or you may contact the Adler Institutional Review Board at 
IRB@adler.edu.  
Please send an email confirmation that provides permission to post the recruitment 
post.  
 
Please feel free to pass this study information to other people who might be willing to 
participate!  
 
Thank you in advance for your time and consideration.  
 
Morgan Kinney, LCPC  
PhD Student  
Adler University  
(207)409-0183  
mkinney@adler.edu

644 
Appendix C 
Consent Form  
 
Purpose of the Study  
This form is to provide consent for participation in a research project designed to 
explore novel perspectives to destigmatize neurodiversity and better understand 
relevant mental health issues and treatment. We would like to invite you to participate 
in this research project; participation is voluntary, and can be revoked at any time. Your 
participation will aid in clarifying the utility of destigmatizing models of neurodiversity 
and mental health treatment, as well as assess the practicality of potential tools.  
 
What to expect  
You must be over the age of 18 to participate in this study. If you choose to 
participate in the study you will be asked to fill out a short demographic form and fill out 
a pre-workshop questionnaire of seven open-ended questions prior to taking a 
workshop, and you will take the questionnaire again after the workshop. Your responses 
to these questionnaires will be submitted via an anonymous document sent to your 
email that will be forwarded to the primary investigator devoid of identifying 
information. Afterward, there may be a limited number of clarifying questions sent by 
email. At the end of the study, any select excerpts used in the dissertation will be sent 
back to the participant to ensure their agreement with the interpretation offered, a 
process called member checking  to ensure accuracy and trustworthiness in the analysis 
process. 
Please see the workshop flier for information on the workshop. As part of taking 
the workshop, there will be some activities including answering questions, discussions, 
and self-inventories typical of most workshops. The workshop is developed by Morgan 
Kinney, a staff member at Veduta Consulting and the primary investigator in the study. 
Veduta Consulting is partnering in the delivery of the workshop as part of its delivery of 
continuing education materials. It is important to note that no one but the primary 
investigator, including anyone at Veduta Consulting, will be privy to any data collected in 
this study at any time, including an assistant who will aid directly in the workshop and 
study only by helping to keep data secure and anonymous. All data will be transmitted 
through secure email and will be kept on a secure PC in the primary investigators home. 
No answers or participation in the study will affect the ability of workshop participants 
to receive continuing education units, nor will they impact any services one might 
receive from Veduta Consulting.  
 
Confidentiality and withdrawal from participation  
Questionnaire responses will be stored on a password-protected computer at 
the private investigators home and kept confidential until the conclusion of the study, 
approximately 1 year, and then destroyed. You have the option of matching these 
security precautions, or else accepting whatever degree of security you would like to 
maintain as sufficient to your standards. Portions of your answers may be excerpted as

645 
quotes in the dissertation itself to illustrate themes and findings, and as such, you have 
the option of not answering questions or redacting answers as you feel compelled. All 
quotes will be separated from identifying information and mixed with other de-
identified quotes to avoid attribution. We will engage in “member checking” after each 
section to reaffirm your comfort with the process, agreement with consent and 
willingness to proceed.  
 
Benefits 
 The study seeks to contribute to our understanding of neurodiversity, de-
stigmatizing mental health practices, and integrative research practices. 
 
Risk 
There is minimal risk involved for participation in this study, however, some 
participants may find some of the questions uncomfortable to answer (e.g. questions 
about your beliefs or experiences with neurodiversity and mental health).  
 
If you are willing to participate in this research project, please indicate your 
willingness to do so by signing this consent form in the space provided below. If you 
have further questions about the study you may contact Morgan Kinney as the primary 
investigator ( mkinney@adler.edu ), my dissertation chair Tsui-Yee Chow at 
(tchow@adler.edu ), or the Adler IRB ( irb@adler.edu ). 
 
Thank You, 
 
Morgan Kinney, LCPC 
PhD Student 
Adler University 
 
By signing this form, I indicate my willingness to participate in this research 
project. I understand that I may withdraw my participation at any time without 
consequence. 
 
Signature:_________________________________________________ 
Date:_______________

646 
Appendix E1 
Demographics questionnaire 
Morgan Kinney  
Adler University  
 
 
1. Name: 
 
 
2. Age: 
 
 
3. Identified sex: 
 
 
4. Ethnicity/race:  
 
 
5. Neurodiverse identification: 
 
 
6. Highest degree: 
 
 
7. Licensure: 
 
 
8. Certifications: 
 
 
9. Provisional or full license? 
 
 
10. How long have you been licensed: 
 
 
11. Primary theoretical orientation:

647 
Appendix E2 
Questionnaire 
Morgan Kinney  
Adler University  
 
Medical Model  
 
1) The neurodiversity movement is partially defined in resistance to the medical 
model of diagnosis and treatment - what is your relationship to the medical model as a 
frame for understanding people’s mental health troubles and their treatment?  
 
 2) In relation to the medical model, what is the risk of stigma, and how does it 
impact our understanding of mental health troubles and treatment?  
 
Neurodiversity  
 
3) What is neurodiversity in your view, and how have these views evolved?  
 
 4) What are your beliefs about the origin and nature of ADHD/ASD? I.e. what IS 
ADHD/ASD?  
 
Expectations/Reactions  
 
5) What do you hope to gain/did you gain from a neurodiversity workshop?  
 
6) What would be/was a barrier or constraint to understanding or using 
neurodiversity workshop information?  
 
7) How do you hope/see this knowledge impacts/ing how you move forward in 
your work/care of neurodiverse clients?

648 
Appendix F  
Member checking email  
Dear colleague, 
 
Thank you again for your participation in the workshop Neurodiversity and Epistemic 
Injustice and the related study. Your answers were thoughtful, impactful and helped to 
shape useful directions for further study. 
 
Attached is a transcript of your answers to both the pre- and post-workshop 
questionnaires for you to confirm your answers. This is part of a process called “member 
checking” where we hope to ensure the trustworthiness and credibility of the research 
by allowing you to confirm the clarity of the information provided. You are not required 
to do anything further with this transcript.  The point is to give you the opportunity to 
ensure the fidelity of your responses, and give you a chance to amend them if you see fit 
(please note: you do not need to be concerned about spelling, as it will be corrected in 
the report; grammar will likely be preserved, however, and can be changed if it 
improves the clarity of your meaning). 
 
For each of the 14 answers in your transcripts, below are three questions to guide how 
and why you might alter your responses: 
1. Do the transcribed responses match your intended sentiment? 
2. Do you want to change anything? 
3. Do you want to add anything? 
If you would like the opportunity to add or change something, please respond inline or 
below the original answer. Feel free to elaborate on why you thought the change is 
necessary. 
 
In select cases, one or two lines in your responses have been highlighted to invite any 
clarification of your intended meaning and a researcher note provides further 
information. This would be to remove some minor ambiguity or ensure accuracy of an 
interpretation; there are no wrong answers, and no answers need to be changed.  
 
Please keep in mind the point is to clarify the original intention, not to revise your 
perspective in hindsight. The goal is to ensure accuracy in the original messaging as 
conveyed, and less to update your views. This is to avoid giving some respondents the 
opportunity to add a second data collection point that not all respondents might take 
advantage of, which might complicate the interpretation of results. It will be up to the 
researcher’s discretion to make choices where this boundary might lay.      
 
If you make any changes, simply attach them to an email response and they will be 
returned to the researcher in their de-identified forms. You will have two weeks to

649 
complete any changes; if we do not hear from you by Friday, August 25th, 2023 we will 
assume you have decided not to alter your responses for the final report. 
 
Please refer back to the informed consent for any further questions about the study 
including subject protections, ethical considerations, points of contact and more.

650 
Appendix G 
IRB Approval Form

ProQuest Number:   
 
 
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS  
The quality and completeness of this reproduction is dependent on the quality  
and completeness of the copy made available to ProQuest.  
 
 
  
 
 
 
Distributed by  
ProQuest LLC  a part of Clarivate (          ). 
Copyright of the Dissertation is held by the Author unless otherwise noted.  
 
 
This work is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17,  
United States Code and other applicable copyright laws.  
 
 
This work may be used in accordance with the terms of the Creative Commons license  
or other rights statement , as indicated in the copyright statement or in the metadata  
associated with this work. Unless otherwise specified in the copyright statement  
or the metadata, all rights are reserved by the copyright holder.  
 
 
ProQuest LLC  
789 East Eisenhower Parkway  
Ann Arbor, MI 48108 USA 
31481933
2024