Area 
 (2008) 40.2, 208–217 
Area 
 Vol. 40 No. 2, pp. 208–217, 2008
ISSN 0004-0894 © The Authors.
Journal compilation © Royal Geographical Society (with The Institute of British Geographers) 2008 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd 
Using ‘the body’ as an ‘instrument of research’: 
kimch’i and pavlova 
Robyn Longhurst*, Elsie Ho** and Lynda Johnston* 
*Department of Geography, Tourism and Environmental Planning, University of Waikato,
Hamilton, Aotearoa New Zealand
Email: robynl@waikato.ac.nz
**Migration Research Group, University of Waikato, Hamilton, Aotearoa New Zealand
Revised manuscript received 18 December 2007 
Often researchers position themselves in relation to race, age and gender, but the body
is less often discussed as an actual ‘instrument of research’. We aim to extend thinkingon this point by reflecting on a project we conducted on migrant women and food inNew Zealand. We present a vignette as an example of how we used our bodies as‘instruments of research’ at a ‘shared lunch’ attended by new migrants from a range ofdifferent countries. At the lunch some combined on their plates spicy dishes such askimch’i (fermented vegetables) and sweet dishes such as pavlova (a meringue dessert).For others this combination prompted feelings of disgust. We conclude that the body isa primary tool through which all interactions and emotions filter in accessing researchsubjects and their geographies.  
Key words: 
New Zealand, food, migrants, disgust, bodies, embodied knowing 
Introduction 
In a progress report entitled ‘Qualitative methods:touchy, feely, look-see?’, Mike Crang questions ‘whethermethods often derided for being somehow soft and“touchy-feely” have in fact been rather limited intouching and feeling’ (2003, 494). Crang continuesthat although geographers have over the past fewyears begun to include ‘the body’ in their researchtopics ‘these ideas have had a muted impact interms of thinking through qualitative researchpractice’ (Crang 2003, 499). We agree with Crangthat in much qualitative research the bodies ofresearchers tend to become a kind of ‘ghostlyabsence’ (2003, 499). Researchers sometimes positionthemselves in relation to race, age, gender and soon, but other aspects of body–space relations suchas smells, tastes, gestures, reactions, clothing, glancesand touches often slip away unnoticed and/or
undocumented.There is now an enormous amount of critical
geographic scholarship on the body and the variousways in which bodies and spatiality are closelyentwined (Probyn 2003) and yet it has taken sometime for these arguments to extend into the realm ofmethods and methodology. Bodies are always located(Longhurst 2001; Nast and Pile 1998) and thisincludes in ‘the field’. Bodies are also always inter-pellated by a range of ideological practices and this
includes research practices. Researchers and participantsperform different embodied subjectivities (sometimescontradictory) in different spaces. Bodies producespace and knowledge, and space and knowledge
produce bodies. Being and knowing cannot be easily
separated. There is less of a distinction between ontologyand epistemology than might have earlier been assumed.
In this article we build on Crang’s ideas on qualitative
methods and the embodied subjectivities of both
researchers and participants (not that these arealways mutually exclusive categories) by reflecting

Using ‘the body’ as an ‘instrument of research’ 
209 
Area 
 Vol. 40 No. 2, pp. 208–217, 2008
ISSN 0004-0894 © The Authors.Journal compilation © Royal Geographical Society (with The Institute of British Geographers) 2008 
on a project on ‘migrant women and food’ in Hamilton,
Aotearoa New Zealand. We wanted to embark upona project that allowed us to think not just about‘cultural diversity’, but about ‘culturally embodieddifference’. We decided, therefore, to examine thelives of some migrant women through the lenses offood and eating. Focusing on food and eating (inboth a metaphoric and real sense) has enabled us tounderstand in more depth what it means to embodycultural difference, but it has also enabled us tounderstand in more depth the process of research.The aim of this article then is to probe what itmeans to use ‘the body’ as ‘an instrument ofresearch’ (Crang 2003) or as a tool to gain insightsinto research subjects and their geographies.
The article is divided into four sections. The first
section reviews recent geographical research onqualitative research method/ologies. It also points tothe importance of recent geographical research onemotions. Crang suggests that ‘Rethinking notions offeeling’ is a way of probing further the problematic‘issue of the dominance of certain forms of vision inthe discipline’ (2003, 494). The second section providessome background information on the research projecton migrant women and food. The project began in2006. We are currently ‘writing up’ research articles.
It aimed to use the subject of food to understandfurther the relationship between identity, place andpower relations for migrant women in Hamilton,New Zealand. Third, we focus on a specific researchencounter that illustrates how the researcher’s andparticipants’ bodies were used as ‘instruments ofresearch’. The encounter was a ‘shared lunch’ at amigrant resource centre with new migrants (men andwomen) who were attending a course that aimed toassist them to find employment. The article concludesthat geographers could benefit from paying moreexplicit attention to bodily performances whenundertaking research. Recognising all our senses – tactile,olfactory, taste, auditory and visual (see Rodaway1994) – has the potential to enrich understanding ofbody–space relationships. 
Method/ologies 
Over the past few years there has emerged a richarray of work on qualitative method/ologies commonlyused in geography. Authors have paid attentionto focus groups and group interviews (Cameron2000; Crang 2001; Longhurst 2003), autobiography
and authoethnography (Butz 2001; Moss 2001),
interviewing (Dunn 2000; England 2001), participantobservation (Dowler 2001; Kearns 2000), reading
texts (Forbes 2000) and working in different cultures(Smith 2003). Numerous edited books on researchmethod/ologies have been published, includingMelanie Limb and Claire Dwyer (2001)  
Qualitative
methodologies for geographers 
, Pamela Shurmer-Smith 
(2002)  
Doing cultural geography 
, Ian Hay (2000) 
Qualitative research methods in human geography 
, 
Nicholas Clifford and Gill Valentine (2003)  
Key methods
in geography 
 and Pamela Moss (2001)  
Placing
autobiography in geography 
 and (2002)  
Feminist
geography in practice 
. Some authored books such
as Keith Hoggart  
et al. 
 (2002)  
Researching human
geography 
 have also been published. Method/ology
is currently a ‘hot topic’ in the discipline (for areview of work on qualitative method/ologies seeCrang’s reports in  
Progress in Human Geography 
(2002 2003 2005) and Davies and Dwyer (2007)).
One could be tempted to think that there is little
left to say about generating and analysing qualitativedata and yet one important gap remains. There is
still relatively little information on using the body
as a tool in the research process. The work that has
been carried out on this topic, however, is usefuland worth reviewing.
Nearly a decade ago Heidi Nast drew on examples
from her ethnographic research in Kano, Nigeria torethink the notion of reflexivity arguing ‘In meta-
phorical and material terms . . . [it] is about allowingour bodies to become places which “field” difference’(1998, 94). Nast built on Cindi Katz’s (1994) ideathat the geographical ‘field’ is not a discretely boundedarea but rather defined through our research questions,through a politics of place, and through socio-spatialrelations. Nast argues that the field is not only‘potentially everywhere and nowhere’ but it is also 
‘every  
body 
’ (1998, 111; italics in original). Similarly,
in 2000 Felix Driver introduced a special issue on‘Field-work in geography’ explaining the field is‘produced in situ through a variety of embodiedspatial practices’ (2000, 267). Hayden Lorimer and
Nick Spedding (2002) encouraged contributors to aspecial issue on ‘Putting philosophies of geographyinto practice’ to include the seemingly mundanedetails about research. The issue aimed to examine‘aspects of disciplinary practice that tend to beportrayed as mundane or localised, but that representthe very routines of  
what we do 
’ (Lorimer and Spedding
2002, 227; italics in original). John-David Dewsbury
and Simon Naylor argue it is not easy to imagine
the field ‘without the performance of bodies andmaterialities to define its boundaries’ (2002, 256).

210 
Longhurst et al. 
Area 
 Vol. 40 No. 2, pp. 208–217, 2008
ISSN 0004-0894 © The Authors.
Journal compilation © Royal Geographical Society (with The Institute of British Geographers) 2008 
Several other geographers have also recognised
the importance of the body to the field and theresearch process. Reflecting on her first-ever day offield research, Hester Parr (2001) explains she feltnervous – her ‘stomach churned’. Similarly, BenMalbon (1999) in the preface to his book  
Clubbing 
,
describes carrying out participant observation invery embodied terms. He talks about a visit to TheTunnel Club in the summer of 1997 in London on aSaturday night and reports on what he wore, whathe drank, who he met, the music he listened anddanced to, the atmosphere at the Club as the nightprogressed and the journey home at 4.30 am. Ina similar vein, Philip Crang (1994) draws on hisembodied experiences of being a waiter at SmokyJoe’s restaurant in southeast England. More recentlyAlison Bain and Catherine Nash (2006) reflectedon what it means to embody research when theycarried out ethnographic work at a queer bathhouseevent in Toronto, Canada. They describe preparingtheir bodies to attend the bathhouse (decidingwhat to wear), positioning their bodies within thespaces of the bathhouse (deciding where to standor sit) and interacting through their bodies duringthe event.
Clearly we are not the first to think about the
ways in which bodies – comportment, eating, facialexpressions, speech acts – ‘matter’ in researchencounters. In addition to the geographers mentionedabove, many anthropologists have engaged withthis issue. A useful example can be seen in DonKulick and Margaret Willson’s (1995) edited collec-tion  
Taboo 
, which focuses on the ethnographer and
sexuality in anthropological fieldwork. There is,however, still plenty of scope for more sustainedreflection on the ways in which our own and others’bodily performances are written into projects. Thiscan be a challenging task. Eric Laurier and ChrisPhilo ask ‘Is the encounter at the heart of fieldworkultimately unspeakable?’ (2006, 353). Fully under-standing and representing ourselves as researchers,
the researched and the research context is difficult,maybe even impossible. However, Dewsbury andNaylor suggest that one way of getting at how bodies
are ‘agents that . . . negotiate the world’ (2002, 257)is to consider emotion – an area that is fast gainingattention in the discipline of geography.
Joyce Davidson and Christine Milligan (2004,
524) claim that geographers are starting to feel a
‘welling up’. This emerging interest in emotional
geographies has brought an increased recognitionthat bodies are lived and experienced throughemotions (Anderson and Smith 2001; Laurier and
Parr 2000). This work builds on the substantialcontributions of embodied geographies. This is perhapsnot surprising given that ‘our first and foremost,most immediate and intimately 
 
felt 
 geography is the
body, the site of emotional experience and expression 
par excellence 
’ (Davidson and Milligan 2004, 524;
italics in original). Emotions are not just tied to thebody, however; they are also bound up with widerstructures and processes (Bondi 2005; Thein 2005).The consideration of emotions seems crucial in anyattempt to understand how ‘lives are lived andsocieties made’ (Anderson and Smith 2001, 7). Differentplaces and bodies are imbued with different emo-tional and affective geographies (Tolia-Kelly 2006).To neglect feelings and emotions, therefore, is to
exclude key relations through which places and
bodies become meaningful. It is important to considerthe emotional processes of  
doing 
 research and of 
being 
 researchers. 
The project 
Food and eating (in both a metaphoric and real sense)are useful lenses through which to examine theimpacts of transnational migration (Ashley  
et al 
.
2004; Kershen 2002; Watson and Caldwell 2005).
After all, it is not just what we eat that makes us whowe are, it is also  
where 
 we eat (Bell and Valentine
1997; Cook and Harrison 2003 2007). Food can 
help people feel at home, it can prompt themto miss home, it can be a bridge to a new home andit can provoke racism (Narayan 1995; Oum 2005).The aim of our research was to use the subject offood to understand further the relationship betweenidentity, place and power relations for migrantwomen (including refugees, international students andtemporary workers).
The research aimed to help fill a gap in the
migration and feminist socio-cultural geographicalliterature by developing new knowledge about theexperiences of migrant women in New Zealand.Food in many cultures is important to women, sinceit is often women who are primarily responsible forpurchasing, preparing and cooking food for familieson a daily basis (Burns 2004). We focused mainlyon the meaning of food prepared and consumedat home (Kneafsey and Cox 2002; Law 2001). Theburgeoning of ethnic food purveyors and restaurantsis an important social and economic phenomenonin many countries, but in this research we wereinterested in the roles played by food in women’s

Using ‘the body’ as an ‘instrument of research’ 
211 
Area 
 Vol. 40 No. 2, pp. 208–217, 2008
ISSN 0004-0894 © The Authors.Journal compilation © Royal Geographical Society (with The Institute of British Geographers) 2008 
domestic lives and spaces (Salih 2003; Valentine
1999). It is these hidden, private geographies ofwomen and food that have, to this point, remainedlargely unexamined in New Zealand and yet it ismigrant women (and children and young people)who often have the greatest need for health, educationand social services. This article, however, focusesnot on the research ‘outcomes’, which are stillbeing prepared, but on the methodological processused in the project.
We thought long and hard about what kind of
method/ology would be most appropriate for thisproject. This research was informed by feminist,poststructuralist, geographical theory on ‘the body’and we wanted methods that sat comfortably withthis theoretical perspective. Finally we devised aresearch programme that involved in the first instanceseeking guidance from a range of ‘service providers’including Refugee Resettlement, and Home Tutors(who visit migrant women in their homes in orderto assist them with learning English). Next we set upvisits with 11 migrant women in their homes inHamilton in order to talk with them, and/or assistwith the preparation and cooking of food that issignificant to them in some way.
Hamilton is New Zealand’s fourth largest city and
has a population of approximately 130 000. The city’spopulation has been transformed over the past 10years, especially by immigration of new residentsfrom ‘non-traditional’ source countries such ascountries in Asia, Africa and the Middle East. In2006 Hamilton’s population was approximately 
made up of P 
a 
keh 
a 
 or European (65.3%), M 
a 
ori
(19.9%), Asian (10.6%), Pacific peoples (4.2%) andMiddle Eastern, Latin American and African (1.5%). 
1 
There are many ‘ethnic restaurants’ in the city,including Mexican, Thai, Chinese, Japanese, Indian,Middle Eastern and Italian. Participants in our studycame from a range of countries, including SouthAfrica, Singapore, Mexico, Korea, India, Iraq, Somalia,Japan, Indonesia, Thailand and Hong Kong. Theyranged in age from approximately mid-20s to 60s.Due to space constraints it is not possible to talkabout the method/ology of the project in its entiretyhere. Instead, we focus on just one experience thatin memory stood out as helping us to crystallisesome thoughts about using the body as an ‘instrumentof research’. The experience was a ‘shared lunch’with a group of approximately 15 new migrants
(the group included men) who were enrolled in a
course designed to help them find employment inNew Zealand. 
Sharing lunch: disgust and desire 
The lunch was held at the Waikato Migrant ResourceCentre (WMRC) in Hamilton, New Zealand. Onlyone of us (Robyn), accompanied by a researchassistant, was able to attend the lunch. Several stafffrom WMRC also ate with the group. Students, thetutor and staff from WMRC came from a range ofcountries including England, Iraq, Malaysia, theNetherlands, Vietnam, Korea, Taiwan, Malaysia,Russia, Madagascar and New Zealand. Robyn andresearch assistant Annika came from New Zealand 
(P 
a 
keh 
a 
 or white European) and Germany (white
European) respectively. Each of us took along a dishfrom our own country. On arrival our dishes weretaken by one of the students – a Korean woman –who placed them on a large oblong table. The tutor– a New Zealand woman of Dutch ancestry –advised the students that the dishes needed to bedivided into savoury and sweet. The Korean studentsseemed uncertain as to why this was the case butattempted to segregate the ‘mains’ and ‘desserts’.Dishes brought along to share at the lunch includedvarious rice and clear noodle dishes, boiled eggssoaked in tea, meat balls, spicy sheep stomach,kimch’i (Korean fermented seasonal vegetable dish),dumplings, and a moist bread dish amongst otherthings. There was also pavlova (meringue dessertnamed after the ballet dancer Anna Pavlova – bothNew Zealand and Australia claim the dessert astheir own), a German-style cake, brandy snaps filledwith cream, and cheesecake. Coke was availableand drunk from glass coffee mugs (as can be seenin Plate 1). Guests collected a crockery plate from astack of dinner plates that sat at one end of the tableand helped themselves to a buffet-style lunch. Someguests at lunch ate with chopsticks, others with aknife and fork.
The researcher (Robyn) placed a small amount of
food from each of the dishes on her plate. Somedishes such as noodles and dumplings were familiar,but others such as spicy sheep stomach were not.She was not keen to try the spicy sheep stomach,but felt somewhat obliged, given the nature of theresearch project, to move beyond her ‘food comfortzone’. She was aware that some of the diners werewatching her choose her food. After taking a littlebit of everything, Robyn sat down beside the tutor, aWMRC staff member, and across from several trainees.She noted that the tutor also had some spicy sheepstomach on her plate and asked her if she had tried
it yet. The tutor replied ‘oh, is that what that is? No,

212 
Longhurst et al. 
Area 
 Vol. 40 No. 2, pp. 208–217, 2008
ISSN 0004-0894 © The Authors.
Journal compilation © Royal Geographical Society (with The Institute of British Geographers) 2008 
I haven’t tried it and I don’t think I want to.’ She
then asked a trainee across from her if she wouldplease take it off her plate. The trainee obliged,putting it on her own plate. The tutor continued toeat her meal, praising many of the dishes for theirtastiness.
Robyn found most of the food on her plate to be
delicious, although a couple of the dishes were notto her liking. The kimch’i was ‘hotter’ than shewould usually eat, but it was ‘tolerable’. The sheepstomach was chewy and swallowing it made herfeel nauseous. When asked by a WMRC staff memberif she liked it, she said she liked the spicy taste butwas not accustomed to the texture. He replied thatthe dish was ‘tough’ and had not been cooked longenough. A completely honest answer to the WMRCstaff member’s question might have been ‘no and itmakes me feel sick’, but as a guest at the lunch thisresponse seemed inappropriate and rude. It felt likethere was a risk that such a blunt response mightbe interpreted as ‘no and you make me feel sick’, asthough there might be some unspoken and unexplainedslippage between the food and the people at thelunch who had bought along the food. Robyn, aftereach mouthful of sheep stomach, took a mouthful ofcoke. The taste and texture of the coke was familiarand helped quell the churning in her stomach andlump in her throat. She finished her small serving of
sheep stomach and then moved on to eating otherfoods that she found more appetising. Some peopleat the lunch did leave food on their plate, butRobyn felt that her plate was under scrutiny fromother diners. It seemed important to some of themigrants at the lunch that she liked the food.
At least half of the group at the lunch, especially
those from Asia, placed both savoury and sweetfood on their plates together. Others ate savouryfood first and then placed sweet food on the sameplate despite the fact that most plates contained theresidue from dishes such as sheep stomach andkimch’i. Robyn, Annika, the tutor and a couple ofother staff members from WMRC used a ‘clean’plate for dessert. For some, mainly but not entirelyfrom European countries, mixing savoury, non-sweetand spicy foods with dessert crossed a cultural lineengendering feelings of unease and disgust. It wasnot so much what was said about combining particularfoods (after all, WMRC is a space that welcomesand indeed promotes cultural difference and peopleat the lunch were affirming of the food rather thancritical) but about body language. Maybe becauseRobyn felt some discomfort with combining thenon-sweet and sweet dishes she became attuned toothers’ reactions, such as a crinkling of the nose, a
Plate 1 Shared lunch with new migrants at the Waikato Migrant Resource Centre, Hamilton, New Zealand
Source : Photograph by Robyn Longhurst

Using ‘the body’ as an ‘instrument of research’ 
213 
Area 
 Vol. 40 No. 2, pp. 208–217, 2008
ISSN 0004-0894 © The Authors.Journal compilation © Royal Geographical Society (with The Institute of British Geographers) 2008 
screwing up of the face and turning away from the
plate. While dishes such as kimch’i or pavlova maybe ‘acceptable’, or even considered delicious, bythemselves or with other savoury/spicy/sweet foods,for some when combined they became ‘matter outof place’ (Douglas 1966, 35) and invoked disgust.
This story about combining kimch’i and pavlova
in one sense is symbolic. It represents Koreans andother migrants coming to New Zealand and bringingtheir highly valued and complex food traditionswith them (see Walraven (2002) on kimch’i, Koreanidentity and globalisation and Tam (2002) on bringingHong Kong style Yumcha to Australia). Food from‘home’ (or as close as one can get) becomes part ofday-to-day life in a new place. Foods and the cultural
practices that surround them in the ‘homeland’ donot remain neatly intact but merge with food andthe cultural practices in the ‘host country’. To put itmetaphorically, kimch’i and pavlova are combined.
At the shared lunch, kimch’i and pavlova were
literally combined on the plates of at least half ofthe guests. While some at lunch didn’t see this asunusual (and may even have found it to be a tastycombination) others, including Robyn, were repelledby the idea of combining the two dishes. Thisvignette about combining kimch’i and pavlovaillustrates very ‘real’ bodily reactions can come fromdeep within during the research process. Whensharing food and drink with research participants,one wants to be ‘agreeable’, have a healthy regardfor a range of cuisines, be open to cultural differenceand ‘cosmopolitan’ (see Hannerz 1990), but pretendingto like food raises the spectre of insincerity. Clearlythere are ethical issues that need unravelling here,but there are also issues about using the body as an‘instrument of research’.
Eating sheep stomach, and others combining sheep
stomach, noodles, boiled eggs, kimch’i and pavlovatogether engendered in Robyn feelings of unease,disgust, possibly even abjection. Donovan (2007)notes that it can be the idea, smell, taste or eventexture of some foods that can prompt feelings ofabjection. Some common examples include seaweed,insects, tapioca, cow tongue, testicles, octopus, giz-zards, sheep brains, pig trotters, chicken feet, necksand giblets (see Donovan 2007; de Garine 2001).Julia Kristeva (1982) discusses three broad categoriesof abjection. One of these is abjection towardfood and thus toward bodily incorporation. The
social significance of the abject is that it functions
to constitute the ‘proper’ social body, one thatconforms to but does not exceed in any way culturalexpectations (see Grosz 1994, 193). In Aotearoa
New Zealand, the ‘proper’ social body separates themain course from dessert.
It did not feel appropriate to discuss these issues
at the shared lunch itself, but in subsequent cookingsessions and interviews with migrant women wetook the opportunity, in the more intimate settingof migrant women’s homes, to talk about Robyn’sexperiences at the shared lunch. In particular, wepromoted conversation about combining savouryand sweet dishes and the way in which this mightengender disgust in some people. We discussedcultural differences around separating meals intocourses and the possibility that the trainees at thelunch did not want to make more dirty dishes byusing two plates (something that we hadn’t previouslyconsidered). Some of the migrant women alsotalked about what food made their stomachs churn.Many did not like vegemite (a dark brown savouryspread made of yeast extract) that many ‘kiwis’ andAustralians enjoy spread on sandwiches, toast andcracker biscuits.
Although it is now permissible, even desirable,
within critical discourse to acknowledge somethingof ourselves and our political locatedness in theproduction of our research (as complex as this is– see Rose 1997), it is still only permissible toacknowledge and reflect on some things aboutourselves – things we are supposed to unproblemat-ically know and understand such as our gender,
ethnicity and/or age. Many things remain off limitsbecause they are too private, too ‘inappropriate’ ortoo messy to include our written research (Longhurst2001). Feeling like gagging when we eat others’food is one of those things that is likely to get writtenout of the research and yet it is exactly the bodilyreaction and emotion that needs to be written in. 
Some might argue that things such as feelings of
unease, disgust and abjection belong in the categoryof the everyday, prosaic and banal, since these arecommon experiences for most of us. Perhaps they
do. But banal does not necessarily imply that some-thing is intellectually unimportant. The banal shouldnot be sidelined from research. In discussing our own
bodies as researchers and our participants’ bodies,we can begin to establish relationships. We situate
ourselves not as autonomous, rational academics, butas people who sometimes experience irrational
emotions including during the course of research.
Emotions matter. This enables geographers to begin
to talk from an embodied place, rather than from a
place on high.

214 
Longhurst et al. 
Area 
 Vol. 40 No. 2, pp. 208–217, 2008
ISSN 0004-0894 © The Authors.
Journal compilation © Royal Geographical Society (with The Institute of British Geographers) 2008 
Iris Young, drawing on the work of Joel Kovel
(1984), argues that racism takes many forms. Oneform is a covert kind of racism that manifests itselfas ‘avoidances, aversion, and separations enactedby the privileged in relation to the oppressed’(Young 1990, 142). Kovel calls this ‘aversive racism’.Aversive racism, he says, digs into the preoedipalpsyche and seeks to construct some subjects as pureand others as defiled. Building on this thinking,Young claims that racism and other oppressions incontemporary society tend to be structured by thesekinds of reactions of aversion. Alan Han argues thatfood consumption functions to create a distinctionbetween ‘raced-abject-Other bodies, and clean whiteeaters’ (2007, 361).
In recognising our own reactions as researchers
and as people with particular food traditions tothe mixing of kimch’i and pavlova, we were able touse our bodies as an integral part of the researchprocess. We were forced to recognise our own  sub-
ject positions as P 
a 
keh 
a 
, white and European and
our own feelings of unease, disgust, abjection andfear. Bodily reactions, gestures, physical presence,the smell of bodies, tone of voice and comportmentall make a difference to the research process. Sensoryperceptions and emotions provoke feelings of like anddislike, desire and fear, acceptance and oppression.
Kelvin Low (2005) used ‘narrative interviews’ to
understand more about how people regard smell intheir everyday life experiences. He asked a numberof respondents in Singapore ‘Tell me about yourexperiences of smell’. Low explains that one of themost prominent themes that emerged in the researchwas how ‘social others’, particularly racial groupssuch as ‘Indian’, ‘Chinese’ and ‘Malay’, were judgedin accordance to their smell. For example, one ofLow’s respondents, Khaliza, explains: 
it’s very hard for me to like differentiate between smell
of Indian food and smell of Indians, because to methey are both moving into one. Usually the smell ofIndians right, it’s associated with their food isn’t it?Like they eat of lot of curry. . . . So that’s why theysmell like that. Strong. How would I describe theplace (the Tekka Centre in ‘Little India’ in Singapore)?Er . . . personally I . . . don’t like it, because . . . it’sreally like . . . overwhelming . . . and they sell thingswhich I don’t fancy and . . . it stinks. To put it brutally,they are very smelly. I don’t like it. (Low 2005, 410;ellipses in original) 
Recognising and attempting to understand our
research participants’ and our own reactions toembodied difference is important. It propelled us
to think more about our plural, shifting and deeplycomplex and contradictory feelings towards others.We do not mean that this would in some way betherapeutic (although it may well be), but rather thatthere is a political imperative in recognising theOther within the Self.
In this research, having invited participants to
prepare and/or cook a meal that is significant to  
them 
,
for  
us 
, meant we have all had to wrestle with the
possible implications of refusing food or gaggingwhen we attempt to eat that which we find offensive(see Han (2007) who examines the tensions betweenfood as benign symbol of multiculturalism and asabjection). Disgust and abjection are not necessarilyvoluntary responses. Bodily reactions to certain(Other) foods and bodies are sometimes unconscious.Often we feel shame at our own feelings of disgust(Probyn 2000). Elspeth Probyn argues that it isimportant that we recognise our feelings of disgustand shame when confronting that which we perceiveas Other because this might pave the way to under-standing and acceptance.
While it may seem easier in some ways to use the
body as ‘an instrument of research’ when carryingout work on food, we think it is possible and indeeddesirable to do this for generating a range of differentqualitative data. In the past we have each engaged 
in research on a range of topics including su n-tanning,
gay pride parades, fat bodies, pregnancy, mothering,mental health of migrants and ‘astronaut’ families.In all these projects, bodily performances – our ownbodies and our participants’ bodies – that occurredduring the course of research were significant insome ways and told us more than the transcribedinterviews. 
Conclusion 
As this research project on migrant women and foodunfolded, we found ourselves thinking more andmore about our own bodies and our participants’bodies as ‘instruments of research’. As we sharedfood with migrants we were forced to confront whatit means to learn through our bodies. Sometimes wefound our interviewees’ culinary creations to bedelicious, other times our bodies involuntarily gaggedat smells and tastes that we were unaccustomed to.We are not claiming that we are uncovering somekind of truth that is grounded in our embodiedexperiences of this research, but we want toexamine what embodied senses such as smell and

Using ‘the body’ as an ‘instrument of research’ 
215 
Area 
 Vol. 40 No. 2, pp. 208–217, 2008
ISSN 0004-0894 © The Authors.Journal compilation © Royal Geographical Society (with The Institute of British Geographers) 2008 
taste can add to our understanding of relationships
between people and places. 
This research to date has taught us as much about
our own embodied selves as it has about the parti-cipants. Perhaps the same can be said for all research,
but in this case confronting our own feelings ofdisgust with certain foods, food combinations, andculinary practices when we prepared ourselves tonot just figuratively but also literally ingest Othernesshas caused some anxious moments. Any under-standing of preparing, cooking and eating food, and
what these things mean to us, is informed by andinseparable from our knowledge of its culturalconstruction and representation.
It is now well established that that the gendered
nature of knowledge production and academic
scholarship has privileged rational thought over‘irrational’ emotionality (Bennett 2004; Longhurst
2001; Rose 1997). The marginalisation of emotionhas been 
part of a gender politics of research in which detach- 
ment, objectivity and rationality have been valued,
and implicitly masculinized, while engagement, sub-
jectivity, passion and desire have been devalued, and
frequently feminized. (Anderson and Smith 2001, 7) 
The discipline of geography has tended to ‘deny, avoid,
suppress or downplay its emotional entanglements’(Bondi  
et al. 
 2005, 1). Yet clearly emotions affect
the ways in which we perceive and react to peopleand places (Anderson and Smith 2001).
This research on migrant women and food has
opened up us, as researchers, to a different kind ofknowing, one which is based on a full range onsenses rather than just on eyes or ears. The ‘geographyof disgust’ that we at times experienced is a kind ofunspeakable geography and yet it is very ‘real’.Feelings of disgust at certain foods or food combina-tions are difficult to articulate in words. Our feelingsmade us question our own silences and constructionsof Otherness. This research has been about muchmore than what is said. It has been about researchas an embodied process.
Gail Davies and Claire Dwyer say ‘it is hard,
though perhaps not impossible, to imagine what a
radically new form of qualitative research practice
might look like’ (2007, 257). We agree. The samesuite of qualitative methods – such as interviews,focus groups and ethnographies – are still beingused but there are changes in the way they arebeing conceptualised and executed. Davies andDwyer (2007, 257) argue that related to this thereare transformations in the way these methods are
being employed to make claims to understandingand engaging with people and places. Increasingly,academic writing is articulating ‘the preoccupationsand passions of its authors’ (Davidson 
 
et al. 
 2005,
11). Singular, clear, rational arguments are nolonger the goal (see Law (2004) on ‘mess in socialscience’). Like Isabel Dyck, we want to think moreabout embodied researchers ‘whose interpretationstell a particular story of others’ lives and embodiment’(2002, 235). Questions about embodiment, reflexivity,
agency, performativity, emotion and affect areincreasingly making their way on to geographers’and other social scientists’ research agendas. Welook forward to reading more about research as anembodied practice and about researchers using theirbodies as ‘instruments of research’. 
Acknowledgements 
We would like to thank the migrants and others from the
Waikato Migrant Resource Centre in Hamilton, New Zea-land, who assisted us with this project. We appreciate yourtime and insights. Thanks are also due to  
Hui Rangahau
Tahi 
 BRCSS Network for funding this research. Finally,
we would like to thank the two anonymous reviewers andeditors at  
Area 
 who provided invaluable feedback on an
earlier draft of this article.  
Note 
1 The percentages for all ethnic groups added together
can exceed 100 per cent, as individuals have been able 
to self-identify with more than one ethnic group inNew Zealand’s censuses since 1981. 
References 
Anderson 
  
K and Smith 
  
S 
 2001 Editorial. Emotional geogra-
phies  
Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 
26 7–10 
Ashley 
  
B, Hollows 
  
J, Jones 
  
S and Taylor 
  
B 
 2004  
Food and
cultural studies 
 Routledge, London 
Bain 
  
A L and Nash 
  
C J 
 2006 Undressing the researcher:
feminism, embodiment and sexuality at a queer bathhouseevent  
Area 
 38 99–106 
Bell 
  
D and Valentine 
  
G 
 1997  
Consuming geographies: we
are where we eat 
 Routledge, London 
Bennett 
  
K 
 2004 Emotionally intelligent research  
Area 
 36
414–22 
Bondi 
  
L 
 2005 Making connections and thinking through
emotions: between geography and psychotherapy 
Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 
 30
433–48

216 
Longhurst et al. 
Area 
 Vol. 40 No. 2, pp. 208–217, 2008
ISSN 0004-0894 © The Authors.
Journal compilation © Royal Geographical Society (with The Institute of British Geographers) 2008 
Bondi 
  
L, Davidson 
 J and Smith  S 2005 Introduction: geo-
graphy’s ‘emotional turn’ in Davidson  J, Bondi  L and Smith
M eds Emotional geographies  Ashgate, Aldershot 1–16
Burns  C 2004 Effect of migration on food habits of Somali
women living as refuges in Australia Ecology of Food and
Nutrition  43 213–29
Butz D 2001 Autobiography, autoethnography, and inter-
subjectivity: analysing communication in northern Pakistanin Moss P  ed Placing autobiography in geography  Syracuse
University Press, Syracuse NY 149–66
Cameron  J 2000 Focussing on the focus group in Hay I  ed
Qualitative research methods in human geography  Oxford
University Press, Oxford 83–102
Clifford  N J and Valentine  G eds 2003 Key methods in
geography  Sage, London
Cook  I and Harrison  M 2003 Cross over food: re-materializing
postcolonial geographies Transactions of the Institute of
British Geographers  28 296–317
Cook  I and Harrison  M 2007 Follow the thing: ‘West Indian
hot pepper sauce’ Space and Culture  10 40–63
Crang  M 2001 Filed work: making sense of group interviews
in Limb  M and Dwyer  C eds Qualitative methodologies
for geographers: issues and debates  Arnold, London
215–33
Crang  M 2002 Qualitative methods: the new orthodoxy?
Progress in Human Geography  26 647–55
Crang  M 2003 Qualitative methods: touchy, feely, look-see?
Progress in Human Geography  27 494–504
Crang  M
 2005 Qualitative methods: there is nothing outside
the text? Progress in Human Geography  29 225–33
Crang  P 1994 It’s showtime: on the workplace geographies
of display in a restaurant in southeast England Environment
and Planning D: Society and Space  12 675–704
Davidson  J and Milligan  C 2004 Editorial. Embodying
emotion sensing space: introducing emotion geographiesSocial and Cultural Geography  5 523–32
Davidson  J, Bondi  L and Smith  M eds 2005 Emotional geo-
graphies  Ashgate, Aldershot
Davies  G and Dwyer  C 2007 Qualitative methods: are you
enchanted or are you alienated? Progress in Human
Geography  31 257–66
de Garine  I 2001 Views about food prejudice and stereotypes
Social Science Information  40 487–507
Dewsbury  J D and Naylor  S 2002 Practising geographical
knowledge: fields, bodies and dissemination Area 34
253–60
Donovan  A M 2007 Tentacles? Testicles! A sampling of per-
ceptions on uneatable food items among undergraduatestudents. Paper presented at The Association of AmericanGeographers Meeting 17–21 April 2007 San Francisco,California
Douglas  M 1966 Purity and danger: an analysis of concepts
of pollution and taboo  Routledge, London
Dowler  L 2001 Fieldwork in the trenches: participant
observation in a conflict area in Limb  M and Dwyer  C
eds Qualitative methodologies for geographers: issues and
debates  Arnold, London 153–64Driver  F 2000 Editorial: Fieldwork in geography Transactions
of the Institute of British Geographers  25 267–8
Dunn  K 2000 Interviewing in Hay I  ed Qualitative research
methods in human geography  Oxford University Press,
Melbourne 50–82
Dyck  I 2002 Further notes on feminist research: embodied
knowledge in place in Moss P  ed Feminist geography in
practice: research and methods  Blackwell, Oxford
England  K 2001 Interviewing elites: cautionary tales about
researching women managers in Canada’s bankingindustry in Moss P  ed Placing autobiography in geography
Syracuse University Press, Syracuse NY 200–13
Forbes  D 2000 Reading texts and writing geography in Hay
I ed Qualitative research methods in human geography
Oxford University Press, Melbourne 122–43
Grosz  E 1994 Volatile bodies. Toward a corporeal feminism
Allen and Unwin, St Leonards
Han A 2007 ‘Can I tell you what we have to put up with?’:
stinky fish and offensive durian Continuum: Journal of
Media and Cultural Studies  21 361–77
Hannerz  U 1990 Cosmopolitans and locals in world culture
in Featherstone M  ed Global culture  Sage, London
Hay I ed 2000 Qualitative research methods in human geo-
graphy  Oxford University Press, Melbourne
Hoggart  K, Lees  L and Davies  A eds 2002 Researching
human geography  Arnold, London
Katz C 1994 Playing the field: questions of fieldwork in geo-
graphy The Professional Geographer  46 67–72
Kearns  R 2000 Being there: research through observing and
participating in Hay I  ed Qualitative research methods
in human geography  Oxford University Press, Melbourne
103–21
Kershen  A J ed 2002 Food in the migrant experience  Ashgate,
Aldershot
Kneafsey  M and Cox  R 2002 
Food, gender and Irishness:
how Irish women in Coventry make home Irish Geography
35 6–15
Kovel  J 1984 White racism: a psychohistory  2nd edn Colum-
bia University Press, New York
Kristeva  J 1982 Powers of horror: an essay on abjection  trans-
lated by Leo Roudiez Columbia University Press, New York
Kulick  D and Willson  M 1995 eds Taboo: sex, identity and
erotic subjectivity in anthropological fieldwork  Routledge,
London
Laurier  E and Parr  H 2000 Emotions and interviewing in
health and disability research Ethics, Place and Environ-
ment  3 98–102
Laurier  E and Philo  C 2006 Possible geographies: a passing
encounter in a café Area 38 353–63
Law J 2004 After method: mess in social science research
Routledge, London
Law L 2001 Home cooking: Filipino women and geographies
of the senses in Hong Kong Cultural Geographies  8 264
Limb  M and Dwyer  C eds 2001 Qualitative methodologies
for geographers: issues and debates  Arnold, London
Longhurst  R 2001 Bodies: exploring fluid boundaries
Routledge, London

Using ‘the body’ as an ‘instrument of research’ 217
Area Vol. 40 No. 2, pp. 208–217, 2008
ISSN 0004-0894 © The Authors.Journal compilation © Royal Geographical Society (with The Institute of British Geographers) 2008Longhurst  R 2003 Semi-structured interviews and focus
groups in Clifford  N J and Valentine  G eds Key methods
in geography  Sage, London 117–32
Lorimer  H and Spedding  N 2002 Editorial: putting philoso-
phies of geography into practice Area 34 227–28
Low K E Y  2005 Ruminations on smell as a sociocultural
phenomenon Current Sociology  53 397–417
Malbon  B 1999 Clubbing: dancing, ecstasy and vitality
Routledge, London
Moss  P ed 2001 Placing autobiography in geography
Syracuse University Press, Syracuse NY
Moss  P ed 2002 Feminist geography in practice: research and
methods  Blackwell, Oxford
Narayan  U 1995 Eating cultures: incorporation, identity and
Indian food Social Identities  1 63–87
Nast H 1998 The body as ‘place’: reflexivity and fieldwork
in Kano, Nigeria in Nast H and Pile S  eds Places through
the body  Routledge, London 93–116
Nast H and Pile  S eds 1998 Places through the body
Routledge, London
Oum  Y R 2005 Authenticity and representation: cuisines
and identities in Korean–American diaspora Postcolonial
Studies  8 109–25
Parr H 2001 Feeling, reading, and making bodies in space
The Geographical Review  91 158–67
Probyn  E 2000 Carnal appetites : 
foodsexidentities  Routledge,
London
Probyn  E 2003 The spatial imperative of subjectivity in
Anderson  K, Domosh  M, Pile  S and Thrift  N eds Handbook
of cultural geography  Sage, London 290–9Rodaway  P 1994 Sensuous geographies: body, sense and
place  Routledge, London
Rose  G 1997 Situating knowledges: positionality, reflexivities
and other tactics Progress in Human Geography  21 305–20
Salih  R 2003 Gender in transnationalism: home, longing and
belonging among Moroccan migrant women  Routledge,
London
Shurmer-Smith  P ed 2002 Doing cultural geography  Sage, London
Smith  F M 2003 Working in different cultures in Clifford  N J
and Valentine  G eds Key methods in geography  Sage,
London 179–93
Tam S M 2002 Heunggongyan forever. Immigrant life and
Hong Kong style Yumcha  in Australia in Wu D Y H and
Cheung  S C H  eds The globalization of Chinese food
Curzon, Surrey 131–51
Thein  D 2005 After or beyond feeling? A consideration of
affect and emotion in geography Area 37 450–4
Tolia-Kelly  D 2006 Affect – an ethnocentric encounter?
Exploring the ‘universalist’ imperative of emotional/affectualgeographies Area 38 213–17
Valentine  G 1999 Eating in: home, consumption and identity
The Sociological Review  47 491–524
Walraven
 B 2002 Bardot soup and Confucians’ meat: food
and Korean identity in global context in Cwiertka K J  and
Walraven B  Asian food: the global and the local  Curzon
Press, Richmond 95–115
Watson  J L and Caldwell  M L 2005 The cultural politics of
food and eating: a reader  Blackwell, Malden MA
Young  I 1990 Justice and the politics of difference  Princeton
University Press, Princeton NJ

