Foranyissueswiththisdocument, pleasecontactyourlibrary.
____________________________________________________________________________________
Title:Philosophical psychology.
ArticleTitle: Aphantasia: aphilosophical approach
ArticleAuthor: Lorenzatti
Pages:1-29
OCLC-41544536; ISSN-09515089; LCN-00238791;
Publisher: 2023-09-13
Source:LibKeyNomad
Copyright: CCG
____________________________________________________________________________________
NOTICE CONCERNING COPYRIGHT RESTRICTIONS:
Thecopyright lawoftheUnitedStates[Title17,UnitedStatesCode] governsthemakingofphotocopies
orotherreproductions ofcopyrighted materials.
Undercertainconditions specified inthelaw,librariesandarchivesareauthorized tofurnisha
photocopy orotherreproduction. Oneofthesespecificconditions isthatthephotocopy isnottobe
"usedforanypurposeotherthanprivatestudy,scholarship, orresearch." Ifausermakesarequestfor,or
lateruses,aphotocopy orreproduction forpurposes inexcessof"fairuse,"thatusermaybeliablefor
copyright infringement.
Thisinstitution reservestherighttorefusetoacceptacopyingorderif,initsjudgment, fulfillment of
thatorderwouldinvolveviolation ofcopyright law.

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=cphp20Philosophical Psychology
ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/cphp20
Aphantasia: a philosophical approach
Joel J. Lorenzatti
To cite this article:  Joel J. Lorenzatti (13 Sep 2023): Aphantasia: a philosophical approach,
Philosophical Psychology, DOI: 10.1080/09515089.2023.2253854
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/09515089.2023.2253854
Published online: 13 Sep 2023.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 243
View related articles 
View Crossmark data

Aphantasia: a philosophical approach
Joel J. Lorenzatti
Philosophy Department, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT, USA
ABSTRACT
In the last six or seven years, aphantasia has received atten -
tion from media outlets, television shows, and social net-
works. This alleged condition, however, has hardly been 
discussed in the philosophy of mind. In this paper, I assess 
some of the research conducted in cognitive science and 
provide, for the first time in the literature, a comprehensive 
assessment of possible explanations for aphantasia. 
Specifically, the hypotheses I submit for consideration ascribe 
the reports of absence of visual imagery to (i) a discrepancy 
at the level of concepts, (ii) a failure of attentional mechan -
isms that modulate introspection, (iii) a lack of personal-level 
access to sub-personal imagistic representations, and (iv) an 
absence of sub-personal imagistic representations. 
I conclude that hypotheses (i) and (ii) can be rejected while 
hypotheses (iii) and (iv) can be accepted as defensible candi -
dates for explaining aphantasia, although the latter is better 
suited to account for the available evidence in both com -
parative and absolute terms. Finally, I present some educated 
guesses and empirical research that could shed further light 
on the study of this condition.ARTICLE HISTORY 
Received 17 February 2023  
Accepted 24 August 2023 
KEYWORDS 
Aphantasia; mental imagery; 
visual imagery; visualization
1.Introduction
Mental imagery seems to be a ubiquitous component of mental life. Ask 
someone to close their eyes and not imagine an elephant coming down 
the street, and it could already be too late; mental images of the heavy 
animal crossing a red traffic light and smashing everything in its path 
may spontaneously and effortlessly come to their mind. Mental imagery 
is also claimed to be the very fabric of literature and the arts. It is 
commonplace to hear that some people do not want to see the movie 
version of a story they have read to avoid the almost certain disappoint -
ment of seeing characters and places depicted differently than they 
imagined. The importance of mental imagery is no less apparent in 
science. From Euclid defining the sphere through the imaginary rotation 
of a semicircle over its diameter to Einstein’s reliance on hypothetical 
scenarios conceived in the mind’s eye, visualization permeates every 
CONTACT Joel J. Lorenzatti 
 joel.lorenzatti@uconn.edu 
 344 Mansfield Road, Unit 1054, Storrs, CT 06269-1054PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY                         
https://doi.org/10.1080/09515089.2023.2253854
© 2023 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group

corner of scientific practice. Finally, mental imagery also plays a central 
role in philosophy. Controversies about the rational role of mental 
imagery are found as early as Plato and Aristotle and as recently as the 
discussions on the epistemic status of thought experiments in contem -
porary analytic philosophy.1
Despite the apparent role of mental imagery in supporting and facilitating 
a substantial part of our mental lives, some otherwise healthy individuals 
have recently reported a complete inability to produce it. While most 
individuals can visualize, to use the previous example, an elephant coming 
down the street, others report being unable to do so—they do not have, or so 
they claim, a “mind’s eye.” They employ imagistic vocabulary just as every -
one else, but, for them, having mental images is nothing but a figure of 
speech—a metaphor with no literal meaning.
This apparent condition, virtually neglected for more than a century since 
first described by Galton (1880 ), has recently received the name of 
“aphantasia.”2 The term, coined by Zeman and colleagues in their seminal 
work, derives from the privative “a” and “phantasía,” a Greek word com -
monly translated as “imagination” (Zeman et al., 2015 ).3 Previous terms 
used in the psychological and neurological literature include “visual irremi -
niscence” (Nielsen, 1946 ), “defective revisualization” (Botez et al., 1985 ), 
and “blind imagination” (Zeman et al., 2010 ). Individuals with this hypothe -
tical condition are currently called “aphantasics” (D’Aloisio-Montilla, 2017 ; 
Keogh & Pearson, 2018 ; Watkins, 2018 ). Other terms used in the literature 
include “non-imagers” (Marks, 1986 ), “image-blinds” (Faw, 1997 ), and 
“non-visualizers” (Kendle, 2017 ).
Most self-described aphantasics, however, report having mental ima-
gery during hypnagogic states and dreams; and even though recent 
surveys revealed that they have less frequent and vivid dreams compared 
to control groups, the absence of mental imagery during these states 
should not be taken to be a defining feature of aphantasia (Dawes 
et al., 2020 ; Faw, 1997 ; Kendle, 2017 ; Zeman et al., 2020 ). Nor is the 
absence of mental imagery limited to the visual sensory modality. 
Although the paradigm case of aphantasia is the lack of visual imagery 
—and this paper is limited to the research conducted in that sensory 
modality—there are reports of lack of mental imagery in modalities other 
than visual, the most salient being the inability to produce acoustic 
imagery in inner speech and silent reading (Dawes et al., 2020 ; Faw,  
2009 ). Some scholars use the terms “visual aphantasia,” “auditory aphan -
tasia,” “gustatory aphantasia,” and so forth to refer to lack of mental 
imagery in other modalities (Monzel et al., 2022 ; Tween, 2019 ). 
A complete inability to form any sensory experiences in the absence of 
the proper stimuli is sometimes referred to as “full aphantasia” (Tween,  
2019 ) or “multisensory aphantasia” (Monzel et al., 2022 ).2
 J. J. LORENZATTI

This alleged condition is also claimed to have different etiologies, for it 
would be important to distinguish between “acquired” and “congenital” 
aphantasia (Dawes et al., 2020 ; Pounder et al., 2022 ; Zeman et al., 2015 ). 
While some cases of acquired aphantasia were reported in the psychological 
and neurological literature throughout the twentieth century, usually in con-
nection with brain injuries, cases of congenital aphantasia started being 
widely reported only after the term “aphantasia” gained some traction.4 
This is the case of otherwise healthy individuals who learn about their 
condition while having a casual conversation, watching television, or brows -
ing on the internet and come to the astonishing conclusion that, for other 
individuals, having mental images is more than a figure of speech.5 In this 
regard, congenital aphantasia could constitute a paradigm case of hidden 
differences in phenomenal experience; that is, subjective differences of which 
individuals remain largely unaware, concealed by the assumption that what is 
in one’s mind is in everyone’s mind (Lupyan et al., 2023 ; Phillips, 2014 ).
In the last six or seven years, aphantasia has received attention from media 
outlets, television shows, and social networks. For instance, articles about the 
topic appeared in The New York Times (2015) and Scientific American (2018); 
news stories were broadcast on the BBC (2015) and CBC (2016); testimonials 
were shared at TEDx events (2016); and references were made in Netflix’s 
Space Force (2020). Aphantasia discussion groups also proliferated on 
Facebook, Reddit, and other social networks, not to mention the creation of 
the awareness website Aphantasia Network. In 2020, Altmetric placed Zeman 
et al.’s (2015 ) seminal work in the top 1% of scientific outputs, reflecting 
a sustained surge of interest in the phenomenon. The alleged condition, 
however, has hardly been discussed in the philosophy of mind. Just 
a couple of years ago, for example, the entry of “mental imagery” in the 
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy , authored by N. J. T. Thomas, neither 
mentioned aphantasia nor discussed imagery deficits beyond the incidental 
and skeptic note that “a few people may insist that they rarely, or even never, 
consciously experience imagery” (Thomas, 2021 , p. 3). By the time of sub-
mitting this paper, Thomas’s entry had been replaced by Nanay’s, which 
mentions aphantasia from the first section of the article, albeit without delving 
much into details (Nanay, 2021a ). Notable exceptions that discussed cases of 
lack of mental imagery in the philosophical literature before the term “aphan -
tasia” was even coined are Faw (2009 ) and Phillips (2014 ).6
2.The puzzle
The puzzle raised by aphantasia is how to explain the enormous range 
of tasks that self-described aphantasics are objectively capable of per-
forming despite subjective reports of lack of visual imagery. As Brain 
wrote more than half a century ago, “perhaps the most surprising PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY
 3

feature is how little the loss of voluntary visualization impaired func -
tions in which visual imagery might have been expected to play some 
part” (Brain, 1954 , p. 290). Alleged aphantasics can carry on activities 
in a way that is apparently indistinguishable from other individuals; 
from telling a story to drawing an object, there seem to be no beha -
vioral differences between aphantasics and visualizers aside from their 
reports. Self-described aphantasics have developed successful careers as 
graphic designers, fine artists, creative photographers, screenplay wri-
ters, film directors, and many other occupations in which visual ima-
gery is considered to play an essential role. This serves to confirm what 
Galton noted more than a century ago, that “men who declare them -
selves entirely deficient in the power of seeing mental pictures can 
nevertheless give life-like descriptions of what they have seen, and 
can otherwise express themselves as if they were gifted with a vivid 
visual imagination” (Galton, 1880 , p. 304).
Experimental research makes this puzzle even more interesting. In the 
study of visual imagery, cognitive scientists often deploy a battery of stan-
dardized tests. Some of these tests are intended to capture and parametrize 
individuals’ subjective reports of visual imagery, while others are intended 
to measure their objective performance in imagery-related tasks. 
Surprisingly, low ratings in reported visual imagery among self-described 
aphantasics stand in strong contrast with the normal scores they achieve in 
tests devised to measure objective visual imagery and visual memory 
capacities.
The standardized tests cognitive scientists use to capture and parametrize 
the subjective reports of visual imagery are the Vividness of Visual Imagery 
Questionnaire (VVIQ) (Marks, 1973 ), the Spontaneous Use of Imagery 
Scale (SUIS) (Reisberg et al., 2003 ), and the Object and Spatial Imagery 
Questionnaire (OSIQ) (Blajenkova et al., 2006 ). The VVIQ is a sixteen- 
question questionnaire in which participants are asked to visualize some 
scenes and rate the vividness of their experiences on a five-point Likert scale. 
Individuals may be asked, for example, to imagine “a country scene which 
involves trees, mountains and a lake” or “some relative or friend whom you 
frequently see,” and then to rate the picture that comes before their mind’s 
eye on a scale from “no image at all” to “as clear and vivid as normal vision.” 
SUIS and OSIQ do not explicitly ask the participants to engage in visualiza -
tion exercises, but instead, participants are provided with certain statements 
and asked to express agreement or disagreement with on a five-point Likert 
scale. Individuals may be asked, for example, to rate their agreement with 
statements such as, “When I hear a commercial on the radio, I have a clear 
picture of what the announcer is trying to sell,” or, “If I am looking for new 
furniture in a store, I always visualize what the furniture would look like in 
particular places in my home.”4
 J. J. LORENZATTI

The standardized tests that cognitive scientists use to measure objective 
performance in imagery-related tasks are the tests of mental rotation 
(Shepard & Metzler, 1971 ), recollection of details (Behrmann et al., 1994 ; 
Weber & Castleman, 1970 ), and identification of colors (Eddy & Glass,  
1981 ; Heuer et al., 1986 ). The test of mental rotation in the version of 
Shepard and Metzler works with three-dimensional objects formed by ten 
cubes. The examiners present the participants with two objects with differ -
ent degrees of rotation, and the participants must determine as quickly as 
possible whether the objects presented are identical in shape. The tests of 
recollection of details, which are more associated with visual memory 
capacities, may ask the participants to answer questions about parts of 
animals (e.g., elephant: “Does it have a long tail proportional to its body 
size?” “Does it have floppy or upright ears?”), determine whether letters 
have certain characteristics (e.g., letter “f”: “Does it extend below the line?” 
“Does it have curved parts?”), and answer questions about salient features of 
famous people (e.g., Tony Blair: “Does he have large ears?” “Does he have 
a mustache?”). Finally, the tests of identification of colors require the 
participants to make comparative judgments about different hues of color 
(e.g., “Is the green of grass darker than the green of a pine tree?” “Which of 
these five reds is the color of a stop-sign?”).
Success in these tests has always been considered to be a sensitive indi-
cator of the presence of mental imagery because, first, most individuals 
report solving the required tasks by conjuring visual images and, second, the 
objects, details, and colors at issue are likely to be coded visually as opposed 
to verbally or otherwise (Dean & Morris, 2003 ; Shepard & Metzler, 1971 ; 
Thomas, 2021 ).7 It was not expected that otherwise healthy individuals who 
sincerely report a lack of visual imagery could succeed in tests devised to 
measure objective performance in imagery-related tasks; and yet, this 
assumption was wrong. As Phillips puts it, there is a “puzzle raised by the 
apparent lack of correlation between objective task performance in imagery 
tasks and reported imagery” (Phillips, 2014 , p. 279). But even if some 
correlations were to be found, this would not diminish the puzzle of how 
individuals who supposedly have no visual imagery can solve these tasks at 
all. The distinct possibility that self-described aphantasics are indeed aphan -
tasics elicits important psychological and philosophical questions; chiefly, 
how can there be individuals who retrieve visual information about objects 
in their absence without mental imagery, and how they can do it without 
compromising the accuracy and richness of the visual information they can 
retrieve?
Moreover, the ability to retrieve visual information in the alleged absence 
of mental imagery has made some researchers compare aphantasia with 
blindsight; that is, cases of cortically blind patients who, nevertheless, are 
able to solve visual and motor tasks that would be impossible to solve PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY
 5

without visual information (D’Aloisio-Montilla, 2017 ; Fulford et al., 2018 ; 
Phillips, 2014 ; Zeman et al., 2010 ). Although aphantasia and blindsight are 
entirely different and unrelated conditions, aphantasics and blindseers share 
the ability to solve tasks without metacognition of the first-order mental 
states that enable their performance; while blindseers can answer questions 
about objects in front of them and dodge obstacles that would have other -
wise involved conscious perception, aphantasics can answer questions about 
absent objects and perform spatial operations that would have otherwise 
involved conscious visual imagery.
3.Four hypotheses
In what follows, I present four hypotheses that researchers have put forward 
in relation to reports of lack of visual imagery and assess some of the evidence 
available in cognitive science. However, evaluation of the hypotheses cannot 
be limited to surveying the available empirical research but must engage with 
conceptual problems that emerge from data interpretation. Understanding 
aphantasia depends not just on empirical findings and cognitive models but 
also on what we make of concepts like that of “consciousness,” “experience,” 
and “awareness.” For example, some psychologists and cognitive scientists 
use the term “experience” almost automatically with perceptual language, 
and philosophers have to disambiguate where there is a question of whether 
the individual is aware of the relevant mental state (Lycan, 1996 ). Similarly, 
the distinction between what is taken to be “conscious” and what is taken to 
be “unconscious” is usually not accompanied by an explanation of whether it 
hinges upon attentional processes that modulate introspection or whether it 
roughly overlaps, at least extensionally so, with the distinction between 
personal and sub-personal states (Drayson, 2012 ).
It is important to mention that the following list is not intended to be 
exhaustive of the possible explanations of aphantasia.8 Also, even when the 
following hypotheses are presented as alternative explanations—and in an 
important sense, they are competing hypotheses about aphantasia—this 
exposition should not preclude the possibility that more than one hypoth -
esis could describe the condition of a particular individual, or that different 
individuals could report lack of visual imagery for different reasons. 
The hypotheses under consideration are the following:
DESCRIPTION : Individuals who report no visual imagery are simply describing 
their mental experiences in a different way, with no significant 
cognitive differences between self-described aphantasics and 
other individuals.6
 J. J. LORENZATTI

INTROSPECTION : Individuals who report no visual imagery fail to become 
aware of personal-level mental states that they nonetheless 
have, due to intrinsic unreliability or abnormal performance 
of introspection.
DISCONNECTION : Individuals who report no visual imagery have sub-personal 
mechanisms with imagistic representations that are not 
accessible at a personal level.
ABSENCE : Individuals who report no visual imagery have no sub-personal 
mechanisms with imagistic representations but use alternative 
cognitive strategies to compensate in activities that would other -
wise involve visual imagery.
It is worth noting that DESCRIPTION and INTROSPECTION deny the existence of 
substantial differences between self-described aphantasics and visualizers 
besides their reports, and thereby conclude that there is no such condition as 
aphantasia in a stricter sense—individuals that report lack of visual imagery 
are mistaken in thinking that they lack visual imagery. By contrast, 
DISCONNECTION and ABSENCE acknowledge the existence of substantial differ -
ences in the capacities to conjure visual imagery among individuals and 
provide an explanation of aphantasia in terms of a condition. In accordance 
with the above, DESCRIPTION and INTROSPECTION either downplay or outright 
disregard the authority of self-described aphantasics’ reports, whereas 
DISCONNECTION and ABSENCE offer explanations in consonance with reported 
experiences. Differences between these hypotheses will become clear in the 
following sections.
3.1.DESCRIPTION
According to DESCRIPTION , individuals who report no visual imagery are 
simply describing their mental experiences in a different way, with no 
significant cognitive differences between self-described aphantasics and 
other individuals. The insight underpinning DESCRIPTION is that mental 
experiences are confusing, and we should not be surprised to find that 
discrepancies between subjective reports are at the level of concepts; while 
some individuals may be prone to recognize a similarity between imagery 
and perception, others may claim that they do not see mental images “any 
more than a man sees the thousand lines of Sophocles which under due 
pressure he is ready to repeat” (Galton, 1880 , p. 302). After all, imagining 
something is different from seeing something, and given that it is impossible 
to provide an ostensive definition to calibrate the referents of the concepts 
used to communicate our mental states, it is uncertain whether two indivi -
duals are applying them in the same way. In short, according to DESCRIPTION , 
discrepancies between mental imagery reports are to be understood as 
a form of miscommunication.PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY
 7

This hypothesis has been suggested by Thomas (2001 ) and discussed, 
although not endorsed, by Schwitzgebel (2011 ). It is also the most 
parsimonious explanation about alleged cases of aphantasia and that 
which captures the pre-theoretical intuitions of most visualizers when 
presented with the case of individuals who claim to have no visual 
imagery whatsoever (Faw, 2009 ; Lupyan et al., 2023 ; Phillips, 2014 ).
Thomas’s main argument is that introspective reports, in general, cannot 
be taken at face value since they are theory-laden—and hopelessly so. Folk 
and scientific theories influence the way we describe our mental states to the 
extent that reported discrepancies in subjective experience are more reflec -
tive of differences in our personal idiosyncrasies than actual differences in 
our mental states. Thomas brings up the historical case of J. B. Watson, who 
went from reporting that his mental imagery was as clear as perception to 
denying its very existence some years later, eventually rendering the concept 
of mental imagery to a “sheer bunk” and “medieval” superstition. These 
differences in subjective reports cannot be ascribed to significant changes at 
the cognitive level or systematic dishonesty in the reports but, rather, the 
argument goes, “it is much more plausible to believe that they reflect 
changes in how the people concerned were inclined to conceptualize their 
minds’ workings, and, thus, to describe them verbally, to themselves as well 
as to others” (Thomas, 2001 , p. 5).
Subjective tests of visual imagery, from Galton’s breakfast table to 
Marks’s VVIQ, import concepts in connection to the visual modality—our 
conceptual repertoire includes phrases such as “to have a mental picture,” 
“to create a mental image,” “to see with the mind’s eye,” and so forth. Now, 
vision gives us a grasp of the outer world, and we perceive objects as being 
located within our egocentric space—but where are mental images located? 
Does it make sense to compare mental imagery with physical images so as to 
justify the figure of speech of mental pictures that can be seen in the mind’s 
eye? Mental pictures are certainly not photographs that can be handed 
around the table or displayed on the phone—you cannot point at a mental 
image to clarify what you mean and settle a discussion. In short, there are 
many disanalogies between what is conceptualized as mental imagery and 
the metaphors used to describe it, and, as Thomas argues, “because it is 
private, it is hard to be sure that we are applying the words we use to 
describe it in the same way that the next person does” (Thomas, 2001 , p. 6).
Despite our charitable efforts, DESCRIPTION does not seem to be a good 
explanation for aphantasia. It is true that notions of mental imagery may 
very well differ among individuals. One may even concede that what 
seems to be univocal in a certain context may be equivocal in others and 
that subjective reports are theory-laden. Still, to claim that two indivi -
duals could be in roughly the same mental states and yet one of them 
fails to describe them in terms of mental imagery is nonetheless 8
 J. J. LORENZATTI

something different. The phenomenal similarity between visual imagery 
and visual perception is not only informed by ordinary life, as evidenced 
by the conceptual repertories used to describe these mental states across 
many languages, but by psychological practice as well (Brogaard & 
Gatzia, 2017 ; Nanay, 2015a , 2021b ; Price, 1952 ). To begin with, visual 
imagery and visual perception represent the same determinable proper -
ties, such as shape and color. Visualizing an elephant involves visualizing, 
at a minimum, certain color patches arranged in a certain way. Second, 
much like visual perception, visual imagery is perspectival. Visualizing an 
elephant amounts to visualizing it from a certain perspective, obscuring 
the other side. Although visualizers can switch from, for example, the 
front view to the back view, these views are not simultaneously given. 
Third, both visual imagery and visual perception can be sharpened 
through attention. When visualizing an elephant, visualizers might not 
be initially aware of the elephant’s tail size or ear shape, but they can 
focus on these features by directing their attention toward them. But 
perhaps the most compelling evidence of the phenomenal similarity 
between visual imagery and visual perception comes from Perky’s famous 
experiments in the early twentieth century, along with their successive 
replications (Perky, 1910 ; Segal, 1972 ; Segal & Nathan, 1964 ). In these 
experiments, participants looking at a wall were given the task of visua -
lizing objects such as a tomato or a banana while the experimenters 
projected, without the participants’ knowledge, faintly colored images 
of these objects. The “Perky effect” showed that participants took them -
selves to be visualizing the objects being projected. The fact that visual 
perception and visual imagery could be systematically confused under 
these settings suggests that the corresponding mental representations are 
similar. If the standard interpretation of these psychological experiments 
is correct, one might ask how plausible it is that a group of individuals 
could fail to describe mental imagery as having some of the character -
istics they nonetheless ascribe to perception.
Some self-described aphantasics report grasping something they describe 
as “subvisual models” or “subliminal imaging,” which certainly could give 
a certain credibility to DESCRIPTION . However, others adduce having no 
representations whatsoever supporting their performance in visual imagery 
and visual memory tests. For these individuals, there is no mental repre -
sentation that helps them to determine, for instance, if two three- 
dimensional structures in the test of mental rotation are the same, nor do 
they report any kind of mental representation in virtue of which they can 
determine whether elephants have long tails in proportion to their body 
sizes. Most self-described aphantasics simply pause for a moment and claim 
they “just know” or “remember” the information at issue (Faw, 2009 ; 
Kendle, 2017 ; Phillips, 2014 ).PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY
 9

Now, even though this argument against DESCRIPTION may not be con-
clusive, additional reasons in the following sections will rule out this 
hypothesis as a general explanation for aphantasia.
3.2.INTROSPECTION
According to INTROSPECTION , individuals who report no visual imagery fail to 
become aware of personal-level mental states that they nonetheless have, 
due to intrinsic unreliability or abnormal performance of introspection. The 
core idea of this hypothesis is that there is a set of attentional mechanisms by 
means of which individuals typically form judgments about their mental 
states, and this set of mechanisms may be failing to provide information 
about these mental states to the individual.9 In other words, these atten -
tional mechanisms may systematically fail to make individuals aware of 
certain mental states, leading them to report a lack of mental imagery. As 
with DESCRIPTION , INTROSPECTION implies that aphantasia is not a true condi -
tion, for self-described aphantasics do actually have mental imagery. 
Against DESCRIPTION , however, INTROSPECTION entails that the initial puzzle 
cannot be explained by mere discrepancies at the level of concepts—it is not 
a problem of miscommunication but metacognition.
A version of this hypothesis was originally suggested by Hebb (1968 ), for 
whom individuals who report a lack of visual imagery are able to form 
mental images that they are unable to retrieve.10 This view also seems to 
have been proposed by Marks, for whom “non-(visual)-imagers may be 
suffering from some sort of sub-clinical neurological disconnection syn-
drome, whereby they do have visual imagery, but are unable to report it” 
(Thomas, 2001 , p. 3).11 Schwitzgebel (2011 ) and, more recently, Nanay 
(2021a , 2021b ) have also defended some versions of INTROSPECTION .
Nanay claims, for example, that “at least some aphantasics seem to have 
mental imagery that they are not aware of” (Nanay, 2021a , p. 7). He 
considers aphantasia to be a behavioral category that may have different 
underlying conditions, one of which must be explained by analogy with 
cases of unconscious perception and unpacked in terms of failures of 
attentional processes. In other words, some cases of aphantasia are best 
explained as cases of “unconscious visual imagery.”12 In any event, this 
should not be a reason for concern because, according to Nanay, “recent 
research highlights that there are very few behavioral or neural differences 
between conscious and unconscious mental imagery” (Nanay, 2021b , p. 1).
Schwitzgebel is possibly the philosopher of mind who has most 
resolutely defended the idea that introspection is unreliable, even in 
normal conditions. The fact that certain individuals may fail to 
become aware of their mental imagery need not be something patho -
logical but an extreme of the distribution of individuals who are in 10
 J. J. LORENZATTI

themselves lousy at understanding their mental lives. Moreover, exten -
sive variation in mental imagery, according to Schwitzgebel, is a myth 
based on the excessive weight given to our ability to understand our 
mental lives. If differences in visual imagery were as vast as self- 
described aphantasics report, we should expect substantial behavioral 
differences, “differences comparable to that between a prodigy and 
a normal person or between a normal person and one with severe 
disabilities” (Schwitzgebel, 2011 , p. 44). However, as our initial puzzle 
suggests, there seems to be no correlation between subjective reports 
and objective performance in visual imagery and visual memory tests, 
and, therefore, we should not honor the reports of self-described 
aphantasics.
The most immediate criticism of INTROSPECTION draws attention to 
the fact that while descriptions of our mental lives can be messy and 
liable to error, the thesis that some individuals systematically fail to 
introspect their mental imagery is a very demanding one. Most self- 
described aphantasics are able to introspect visual imagery during 
hypnagogic states and dreams, and others are able to introspect 
mental imagery in other sensory modalities (Dawes et al., 2020 ; Faw,  
2009 ; Zeman et al., 2020 ). Thus, INTROSPECTION would fall short in 
explaining why otherwise healthy individuals can introspect some 
forms of mental imagery but not others. One may acknowledge that 
individuals sometimes make mistakes about their mental lives, but to 
insist that self-described aphantasics consistently misunderstand their 
mental lives, even in favorable circumstances and regardless of their 
attentiveness, is a thesis that should provide further reasons to be 
taken seriously.
Perhaps more important, INTROSPECTION —but also DESCRIPTION —predicts 
little to no behavioral differences between self-described aphantasics and 
other individuals besides their reports. However, recent evidence supports 
the existence of these differences. For example, differences between self- 
described aphantasics and visualizers have been observed in the information 
that each group is able to retrieve from visualization exercises. One of these 
exercises, which is used as a shibboleth for aphantasia in some “awareness” 
circles, runs as follows13:
Visualize the following scene: There is a ball on a table. Someone walks up 
to the table and gives the ball a push. The ball rolls and finally falls to the 
floor.
Now, answer the following questions:
(a)What size and color was the ball?
(b)What gender was the person that pushed the ball?
(c)How exactly did the ball move after being pushed?PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY
 11

This exercise is interesting because, should visual imagery be conjured, 
visualizers should have a somewhat clear idea of what the ball, person, 
and resulting motion looked like (the reader may have experienced some 
of this when reading the prompt). It is not surprising to find that most 
visualizers often provide additional information that is not explicitly asked 
for in the questions. Visualizers may reply, for example, that they visualized 
a rubber ball about the size of a handball, or that they are not entirely certain 
about the gender as they only saw the person’s feet, but they are confident 
that it was a child (among my colleagues, one even reported visualizing not 
a person but a monkey). These answers are similar to those that would be 
obtained if the participants were asked about a scene they witnessed a few 
moments ago. After all, as Berkeley observed in his critique of Locke’s 
theory of abstract ideas more than three centuries ago, “whatever . . . 
I imagine, it must have some particular shape and color. Likewise, the 
idea of man that I frame to myself must be either of a white, or a black, or 
a tawny, a straight, or a crooked, a tall, or a low, or a middle-sized man. 
I cannot by any effort of thought conceive the abstract idea above described. 
And it is equally impossible for me to form the abstract idea of motion 
distinct from the body moving, and which is neither swift nor slow, curvi -
linear nor rectilinear” (Berkeley, 1910 , p. 11). While Berkeley’s observation 
seems true for visualizers, it should not, the argument goes, hold true for 
self-described aphantasics; given that these individuals allegedly lack visual 
imagery, they should not be able to provide positive answers to the ques -
tions in the prompt. In fact, that is what happens; self-described aphantasics 
simply shrug their shoulders as if they were asked about the ball’s serial 
number or the person’s ice cream preferences.
The results obtained in visualization exercises like the one introduced 
above are part of a broader phenomenon that is also manifest in the way 
different individuals experience the practice of reading. Most readers cannot 
avoid creating visual images of the characters and places involved in a story, 
and as Berkeley notes, having a mental image of something is having 
a mental image along with many of its determinable properties. Self- 
described aphantasics, however, report creating no visual images as the 
narrative of a story unfolds (Alireza, 2016 ; Kendle, 2017 ). Consequently, 
characters in fictional stories are ex hypothesi not assigned the determinable 
properties that most individuals promptly and involuntarily assign to them. 
Aragorn in The Lord of the Rings , to mention a well-known example, has no 
physiognomy outside of that specified by the narrator. Likewise, Gondor has 
no topography beyond what is mentioned in the story. For movies based on 
books, it is interesting to note that visualizers often complain about char -
acters and places being represented differently than they had pictured when 
reading the book. It is commonplace to hear that some people do not want 
to see the Hollywood version of a story they have read—anyone who has 12
 J. J. LORENZATTI

read J. R. R. Tolkien has already formed a vivid mental image of the fictional 
universe in the story. By contrast, the information that self-described 
aphantasics are able to gather from the reading is, according to them, not 
detailed enough to produce such disappointment-by-mismatch when they 
see, for example, Viggo Mortensen carrying the shards of Narsil or New 
Zealand’s mountain ranges portrayed as Gondor. The point is not, of course, 
that self-described aphantasics cannot be disappointed by the way certain 
characters or places are portrayed in movies but that the nature and extent 
of their disappointment differ from that of visualizers.
The proponent of INTROSPECTION could attempt to disregard these obser -
vations by reminding the contender that self-described aphantasics’ reports 
—or any subjective reports, for that matter—need not be honored. 
However, notice that the above are not reports about the intimacy of visual 
imagery, or lack thereof—they are reports about the information one can 
retrieve from a visualization exercise or fictional story.
Moreover, these differences seem to extend to the emotions that visuali -
zation exercises and fictional stories are capable of evoking. Indeed, some 
researchers have found a positive correlation between the reported vividness 
of visual imagery and the extent to which individuals are affected by 
frightening scenarios. Wicken et al. (2021 ), for example, showed that self- 
described aphantasics exhibit no physiological response to fear, as measured 
by skin conductance, when reading frightening stories, even though they 
show no difference compared to control groups when viewing frightening 
images.14
Relatedly, surveys revealed that about two-thirds of self-described 
aphantasics report difficulties with autobiographical memory; that is, the 
ability to recreate past episodic memories from a personal point of view 
(Zeman et al., 2015 ). Watkins even suggested incidences of aphantasia in 
disorders such as the recently described syndrome of “severely deficient 
autobiographical memory” (SDAM), in which individuals are prevented 
from traveling in time to reenact experiences and emotions (Watkins,  
2018 ). These reports were recently confirmed by other systematic and 
wide-ranging psychological studies with self-described aphantasics 
(Dawes et al., 2020 ; Milton et al., 2021 ).
Now, it is unlikely that these behavioral differences can be attributed to 
failures of the attentional mechanisms that modulate introspection.15 Skin 
conductance tracks changes in autonomic nervous system arousal, which, in 
turn, are triggered by low-level processes of which the individual may or 
may not be aware. Introspection, or the lack thereof, is thus unlikely to 
produce the effects described above. Indeed, Wicken et al. (2021 ) dismiss 
the hypothesis that self-described aphantasics lack good metacognition of 
their mental images and provide an explanation that delves deeper into our 
cognitive architecture.PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY
 13

If the interpretation of these empirical results is correct, there are good 
reasons to believe that INTROSPECTION not only fails to predict but also would 
be unable to explain the behavioral differences between self-described 
aphantasics and visualizers. But even if one were to maintain this hypothesis 
as a viable contender, the following sections will present additional experi -
mental results that virtually rule out INTROSPECTION —and DESCRIPTION —as 
a plausible explanation for aphantasia.
3.3.DISCONNECTION
According to DISCONNECTION , individuals who report no visual imagery have 
sub-personal mechanisms with imagistic representations that are not acces -
sible at a personal level. The personal and sub-personal distinction, intro -
duced by Dennett (1969 ), is between states and capacities attributed to the 
individual (for example, the capacity to perceive objects or understand 
language) and states and capacities attributed to a particular component 
of the individual’s cognitive system (for example, the capacity to convert 
differences in luminosity into edges or combine words into grammatical 
sentences). According to this hypothesis, subsystems within the self- 
described aphantasics would be endowed with the same cognitive mechan -
isms as visualizers but without the relevant information being accessible to 
the individual as such.
Although DISCONNECTION resembles INTROSPECTION , these hypotheses differ 
in two important ways. First, while the hypothesis of a failure of attentional 
mechanisms that modulate introspection denies the existence of consider -
able differences between self-described aphantasics and visualizers, the 
hypothesis of a disconnection between personal-level mental states and sub- 
personal mechanisms predicts significant differences from the beginning, 
for it is true that the whole individual does not have visual imagery. 
Consequently, while INTROSPECTION does not honor the reports of those 
who claim to have no mental imagery, DISCONNECTION grants prima facie 
credibility to these reports and explains the nature of the deficit. Second, 
while INTROSPECTION blames attentional mechanisms that modulate intro -
spection for what it regards as false reports, DISCONNECTION claims that there 
is nothing to blame these mechanisms for—no more than we would blame 
them for failing to reveal the algorithms of edge detection or the rules of 
transformational grammar.
This hypothesis seems to have been first proposed, at least for patients 
with acquired aphantasia, by Brain (1954 ) after studying cases of loss of 
visual imagery due to brain injuries.16 For the cases of congenital aphanta -
sia, the first conceptual and empirical articulation probably belongs to Botez 
and colleagues, who conclude that “visual imagery does exist in our patient 
at a subliminal level, but he is incapable of conscious retrieval and 14
 J. J. LORENZATTI

reporting” (Botez et al., 1985 , p. 387). In that particular case, Botez and 
colleagues attribute the lack of visual imagery to neurological causes that 
affected the visual interhemispheric transfer.17 More recently, two similar 
versions of DISCONNECTION have been proposed by Faw (1997 , 2009 ) and 
Phillips (2014 ). Although neither of them denies the existence of specific 
neural correlates of visual imagery and the lack thereof, their explanations 
do not entail neurological damage, as in Brain’s patients, or abnormal 
neurological development, as in Botez’s patient.
Faw (2009 ) introduces the concepts of “MI-1” to refer to the objective 
capacity for mental imagery and “MI-2” to refer to the subjective capacity 
for mental imagery. The MI-1/MI-2 distinction is not intended to provide 
a specific hypothesis but a somewhat higher-level description of the phe-
nomenon that, in turn, could be instantiated by several lower-level hypoth -
eses. The lower-level hypothesis favored by him, however, seems to fall into 
DISCONNECTION . In Faw’s own words, individuals who report a lack of visual 
imagery “might have some sort of subliminal imaging ability that allows 
normal perception but not conscious supraliminal imaging” (Faw, 2009 , 
p. 46). Individuals with only MI-1 (lacking MI-2) would have cognitive 
mechanisms endowed with imagistic representations, but these would not 
constitute mental states of the whole person.
In a similar vein, Phillips (2014 ) distinguishes two senses of “mental 
imagery,” namely, the “representational” and “experiential” senses.18 
Imagery in the representational sense refers to those “underlying sub- 
personal representations” that are constitutively structured as images. By 
contrast, imagery in the experiential sense refers to “conscious personal- 
level episodes.” While visual imagery and visual memory tests measure 
imagery in the representational sense, individual reports describe imagery 
in the experiential sense. There is a theoretical possibility, therefore, that 
self-described aphantasics have underlying sub-personal representations 
that allow them to solve visual imagery and visual memory tests but lack 
personal-level episodes that allow them to produce the corresponding 
reports.
This view grants that some individuals could be correct in reporting no 
visual imagery—inasmuch as they have no personal-level episodes of visual 
imagery—and, at the same time, explains why they can score well in visual 
imagery and visual memory tests—insofar as they have underlying sub- 
personal representations just like visualizers.
What about the observed differences in information retrieval and emo -
tional response in the context of visualization exercises and fictional stories? 
DISCONNECTION does not provide an explanation for these differences, but 
unlike previous hypotheses, it contains theoretical elements that extend 
beyond mere discrepancies at the level of concepts or failures of attentional 
processes. Proponents of this view count with the resources for creating PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY
 15

models in which the lack of personal-level access to sub-personal imagistic 
representations affects differentially other personal or sub-personal agencies 
that typically benefit from this informational access. Even so, as we will see, 
DISCONNECTION may encounter some difficulties in explaining other empiri -
cal findings related to aphantasia.
3.4.ABSENCE
According to ABSENCE , individuals who report no visual imagery have no 
sub-personal mechanisms with imagistic representations but use alternative 
cognitive strategies to compensate in activities that would otherwise involve 
visual imagery.
This hypothesis has been defended by Zeman et al. (2010 , 2015 ), and 
pointed as one among other possible explanations of aphantasia by Keogh 
and Pearson (2018 ), Kay et al. (2022 ), Wicken et al. (2021 ), and Pounder et 
al. (2022 ).19 Acquired aphantasia was studied by the former in a patient who 
reported a loss of mental imagery after a minor surgery. Zeman and 
colleagues found that despite subjective reports of lack of visual imagery, 
he was not impaired in solving visual imagery and visual memory tasks. 
However, since the cognitive strategy used by most participants in Shepard 
and Metzler’s tests is rotating the three-dimensional objects in the mind’s 
eye, data typically show a linear correlation between the angle of rotation 
and the time required to determine whether the objects presented in the task 
are the same—larger angles correlate with longer response time, and smaller 
angles correlate with shorter response time. The pattern obtained from 
Zeman’s patient showed a less clear relationship between angular rotation 
and response time, suggesting that he adopted a different cognitive strategy 
for solving mental rotation tasks.
This anomaly led Zeman and colleagues to perform further research 
using functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Studies showed strik -
ing differences between their patient and the control group in tasks that 
required visualizing the faces of famous people, but not in those that 
required viewing them in pictures. Specifically, both Zeman’s patient and 
the individuals in the control group activated posterior cortical areas asso-
ciated with vision when asked to look at famous faces, but only the control 
group showed considerable activation of these areas when asked to visualize 
these faces. Instead, Zeman’s patient showed higher activation in anterior 
cortical areas that are typically associated with executive functions.20
The contrast observed in the respective patterns of cortical activation can 
be interpreted as evidence against DESCRIPTION and INTROSPECTION since 
neither of these hypotheses predicts considerable differences at 
a neurological level. In addition, the apparent use of a different cognitive 
strategy in the test of mental rotation may be understood as evidence against 16
 J. J. LORENZATTI

DISCONNECTION . If Zeman’s patient had sub-personal mechanisms associated 
with visual imagery operating normally; that is, differing from control 
groups only on the information that is consciously accessible at a personal 
level, then it would have been correct to predict similar performance to the 
control group. In other words, there is prima facie no reason to think that 
the patient’s failure to consciously access representations that are imagistic 
in nature would have affected his response time in a way that does not 
correlate with the angular rotation. Indeed, the lack of correlation led 
Zeman and colleagues to reject an explanation in terms of processing of 
imagistic representations which do not enter consciousness.
Does this mean that DISCONNECTION is not a plausible hypothesis for 
aphantasia? Drawing that conclusion about all cases of aphantasia, includ -
ing both congenital and acquired, would be a hasty generalization. What the 
research conducted by Zeman and colleagues shows is that DISCONNECTION 
does not provide a good explanation for their patient. Whether this conclu -
sion can be extrapolated to otherwise healthy individuals who report 
a lifelong lack of visual imagery is something that requires further evidence. 
It is important to note that proponents of DISCONNECTION , such as Phillips 
(2014 ), acknowledge from the beginning that some cognitive processes at 
work in standard tests of visual imagery are not imagistic and, thus, make 
room for the possibility that patients such as Zeman’s may have developed 
strategies that exploit other cognitive mechanisms. In fact, Phillips agrees 
with Zeman in relation to the above patient’s condition but predicts that this 
anomaly concerning response time will not be replicated in patients with 
congenital aphantasia.21
More recently, Pounder et al. (2022 ) found differences in response time 
in the mental rotation task, but only between visualizers and self-described 
aphantasics who reported severe deficits in visual imagery. Other self- 
described aphantasics who did not score at floor on the VVIQ scale showed 
no differences compared to control groups. These differences within the 
group of self-described aphantasics could be interpreted as portraying 
different underlying characteristics for different individuals. It is possible 
that some individuals report a lack of visual imagery in line with 
DISCONNECTION and others with ABSENCE . This need not be the case, however. 
It should be noted that even when some self-described aphantasics showed 
a linear correlation between angular rotation and response time in accor -
dance with Phillips’s predictions, it does not imply the existence of sub- 
personal imagistic representations as suggested by DISCONNECTION . It may 
well be the case that aphantasics have no imagistic representations working 
at a sub-personal level but use haptic or motor mechanisms whose repre -
sentations are nonetheless spatially organized. Spatial organization will 
predict, just like imagistic coding, a linear correlation between angular 
rotation and response time.PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY
 17

However, there are independent reasons to think that cases of congenital 
aphantasia are similar to cases of acquired aphantasia. Two neurological 
studies revealed commonalities between Zeman’s patient and individuals 
who reported lifelong deficits in visual imagery. Fulford et al.’s (2018 ) fMRI 
studies showed that individuals with deficits in visual imagery had a more 
widespread cortical activation than their respective control groups when 
asked to visualize famous faces and places. Moreover, the participants in the 
study showed, just like Zeman’s patient, lower activation in posterior cor-
tical areas associated with vision and higher activation in anterior cortical 
areas associated with executive functions when asked to visualize famous 
faces and places. In the same vein, Milton et al.’s (2021 ) fMRI studies 
showed that self-described aphantasics had lower activation in posterior 
cortical areas compared to high-visualizers and lower activation in anterior 
parietal areas compared to both high-visualizers and control groups. Milton 
and colleagues interpret their results in terms of a reduction in connectivity 
between cognitive control systems and visual cortices.22 Taken together, 
these neurological results can be understood as evidence in favor of ABSENCE , 
suggesting that aphantasics have no visual imagery whatsoever, not even 
sub-personal imagistic representations, but they exploit other cognitive 
mechanisms somewhat comparable in richness.
Another line of research intended to shed light on the nature of 
aphantasia has been conducted by Keogh and Pearson (2018 ) by exploit -
ing the effects of binocular rivalry. In standard tests of binocular rivalry, 
the participants are presented with two different images, one to each eye. 
Instead of seeing two superimposed images, participants perceive one 
image while the other is suppressed. Using the same binocular rivalry 
setup, Pearson et al. (2008 ) have further demonstrated that presenting 
a very faint projection of one of the images prior results in a higher 
probability of that image being dominant in the test. In other words, the 
dominance of one image over the other can be induced by faintly 
showing one of them to the participant before the instance of binocular 
rivalry. This effect in which one image is induced over the other is called 
the “priming effect.” Now, similar results can be obtained when, instead 
of presenting the participants with one of the images before the instance 
of binocular rivalry, they are asked to visualize one of them (Pearson,  
2014 ; Pearson et al., 2008 ). This means that visual imagery can prime 
dominance of one image over the other in a similar way that visual 
perception does. Interestingly, the binocular rivalry tests conducted 
with self-described aphantasics revealed no significant dominance- 
inducing effect of one image over the other (Keogh & Pearson, 2018 ). 
In other words, the experimental results showed that the priming effect 
among aphantasics does not differ substantially from chance. Along the 
same line, Keogh and Pearson, led by Kay et al. (2022 ), have recently 18
 J. J. LORENZATTI

gathered evidence that indicates that self-described aphantasics, unlike 
visualizers, do not adjust the size of their pupils when asked to visualize 
high-luminance objects.
How should these experimental results be understood in relation to the 
hypotheses we are considering? The visual rivalry and pupillometry experi -
mental paradigms provide strong evidence against DESCRIPTION and 
INTROSPECTION insofar as they clearly show significant behavioral differences 
between self-described aphantasics and visualizers beyond subjective 
reports. In turn, they also provide evidence against our initial puzzle, for 
differences at the behavioral level could be more important than supposed at 
first. Notice that the absence of priming effect and pupillary response to 
illusory brightness among self-described aphantasics cannot be attributed to 
the inherent difficulty to describe our mental lives or the failure to form 
adequate judgments about our mental states. Given that these experimental 
paradigms allow experimenters to dispense with any interpretation of indi-
viduals’ own mental lives and bypass subjective reports of visual imagery, 
researchers do not need to honor or dishonor self-described aphantasics’ 
construals—they can simply point out the behavioral differences between 
the groups.
Moreover, evidence stemming from the visual rivalry and pupillometry 
experimental paradigms incidentally supports the thesis that individuals 
have good metacognition of their mental states and strengthens the program 
of finding hidden differences in phenomenal experience through self- 
reports (Lupyan et al., 2023 ; Phillips, 2014 ). The fact that individuals’ 
construals of their own mental lives are a reliable predictor of either the 
presence or absence of priming effect and pupillary response suggests that 
introspection may not be as unreliable as Schwitzgebel and others claim.
How these results should be evaluated in relation to DISCONNECTION , on the 
other hand, is less clear. It could be tempting to conclude that if aphantasia 
was to involve a lack of visual imagery in the sense of differences at the 
personal level with no significant differences at the sub-personal level, we 
should be able to observe priming effect and pupillary response among 
aphantasics. Since this prediction is not verified, the argument goes, aphan -
tasics must lack sub-personal imagistic representations. However, the pro-
ponent of DISCONNECTION may claim that this conclusion presupposes that 
the priming effect and pupillary response are driven by sub-personal ima-
gistic representations. An alternative explanation would be that the priming 
effect and pupillary response are not bound to these sub-personal represen -
tations but to higher-order states such as beliefs and expectations. In other 
words, the visual rivalry and pupillometry experimental paradigms favor 
ABSENCE over DISCONNECTION on the plausible but unproven assumption that 
the priming effect and pupillary response are causally connected to the 
activation of the visual cortices and other areas related to visual imagery.PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY
 19

At this juncture, another line of psychological research proves to be 
particularly relevant. Keogh and Pearson (2014 ) also showed that back -
ground luminance substantially decreases performance in visual work -
ing memory tasks among high-visualizers but not low-visualizers. In 
other words, they found that, while high-visualizers have—on average— 
better performance in visual working memory tasks compared to low- 
visualizers, their performance drops drastically when background lumi -
nance is increased. In stark contrast, low-visualizers’ performance 
remains constant across illumination conditions. Importantly, the effect 
of background luminance among high-visualizers is restricted to visual 
working memory tasks, for neither group decreased performance in 
verbal work memory tasks. Although this study predates the identifica -
tion of aphantasia as such and, therefore, participants were recruited as 
low-visualizers as determined by low priming effect and not self-reports 
of lack of visual imagery, some participants in the study may have 
nonetheless been aphantasics (Keogh & Pearson, 2018 ). But even if 
this were not the case, evidence suggests that individuals employ multi -
ple cognitive strategies to solve visual working memory tasks, albeit 
with varying degrees of success.
A plausible yet by no means uncontroversial interpretation of these 
experimental results is that, while high-visualizers use cognitive mechan -
isms supported by cortical areas associated with vision—mechanisms that 
can be selectively disrupted by illumination conditions—low-visualizers 
employ cognitive mechanisms that share little to no neural correlates with 
the visual modality. Given that incoming visual information has obligatory 
access to the visual areas, it is not surprising, then, that changes in lumi -
nance can interfere with the performance of individuals using mechanisms 
that employ these areas, while the performance of individuals using other 
cognitive mechanisms remains unaffected.
4.Future directions
Although DISCONNECTION cannot be discarded as a general explanation for 
aphantasia, it nonetheless seems less suited than ABSENCE to explain the 
available evidence. Further research in this direction could help us to either 
decide between these hypotheses, accept them both as two possible under -
lying explanations of what is generically referred to as “aphantasia,” or 
suggest an alternative account not considered here.
Specific experimental paradigms could shed further light on this issue: 
First, the imagery value test (Paivio, 1971 ; Sadoski, 2005 ). Assessing whether 
nouns with high imagery value (such as “elephant”) and nouns with low 
imagery value (such as “truth”) are remembered and retrieved at different 
rates in self-described aphantasics, as has been observed among visualizers, 20
 J. J. LORENZATTI

could provide crucial evidence concerning how these concepts are codified 
and thus help us understand the relationship between mental imagery and 
different forms of memory.
Second, the pupillometry paradigm could also provide differential evi-
dence for one of the hypotheses above. Binda et al. (2013 ), for example, 
found that grayscale pictures of high-luminance objects (such as the sun) 
elicit greater pupil constriction than those of low-luminance objects (such as 
the moon). Although it remains unclear whether pupil responses were 
produced in response to higher-level semantic representations or lower- 
level imagistic representations, the absence of pupillary response to illusory 
brightness among self-described aphantasics points in the direction of the 
latter possibility (Kay et al., 2022 ). Similarly, Mathôt et al. (2017 ) found that 
words conveying brightness (such as “day”) also elicit greater pupil con-
striction than words conveying darkness (such as “night”). Further research 
using this experimental paradigm with self-described aphantasics could 
show whether reading or hearing words associated with degrees of illumi -
nation produce distinctive effects among self-described aphantasics. Similar 
effects would favor DISCONNECTION over ABSENCE , while differential effects 
would favor ABSENCE over DISCONNECTION .
Third, the eye-tracking paradigm could determine whether self-described 
aphantasics show similar eye-movement patterns when asked to visualize 
and perceive a certain scene. It has been documented among visualizers that 
eyes move “around” visualized objects in a similar way that they would 
move around actually perceived objects (Altmann, 2004 ; Nanay, 2015b ). 
A commonality in eye-movement patterns between self-described aphanta -
sics and visualizers would indicate the existence of imagistic representations 
that are nevertheless not accessible at a personal level, favoring 
DISCONNECTION , while a dissimilarity in eye-movement patterns would sug-
gest the presence of alternative mechanisms, favoring ABSENCE .
Finally, further research using fMRI with a battery of imagery-related 
tasks (instead of tasks requiring participants to visualize only faces and 
places) with self-described aphantasics is expected to provide conclusive 
evidence not only for the study of aphantasia but also mental imagery in 
general, as there is still no consensus on which cortical areas are strictly 
associated with visual imagery.23
5.Concluding summary
In this paper, I have considered four hypotheses aimed at explaining 
aphantasia. After assessing the available evidence, various reasons have 
emerged to doubt that it could be explained either as a discrepancy at the 
level of concepts or a failure of attentional mechanisms; neither DESCRIPTION 
nor INTROSPECTION predicts the behavioral and neurological differences PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY
 21

observed between self-described aphantasics and visualizers. In turn, the 
hypothesis of a lack of personal-level access to sub-personal imagistic 
representations cannot be discarded as an explanation for aphantasia but 
may encounter some difficulties in explaining the empirical findings sur-
veyed above. Despite its strengths in accommodating aphantasics’ self- 
reports and providing a framework for models that explain certain beha -
vioral differences, DISCONNECTION faces problems in accounting for the beha -
vioral effects induced by the visual rivalry, pupillary, and luminance 
experimental paradigms and may also face challenges in accounting for 
the widespread cortical activation in aphantasics. Finally, the hypothesis of 
an absence of sub-personal imagistic representations is both in comparative 
and absolute terms better suited to explain the previous psychological and 
neurological studies; ABSENCE can accommodate virtually all the evidence 
gathered thus far.
From an interdisciplinary perspective, it is hoped that the philosophical 
concepts presented here have proven helpful in addressing some of the 
problems emerging from cognitive science. Three elements I take to be 
particularly relevant to the discussion are: First, to provide a conceptual 
articulation of what is as yet only a diverse array of empirical studies and 
offer, for the first time in the literature, a comprehensive evaluation of 
possible explanations for aphantasia. Second, to call attention to the dis-
tinction between what I termed “INTROSPECTION ” and “DISCONNECTION ,” some -
thing that is too often blurred by vague use of the concepts of 
“consciousness,” “experience,” and “awareness.” Third, and related to the 
previous point, to call for greater precision in what we mean by “mental 
imagery” in relation to aphantasia—and thus avoid the ambiguity of 
whether it refers to personal-level events (of which the individual may or 
may not be aware) or sub-personal imagistic representations (of which the 
subject is necessarily unaware). In this regard, aphantasia is a case in which 
conceptual clarification is of particular importance, not only for empirical 
research but also for philosophical inquiry itself, inasmuch as this condition 
challenges many of our pre-theoretical and philosophical intuitions alike.
Notes
1. Euclid’s definition of the sphere can be found in the Book IX, Definition 14, of his 
Elements . Einstein’s famous Gedankenexperimente can be found in his 
Autobiographical Notes . For the controversy between Plato and Aristotle about the 
rational role of mental imagery, see, for example, Ananth (2014 ). For discussion about 
the rational role of imagination in contemporary analytic philosophy, see Berto and 
Schoonen (2018 ).
2. I will refer to aphantasia as a “condition” or “alleged condition” with the caveat that 
many self-described aphantasics do not think their perceived lack of visual imagery in 
terms of an impairment, disability, or handicap. The same applies to other 22
 J. J. LORENZATTI

expressions such as “otherwise healthy individuals” I will be employing in this paper. 
In this regard, Zeman et al. (2020 ) write that they “do not at present consider lifelong 
aphantasia to be a medical disorder, but rather an intriguing variation in human 
experience, analogous to synesthesia” (p. 438).
3. Plato uses the term “phantasía” to refer to appearances and regards this notion as 
a combination of perception and belief (Soph . 263b–264b, Tht. 152a–186e). Aristotle 
inherits this use but sometimes employs the term in ways that seem to refer to imagination 
and mental imagery (DA III, 3, 427b 17–25, 428a 1–16, Mem . I, 450a 20–25).
4. According to some estimates, extreme cases of this alleged condition may affect up to 
1% of the population (Zeman et al., 2020 ).
5. For testimonials, see Price (1952 ), Faw (2009 ), Ross (2016 ), Alireza (2016 ), Kendle 
(2017 ), and Watkins (2018 ). Perhaps I should add that I describe myself as an 
aphantasic.
6. More recently, D’Aloisio-Montilla (2017 ) has argued that aphantasia provides a new 
line of argument in favor of the “overflow account;” that is, the view that phenomenal 
consciousness is far richer than access consciousness (Block, 2011 ).
7. For an extensive review of the literature about the apparent lack of correlation 
between subjective reports of visual imagery and objective performance in imagery- 
related tasks, see Dean and Morris (2003 ), Nanay (2021b ), Schwitzgebel (2011 ), and 
Phillips (2014 ).
8. Another possible explanation of aphantasia that I have not included here is that 
individuals who report no visual imagery have the capacity to produce it but are 
prevented from doing so by other personal or sub-personal agencies. In other words, 
self-described aphantasics would be able to conjure visual imagery but are system -
atically prevented from reaching the instance in which visual imagery is produced. 
“Neurosis,” “anxiety,” “repression,” “depression,” “biases,” and simply “refusal to 
imagine” are some of the interfering factors considered in the literature. Different 
versions of this hypothesis, which I have termed “INTERFERENCE ,” have been suggested 
by Charcot and Bernard (1883 ), Zangwill (according to Brain, 1954 ), Kunzendorf 
(1995 ), and de Vito and Bartolomeo (2016 ) and constitute one of the possibilities that 
researchers either explicitly or implicitly attempt to rule out in contemporary work on 
aphantasia (see, for example, Kay et al., 2022 ; Wicken et al., 2021 ).
9. For theories of introspection and discussion, see Armstrong (1968 ), Dennett (1969 ), 
Lycan (1987 ), and Hill (1988 ).
10. Hebb (1968 ) claims that “the difference between those who have little imagery and 
those who have much may be not a difference of the mechanism of thinking, but 
a difference in the retrievability of the image” (p. 476).
11. The ideas that Thomas (2001 ) ascribes to Marks on the basis of their personal 
communication seem to be akin to what I have called “INTROSPECTION ” (all this 
provided that by “visual imagery” Marks signifies personal-level states and not sub- 
personal representations, for otherwise his view would be best described as what 
I have termed “DISCONNECTION ”).
12. Nanay’s stance on this matter requires further clarification. For a mental state to be 
“unconscious” in Nanay’s sense, the individual must lack “conscious awareness” and, 
therefore, his take on the issue is similar to what we have described as INTROSPECTION . 
However, since he defines “mental imagery” in terms of “cortical activation of the 
early visual cortices,” he makes no room for the distinction between INTROSPECTION 
and DISCONNECTION ; if having mental imagery is simply being in such a neurological 
state, whether the lack of access to information pertaining to that state occurs due to 
a failure in introspection or lack of personal access makes no difference, the only case PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY
 23

in which an underlying condition would count as a genuine case of lack of mental 
imagery would be that of absence of cortical activation of the early visual cortices, 
something analogous to ABSENCE , of which Nanay is skeptical (Nanay, 2021b ).
13. This is a modified version of a visualization exercise found on Reddit: https://www. 
reddit.com/r/Aphantasia/comments/c6k023/this_is_why_the_new_users_here_are_ 
confused_two/
14. Dadds et al. (2004 ) have also suggested a positive correlation between the reported 
vividness of visual imagery and the extent to which individuals are affected by 
aversions (but see Dawes et al., 2020 , for a nuanced hypothesis). Also, see Milton 
et al. (2021 ) for other psychological characteristics that could potentially be associated 
with aphantasia, such as elevated IQ scores, traits on the autistic spectrum, and 
introversion.
15. Thanks to an anonymous reviewer for bringing to my attention the need to include 
this point in the argument.
16. Brain (1954 ) claims that “it follows that visual imagery is not essential to these 
processes, which therefore must depend upon neurophysiological schemas which 
do not themselves enter consciousness” (p. 290).
17. Specifically, Botez et al. (1985 ) found hypoplasia of the right hemisphere and abnor -
mal development of the posterior and superior parts of a stretched corpus callosum. 
Although the passage itself does not allow us to distinguish between INTROSPECTION and 
DISCONNECTION , the existence of these neural correlates suggests the latter.
18. It is important to mention that the famous “mental imagery debate” from the 
seventies and eighties pertains only to imagery in the sense of underlying sub- 
personal representations. Thus, there is no need to get involved in such debate in 
this paper besides pointing out that DISCONNECTION would require sub-personal repre -
sentations to be imagistic in nature.
19. For example, Zeman et al. (2010 ) conclude that their patient “preserved performance 
on tests of visual imagery . . . [due to] the use of alternative nonvisual strategies” 
(p. 154). Keogh and Pearson (2018 ) claim that their experimental results “support the 
theory that congenital aphantasia is characterized by a lack of low-level sensory visual 
imagery, and is not due to a lack of metacognition or an inability to introspect” 
(p. 58). Wicken et al. (2021 ) argue that the data “provide further support for 
aphantasia being a condition that is characterized by a true lack of visual imagery, 
rather than a condition of poor metacognition” (p. 4). Kay et al. (2022 ) claim that 
their research “provide strong evidence linking the pupillary light response to mental 
imagery, as well as supporting the behavioral work showing that aphantasic indivi -
duals indeed lack visual sensory imagery” (p. 8). Finally, Pounder et al. (2022 ) suggest 
that “it is the possible that aphantasic individuals are completing these tasks without 
access to visual imagery, but rather by using spatial imagery (similar to congenitally 
blind individuals)” (p. 189).
20. Specifically, Zeman’s patient and the control group showed no differential activa -
tion in the inferior occipital and fusiform gyri when viewing pictures of famous 
faces. However, when prompted to visualize these faces, the patient showed 
a comparatively reduced activation in the bilateral fusiform gyri, superior temporal 
gyri/sulci, inferior occipital gyri, and calcarine sulci, and a comparatively increased 
activation in the right anterior cingulate, bilateral inferior frontal gyri, and the 
precuneus (Zeman et al., 2010 ).
21. In Phillips’s own words, “what Zeman et al. call ‘blind imagination’ apparently 
involves the ‘successful use of an alternative strategy to perform imagery tasks in 
the absence of the experience of imagery’ (Zeman et al., 2010 , [p.] 145). One piece of 24
 J. J. LORENZATTI

evidence for this is that their subject does not exhibit the standard reaction time effect 
in the mental rotation task. Acknowledging the size of this empirical assumption, 
I assumed above that this is not true of professed non-imagers” (2014 , p. 296).
22. Surprisingly, neither Fulford et al. (2018 ) nor Milton et al. (2021 ) found a positive 
correlation between visual imagery and activation in the early visual cortices.
23. For discussion about the cortical areas that underlie visual imagery, see Albers 
et al. (2013 ), Brogaard and Gatzia (2017 ); Fulford et al. (2018 ), Nanay (2021b ), 
and Spagna et al. (2021 ).
Acknowledgements
I am extremely grateful to Bill Lycan, Lionel Shapiro, Diego Lawler, Elena Comay del Junco, 
and two anonymous reviewers of this journal for providing insightful comments on earlier 
versions of this paper.
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author.
ORCID
Joel J. Lorenzatti 
 http://orcid.org/0009-0008-6541-6054
References
Albers, A. M., Kok, P., Toni, I., Dijkerman, H. C., & de Lange, F. P. (2013 ). Shared 
representations for working memory and mental imagery in early visual cortex. Current 
Biology , 23(15), 1427–1431. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2013.05.065
Alireza, T. (2016 , June 30). Aphantasia: Seeing the world without a mind’s eye. [Video], 
YouTube. https://youtu.be/arc1fdoMi2Y 
Altmann, G. T. M. (2004 ). Language-mediated eye movements in the absence of a visual 
world: The ‘blank screen paradigm. Cognition , 93(2), B79–B87. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
cognition.2004.02.005
Ananth, M. (2014 ). A cognitive interpretation of Aristotle’s concepts of catharsis and tragic 
pleasure. International Journal of Art and Art History , 2(2), 4–19. https://doi.org/10. 
15640/ijaah.v2n2a1
Armstrong, D. M. (1968 ). A materialist theory of the mind . Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Behrmann, M., Moscovitch, M., & Winocur, G. (1994 ). Intact mental imagery and impaired 
visual perception: Dissociable processes in a patient with visual agnosia. Journal of 
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance , 20(5), 1068–1087.  
https://doi.org/10.1037//0096-1523.20.5.1068
Berkeley, G. (1910 ). A treatise concerning the principles of human knowledge . The Open 
Court Publishing Company.
Berto, F., & Schoonen, T. (2018 ). Conceivability and possibility: Some dilemmas for 
humeans. Synthese , 195(6), 2697–2715. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11229-017-1346-7
Binda, P., Pereverzeva, M., & Murray, S. O. (2013 ). Pupil constrictions to photographs of the 
sun. Journal of Vision , 13(8), 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1167/13.6.8PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY
 25

Blajenkova, O., Kozhevnikov, M., & Motes, M. A. (2006 ). Object-spatial imagery: A new 
self-report imagery questionnaire. Applied Cognitive Psychology , 20(2), 239–263. https:// 
doi.org/10.1002/acp.1182 
Block, N. (2011 ). Perceptual consciousness overflows cognitive access. Trends in Cognitive 
Sciences , 15(12), 567–575. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2011.11.001 
Botez, M. I., Olivier, M., Vézina, J. L., Botez, T., & Kaufman, B. (1985 ). Defective revisua -
lization: Dissociation between cognitive and imagistic thought case report and short 
review of the literature. Cortex , 21(3), 375–389. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0010-9452(85) 
80003-4
Brain, R. W. (1954 ). Loss of visualization. Proceedings of the Royal Society of Medicine , 47(4), 
288–290. https://doi.org/10.1177/003591575404700410 
Brogaard, B., & Gatzia, D. E. (2017 ). Unconscious imagination and the mental imagery 
debate. Frontiers in Psychology , 8. Article 799. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2017.00799
Charcot, J. M., & Bernard, D. (1883 ). Un cas de suppression brusque et isolée de la vision 
mentale des signes et des objets (formes et couleurs). Le Progrès Médical , 11, 568–571.
Dadds, M. R., Hawes, D., Schaefer, B., & Vaka, K. (2004 ). Individual differences in imagery 
and reports of aversions. Memory , 12(4), 462–466. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
09658210444000070
D’Aloisio-Montilla, N. (2017 ). Imagery and overflow: We see more than we report. 
Philosophical Psychology , 30(5), 545–570. https://doi.org/10.1080/09515089.2017.1298086 
Dawes, A. J., Keogh, R., Andrillon, T., & Pearson, J. (2020 ). A cognitive profile of 
multi-sensory imagery, memory and dreaming in aphantasia. Scientific Reports , 10(1), 
10022. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-65705-7
Dean, G. M., & Morris, P. E. (2003 ). The relationship between self-reports of imagery and 
spatial ability. British Journal of Psychology , 94(2), 245–273. https://doi.org/10.1348/ 
000712603321661912
Dennett, D. C. (1969 ). Content and consciousness . Routledge and Kegan Paul.
de Vito, S., & Bartolomeo, P. (2016 ). Refusing to imagine? On the possibility of psychogenic 
aphantasia. A commentary on Zeman et al. (2015). Cortex , 74, 334–335. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.cortex.2015.06.013
Drayson, Z. (2012 ). The uses and abuses of the personal/subpersonal distinction. 
Philosophical Perspectives , 26(1), 1–18. https://doi.org/10.1111/phpe.12014
Eddy, J. K., & Glass, A. L. (1981 ). Reading and listening to high and low imagery sentences. 
Journal of Verbal Learning & Verbal Behavior , 20(3), 333–345. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
S0022-5371(81)90483-7 
Faw, B. (1997 ). Outlining a brain model of mental imaging abilities. Neuroscience and 
Biobehavioral Reviews , 21(3), 283–288. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0149-7634(96)00026-7 
Faw, B. (2009 ). Conflicting intuitions may be based on differing abilities: Evidence from 
mental imaging research. Journal of Consciousness Studies , 16(4), 45–68. https://psycnet. 
apa.org/record/2009-05537-003 
Fulford, J., Milton, F., Salas, D., Smith, A., Simler, A., Winlove, C., & Zeman, A. (2018 ). The 
neural correlates of visual imagery vividness—an fMRI study and literature review. 
Cortex , 105, 26–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2017.09.014
Galton, F. (1880 ). Statistics of mental imagery. Mind , 5(19), 301–318. https://doi.org/10. 
1093/mind/os-V.19.301
Hebb, D. O. (1968 ). Concerning imagery. Psychological Review , 75(6), 466–477. https://doi. 
org/10.1037/h0026771 
Heuer, F., Fischman, D., & Reisberg, D. (1986 ). Why does vivid imagery hurt colour 
memory? Canadian Journal of Psychology / Revue Canadienne de Psychologie , 40(2), 
161–175. https://doi.org/10.1037/h008009026
 J. J. LORENZATTI

Hill, C. S. (1988 ). Introspective awareness of sensations. Topoi , 7(1), 11–24. https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/BF00776205
Kay, L., Keogh, R., Andrillon, T., & Pearson, J. (2022 ). The pupillary light response as 
a physiological index of aphantasia, sensory and phenomenological imagery strength. 
eLife , 11, 1–17. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.72484
Kendle, A. (2017 ). Aphantasia: Experiences, perceptions, and insights . Dark River.
Keogh, R., & Pearson, J. (2014 ). The sensory strength of voluntary visual imagery predicts 
visual working memory capacity. Journal of Vision , 14(12), 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1167/ 
14.12.7
Keogh, R., & Pearson, J. (2018 ). The blind mind: No sensory visual imagery in aphantasia. 
Cortex , 105, 53–60. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2017.10.012
Kunzendorf, R. G. (1995 ). VVIQ construct validity: Centrally excited sensations versus 
analog representations and memory images. Journal of Mental Imagery , 19(3–4), 150– 
153. https://psycnet.apa.org/record/1996-29149-001 
Lupyan, G., Uchiyama, R., Thompson, B., & Casasanto, D. (2023 ). Hidden differences in 
phenomenal experience. Cognitive Science , 47(1), e13239. https://doi.org/10.1111/cogs. 
13239 
Lycan, W. G. (1987 ). Consciousness . MIT Press.
Lycan, W. G. (1996 ). Consciousness and experience . MIT Press.
Marks, D. F. (1973 ). Visual imagery differences in the recall of pictures. British Journal of 
Psychology , 64(1), 17–24. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2044-8295.1973.tb01322.x
Marks, D. F. (Ed.). (1986 ). Theories of image formation . Brandon House.
Mathôt, S., Grainger, J., & Strijkers, K. (2017 ). Pupillary responses to words that convey 
a sense of brightness or darkness. Psychological Science , 28(8), 1116–1124. https://doi.org/ 
10.1177/0956797617702699 
Milton, F., Fulford, J., Dance, C., Gaddum, J., Heuerman-Williamson, B., Jones, K., 
Knight, K. F., MacKisack, M., Winlove, C., & Zeman, A. (2021 ). Behavioral and neural 
signatures of visual imagery vividness extremes: Aphantasia versus hyperphantasia. 
Cerebral Cortex Communications , 2(2), 1–15. https://doi.org/10.1093/texcom/tgab035
Monzel, M., Mitchell, D., Macpherson, F., Pearson, J., & Zeman, A. (2022 ). Aphantasia, 
dysikonesia, anauralia: Call for a single term for the lack of mental imagery-commentary 
on Dance et al. (2021) and Hinwar and Lambert (2021). Cortex , 150, 149–152. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.cortex.2022.02.002
Nanay, B. (2015a ). Perceptual content and the content of mental imagery. Philosophical 
Studies , 172(7), 1723–1736. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11098-014-0392-y 
Nanay, B. (2015b ). Perceptual representation/perceptual content. In M. Matthen (Ed.), 
Oxford handbook for the philosophy of perception (pp. 153–167). Oxford University Press.
Nanay, B. (2021a ). Mental imagery. In E. N. Zalta (Ed.), Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy 
(Winter 2021, ed). Stanford University. https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2021/ 
entries/mental-imagery/ 
Nanay, B. (2021b ). Unconscious mental imagery. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society B, 376(1817), 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2019.0689
Nielsen, J. M. (1946 ). Agnosia, apraxia, aphasia. Their value in cerebral localization (2nd 
ed.). Hoeber.
Paivio, A. (1971 ). Imagery and verbal processes . Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Pearson, J. (2014 ). New directions in mental-imagery research: The binocular-rivalry tech-
nique and decoding fMRI patterns. Current Directions in Psychological Science , 23(3), 
178–183. https://doi.org/10.1177/0963721414532287 PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY
 27

Pearson, J., Clifford, C. W. G., & Tong, F. (2008 ). The functional impact of mental imagery 
on conscious perception. Current Biology , 18(13), 982–986. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub. 
2008.05.048
Perky, C. W. (1910 ). An experimental study of imagination. The American Journal of 
Psychology , 21(3), 422–452. https://doi.org/10.2307/1413350 
Phillips, I. (2014 ). Lack of imagination: Individual differences in mental imagery and the 
significance of consciousness. In M. Sprevak & J. Kallestrup (Eds.), New waves in 
philosophy of mind (pp. 278–300). Palgrave Macmillan.
Pounder, Z., Jacob, J., Evans, S., Loveday, C., Eardley, A. F., & Silvanto, J. (2022 ). Only 
minimal differences between individuals with congenital aphantasia and those with 
typical imagery on neuropsychological tasks that involve imagery. Cortex , 148, 
180–192. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2021.12.010
Price, H. H. (1952 ). Image thinking. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society , 52(1), 135–166.  
https://doi.org/10.1093/aristotelian/52.1.135
Reisberg, D., Pearson, D. G., & Kosslyn, S. M. (2003 ). Intuitions and introspections about 
imagery: The role of imagery experience in shaping an investigator’s theoretical views. 
Applied Cognitive Psychology , 17(2), 147–160. https://doi.org/10.1002/acp.858 
Ross, B. (2016 , April 22). Aphantasia: How it feels to be blind in your mind . Facebook. 
https://www.facebook.com/notes/blake-ross/aphantasia-how-it-feels-to-be-blind-in- 
your-mind/10156834777480504/ 
Sadoski, M. (2005 ). A dual coding view of vocabulary learning. Reading & Writing 
Quarterly , 21(3), 221–238. https://doi.org/10.1080/10573560590949359
Schwitzgebel, E. (2011 ). Perplexities of consciousness . The MIT Press. https://doi.org/10. 
7551/mitpress/8243.001.0001
Segal, S. J. (1972 ). Assimilation of a stimulus in the construction of an image: The Perky 
effect revisited. In P. W. Sheehan (Ed.), The function & nature of imagery (pp. 203–230). 
Academic Press.
Segal, S. J., & Nathan, S. (1964 ). The Perky effect: Incorporation of an external stimulus into 
an imagery experience under placebo and control conditions. Perceptual and Motor Skills , 
18(2), 385–395. https://doi.org/10.2466/pms.1964.18.2.385 
Shepard, R. N., & Metzler, J. (1971 ). Mental rotation of three-dimensional objects. Science , 
171(3972), 701–703. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.171.3972.701
Spagna, A., Hajhajate, D., Liu, J., & Bartolomeo, P. (2021 ). Visual mental imagery engages 
the left fusiform gyrus, but not the early visual cortex: A meta-analysis of neuroimaging 
evidence. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews , 122, 201–217. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.neubiorev.2020.12.029 
Thomas, N. J. T. (2001 , December 22). Are there people who do not experience imagery? (and 
why does it matter?) . Imagery Imagination. http://www.imagery-imagination.com/non- 
im.htm 
Thomas, N. J. T. (2021 ). Mental imagery. In E. N. Zalta (Ed.), Stanford encyclopedia of 
philosophy (Fall 2021, ed). Stanford University. https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/ 
fall2021/entries/mental-imagery/ 
Tween, O. (2019 , May 3). Investigation into aphantasia: Neurological, functional, and 
behavioral correlates . Beloit College. https://doi.org/10.31237/osf.io/q7v2k
Watkins, N. W. (2018 ). (A)phantasia and severely deficient autobiographical memory: 
Scientific and personal perspectives. Cortex , 105, 41–52. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor 
tex.2017.10.010
Weber, R. J., & Castleman, J. (1970 ). The time it takes to imagine. Perception & 
Psychophysics , 8(3), 165–168. https://doi.org/10.3758/BF03210196 28
 J. J. LORENZATTI

Wicken, M., Keogh, R., & Pearson, J. (2021 ). The critical role of mental imagery in human 
emotion: Insights from fear-based imagery and aphantasia. Philosophical Transactions of 
the Royal Society B, 288(1946), 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2021.0267
Zeman, A. Z. J., Della Sala, S., Torrens, L. A., Gountouna, V. E., McGonigle, D. J., & 
Logie, R. H. (2010 ). Loss of imagery phenomenology with intact visuo-spatial task 
performance: A case of ‘blind imagination’. Neuropsychologia , 48(1), 145–155. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2009.08.024
Zeman, A., Dewar, M., & Della Sala, S. (2015 ). Lives without imagery—congenital aphanta -
sia. Cortex , 73, 378–380. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2015.05.019
Zeman, A., Milton, F., Della Sala, S., Dewar, M., Frayling, T., Gaddum, J., Hattersley, A., 
Heuerman-Williamson, B., Jones, K., MacKisack, M., & Winlove, C. (2020 ). Phantasia- 
the psychological significance of lifelong visual imagery vividness extremes. Cortex , 130, 
426–440. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2020.04.003PHILOSOPHICAL PSYCHOLOGY
 29