Frontiers in Psychology 01 frontiersin.org
The unified protocol for 
transdiagnostic treatment of 
emotional disorders for 
misophonia: a pilot trial exploring 
acceptability and efficacy
Kibby McMahon 1*, Clair Cassiello-Robbins 2, Anna Greenleaf 3, 
Rachel Guetta 1, Emily Frazer-Abel 1, Lisalynn Kelley 1 and 
M. Zachary Rosenthal 1,3
1 Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, 
United States, 2 Triangle Area Psychology Clinic, Durham, NC, United States, 3 Department of 
Psychology and Neuroscience, Duke University, Durham, NC, United States
Introduction:  Misophonia is a recently defined disorder characterized by distressing 
responses to everyday sounds, such as chewing or sniffling. Individuals with 
misophonia experience significant functional impairment but have limited options 
for evidenced-based behavioral treatment. To address this gap in the literature, 
the current pilot trial explored the acceptability and efficacy of a transdiagnostic 
cognitive-behavioral approach to treating symptoms of misophonia.
Methods:  This trial was conducted in two studies: In Study 1, the Unified Protocol 
for Transdiagnostic Treatment of Emotional Disorders (UP) was delivered to 
eight patients in order to receive feedback to guide revisions to the treatment to 
suit this population. In Study 2, ten patients received the revised UP treatment 
to explore its acceptability and preliminary efficacy. This study used a single-
case experimental design with multiple baselines, randomizing patients to 
either a 2-week baseline or 4-week baseline prior to the 16 weeks of treatment, 
followed by four weeks of follow-up.
Results:  The findings from these studies suggested that patients found both the 
original and adapted versions of the UP to be acceptable and taught them skills 
for how to manage their misophonia symptoms. Importantly, the findings also 
suggested that the UP can help remediate symptoms of misophonia, particularly 
the emotional and behavioral responses.
Discussion:  These findings provide preliminary evidence that this transdiagnostic 
treatment for emotional disorders can improve symptoms of misophonia in adults.
KEYWORDS
misophonia, Unified Protocol (UP), single case design, behavioral intervention, 
cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT), sound intolerance
Introduction
Misophonia is a recently defined sound intolerance disorder characterized by distressing 
and functionally impairing responses to certain everyday sounds, commonly those that are 
oral (e.g., chewing, swallowing, lip smacking) or facial (e.g., nose whistling or sniffling) ( Swedo 
et al., 2022 ). These sounds and associated stimuli are often called “triggers” of misophonia and 
are often repetitive sounds produced by other people but can include environmental sounds OPEN ACCESS
EDITED BY
David Pineda,  
Miguel Hernández University of Elche, Spain
REVIEWED BY
Andrew Giles Guzick,  
University of Pennsylvania, United States
Eric A. Storch,  
Baylor College of Medicine, United States
*CORRESPONDENCE
Kibby McMahon   
 Kibby.McMahon@duke.edu
RECEIVED 14 September 2023
ACCEPTED 19 December 2023
PUBLISHED 09 February 2024
CITATION
McMahon K, Cassiello-Robbins C, Green
leaf A, Guetta R, Frazer-Abel E, Kelley L and 
Rosenthal MZ (2024) The unified protocol for 
transdiagnostic treatment of emotional 
disorders for misophonia: a pilot trial 
exploring acceptability and efficacy.
Front. Psychol.  14:1294571.
doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1294571
COPYRIGHT
© 2024 McMahon, Cassiello-Robbins, 
Greenleaf, Guetta, Frazer-Abel, Kelley and 
Rosenthal. This is an open-access article 
distributed under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution License (CC BY) . The 
use, distribution or reproduction in other 
forums is permitted, provided the original 
author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are 
credited and that the original publication in 
this journal is cited, in accordance with 
accepted academic practice. No use, 
distribution or reproduction is permitted 
which does not comply with these terms.TYPE Original Research
PUBLISHED  09 February 2024
DOI 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1294571

McMahon et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1294571
Frontiers in Psychology 02 frontiersin.org(e.g., clock ticking, humming of appliances, or silverware on plates) or 
animal-produced sounds (e.g., animals grooming or eating). In 
response to hearing or anticipating these sounds, people with 
misophonia may experience or express a range of aversive responses 
across physiological, attentional, emotional, cognitive, interpersonal, 
and behavioral areas of functioning. They often engage in avoidance 
and escape behaviors to prevent and mitigate exposure to aversive 
triggering cues. Efforts to avoid misophonia triggers can be  very 
limiting; for example, eating is a daily experience and common source 
of social interaction. Avoidance of eating due to misophonia sounds 
can reduce social contact and strain interpersonal relationships. 
Furthermore, people with functional impairment due to misophonia 
report higher psychopathology symptoms, lower interpersonal 
emotion regulation, and lower quality of life than individuals without 
impairment ( Möllmann et al., 2023 ). Even though misophonia only 
appeared in the clinical literature as recently as 2001 ( Jastreboff and 
Jastreboff, 2001 ), research suggests that close to 20% of individuals 
experience at least moderate symptoms of the condition ( Wu et al., 
2014 ; Mattson et  al., 2023 ; Vitoratou et  al., 2023 ). This research 
suggests that a notable portion of the population may suffer from 
impairing symptoms of misophonia, highlighting the pressing need 
for more treatment and prevention efforts. Despite its prevalence and 
impact, there are few treatment studies examining how to best help 
those suffering with misophonia. Recent reviews of misophonia 
identified only three open trials and one randomized controlled trial 
(Mattson et al., 2023 ; Rosenthal et al., 2023 ). The remaining studies 
were case studies. Given the impact of misophonia, researchers need 
to continue to identify and rigorously evaluate evidence-based 
treatments that can help remediate symptoms.
Recent research has highlighted problematic emotional responses 
as the mechanism underlying impairment in misophonia. People with 
misophonia report a range of affective responses to their misophonic 
triggers, especially anger, anxiety and disgust ( Dibb and Golding, 
2022 ; Savard et al., 2022 ; Andermane et al., 2023 ; Vitoratou et al., 
2023 ). Studies also have pointed to the relationship between 
misophonia and problems with emotion regulation, particularly 
difficulties controlling impulsive behavior while upset ( Cassiello-
Robbins et al., 2020a ; Guetta et al., 2022 ; Rinaldi et al., 2023 ). Beyond 
emotional reactions, misophonia is associated with co-occurring 
psychiatric disorders that are also characterized by the experience of 
strong emotions such as anxiety and mood disorders ( Jager et al., 
2020 ; Rosenthal et al., 2022 ; Siepsiak et al., 2022 ). Misophonia does 
not appear to be reliably linked to any specific disorder, suggesting it 
is a transdiagnostic problem ( Rosenthal et al., 2022 ). However, the 
most rigorously conducted study to date exploring co-occurring 
mental health problems and misophonia using structured diagnostic 
interviews and larger samples found that, in both children and adults, 
the most common psychiatric comorbidities are anxiety and mood 
disorders ( Jager et al., 2020 ; Rosenthal et al., 2022 ; Guzick et al., 2023 ). 
Therefore, one reasonable approach in treatment development for 
misophonia is to examine interventions that are evidence-based, 
transdiagnostic (including but not limited to those across anxiety and 
mood disorders), and target underlying difficulties with emotional 
functioning across children and adults.
Evidence-based psychological treatments such as cognitive-
behavioral therapies (CBTs), are well established treatments, many of 
which were developed to target changes in emotion regulation. Such 
CBTs generally help patients change their thoughts and behaviors to manage the onset, experience or reactions to emotions. Preliminary 
studies using CBTs have begun to show early promise for treating 
misophonia with CBTs ( Rosenthal et  al., 2023 ). An open trial 
demonstrated that a group delivered CBT led to a significant reduction 
in misophonia symptoms in 48% of the 90 participants ( Schröder 
et al., 2017 ). A follow-up study with this treatment using a randomized, 
waitlist-controlled trial concluded that the brief group-based CBT 
approach showed both short- and long-term efficacy for misophonia 
(Jager et  al., 2021 ). Patients in the treatment group reported 
improvements in mental and physical dysfunction, suggesting the 
possibility that CBTs might improve areas of functioning in patients 
with misophonia. A number of case studies also suggest various CBTs 
could effectively target symptoms of misophonia ( Mattson et  al., 
2023 ). Findings from these studies indicate promise for the use of 
cognitive-behavioral approaches to increasing control over attention 
and affective responses to triggers in treatment of misophonia.
Early studies like these have demonstrated that this disorder can 
be treated with interventions that help people change their thoughts, 
physiological responses, behaviors and attentional focus in response 
to trigger sounds. Because this field of research is in its nascent stage, 
researchers have ample room to build on these preliminary findings. 
For example, many of the early uncontrolled case studies and open 
trials are limited in not using measures of misophonia with strong 
psychometric properties. Additionally, the CBT protocol tested in the 
only randomized controlled trial was specifically designed for 
misophonia symptoms and helping patients change their responses to 
their trigger sounds. Although this approach is novel and may be quite 
useful for some people with misophonia, this approach may not target 
the transdiagnostic processes that may underline misophonia in the 
context of common co-occurring psychiatric disorders. A CBT-based 
treatment that improves the ability to respond to emotions skillfully 
may be helpful in treating misophonia symptoms and, concurrently, 
other co-occurring mental health problems.
One CBT that can target such emotional processes shared by 
several diagnostic categories is the Unified Protocol for 
Transdiagnostic Treatment of Emotional Disorders (UP; Barlow et al., 
2018 ). The UP targets emotional disorders  a term that transcends 
diagnostic categories and describes a mechanistic process that 
contributes to the etiology and maintenance of difficulties managing 
strong emotions ( Bullis et al., 2019 ). The term “emotional disorders” 
includes diagnoses such as anxiety, depressive, obsessive-compulsive, 
trauma-related, and borderline personality disorders. It also includes 
presenting problems that are not diagnoses in DSM-5 if they can 
be  conceptualized in the described functional model (e.g., 
dysregulated anger that does not meet criteria for intermittent 
explosive disorder). Emotional disorders are described by a functional 
model as: (1) the experience of frequent, intense, predominantly 
negative emotions; (2) an aversive reaction to the experience of 
emotions (e.g., the perception that these emotions are intolerable, 
uncontrollable, unacceptable); and (3) use of avoidance-based 
emotion regulation strategies (e.g., avoidance, suppression) that 
typically reduce the intensity of the emotion in the short-term but 
maintain problems in the long-term ( Sauer-Zavala and Barlow, 2014 ). 
Over time, this tendency to avoid emotional experiences leads to 
impairment in daily life (e.g., isolation from others, limiting activities) 
and even more distress in response to emotions. The conceptualization 
of emotional disorders provided by the UP maps clearly onto 
misophonia. Because misophonia can be conceptualized using this

McMahon et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1294571
Frontiers in Psychology 03 frontiersin.orgfunctional model of emotional disorders, it is possible the UP serves 
as a promising candidate treatment for this condition ( Rosenthal 
et al., 2023 ).
As a treatment, the overarching goal of the UP is to increase 
acceptance of emotions to reduce reliance on ineffective emotion 
regulation strategies by teaching CBT skills to manage emotions 
more effectively. More specifically, this treatment is typically 
delivered over 16 outpatient sessions and consists of 8 modules. In 
brief, these modules are (1) motivation enhancement, (2) 
psychoeducation about the function of emotions and how to track 
emotional experiences, (3) mindful emotion awareness, (4) 
cognitive flexibility, (5) changing ineffective behaviors, (6) 
awareness and tolerance of physical sensations (e.g., interoceptive 
exposures), (7) emotion exposure, and (8) relapse prevention. These 
modules are described in detail elsewhere ( Payne et  al., 2014 ; 
Barlow et al., 2018 ). As described in Table 1 , these skills target 
misophonia in important and distinct ways.
One previous two-phase study showed promise for using the UP 
to treat misophonia in children ages 8–16 years old ( Lewin et  al., 
2021 ). Preliminary results from the first phase with four pilot 
participants showed modest improvements in evaluator-rated severity 
of symptoms. The results of this phase concluded that the UP is one 
possible approach to treatment and suggest that children with 
misophonia could learn skills to tolerate distress associated with their 
trigger sounds. The second phase was a randomized clinical trial that 
compared 10 sessions of the UP to 10 sessions of an emotional/
physiological relaxation and education intervention. Outcomes from 
this study presented at conferences have suggested that compared to 
those in the comparison group, youth with misophonia who received 
the UP treatment exhibited greater misophonia symptom 
improvement ( Lewin, 2023 ). Findings from this pioneering study 
highlight the potential for using the UP to treat misophonia. Further 
research in adult populations is the next logical step to studying the 
UP’s efficacy across all individuals with this disorder.Current study
In sum, there is a need for more research on theory-driven, 
transdiagnostic treatments for misophonia. The UP has been effective 
with disorders (e.g., anxiety, depressive personality, obsessive-
compulsive disorders) that are commonly comorbid with misophonia 
and share similar mechanisms of emotional dysregulation ( Cassiello-
Robbins et al., 2020b ; Rosenthal et al., 2022 ). Thus, the UP targets the 
emotional intolerance, co-occurring disorders, and processes relevant 
to misophonia. The UP is time-limited and follows a standard 
protocol, making it accessible and cost-effective to implement with 
patients. Given its ability to target heterogenous presenting problems, 
the UP represents an innovative intervention capable of helping 
patients who experience misophonia as well as co-occurring 
psychiatric conditions ( Rosenthal et al., 2023 ).
The primary aim of this study is to examine the UP’s applicability 
to adult patients with misophonia by exploring its acceptability and 
preliminary efficacy. Two studies evaluated the preliminary promise 
of the UP for misophonia. In Study 1, we delivered the standard UP 
to eight patients in order to receive feedback to guide revisions to the 
treatment for this population. In Study 2, we delivered the revised 
treatment based on patient feedback from Study 1 and examined the 
acceptability and preliminary efficacy of the modified UP for 
misophonia. This study used a single-case experimental design with 
multiple baselines, randomizing patients to either a 2-week baseline 
or 4-week baseline prior to the 16 weeks of treatment, followed by 
4 weeks of follow-up. This design allowed us to take an in-depth 
investigation of the between and within-subject effects of 
the treatment.
Method
Participants and recruitment
Patient participants for this study were drawn from a parent study 
investigating the relationship between misophonia symptoms and 
medical and psychiatric diagnoses ( Rosenthal et al., 2022 ). Individuals 
between the ages of 18 and 65 years old enrolled in the parent study 
by accessing a link on the Duke Center for Misophonia and Emotion 
Regulation website1, which took them to an online screen conducted 
in REDCap ( Harris et al., 2009 ). The study was approved by the Duke 
Health Institutional Review Board, and all patients provided signed 
informed consent to participate. Individuals were recruited from 
online sources (e.g., searching for information about misophonia, 
social media, news media stories about misophonia linking to our 
Center). Individuals who met criteria for a current psychotic disorder, 
current mania, current anorexia, or were unable to read English were 
excluded during the online screen. Eligible participants completed the 
Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-5 (SCID-5; First et al., 2015b ) 
and the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-5 Personality 
Disorders (SCID-5-PD; First et al., 2015a ) with a trained assessor. In 
addition, they completed self-report measures including the 
Misophonia Questionnaire (MQ; Wu et  al., 2014 ). Patients were 
1 www.misophonia.duke.eduTABLE 1  Core unified protocol modules and their relevance to 
misophonia.
Module Module focus Relevance to 
misophonia
Mindfulness Attentional control Improve ability to deploy 
attention and reduce 
hypervigilance toward 
misophonia cues
Cognitive flexibility Produce and consider 
diverse interpretations 
of situationsReduce dysfunctional 
attributions toward self and 
others
Behavior change Encourage new ways of 
responding to strong 
emotionsRespond to emotions in 
ways that are consistent 
with values and goals
Interoceptive exposure Build awareness and 
tolerance of physical 
sensationsReduce avoidance and 
escape behavior
Emotion exposure Reduce avoidance of 
emotion-provoking 
stimuliEngage in valued activities 
avoided due to misophonia

McMahon et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1294571
Frontiers in Psychology 04 frontiersin.orgeligible for the present study if they lived in North Carolina, had a 
score higher than 2 on the misophonia symptoms scale of the MQ, a 
score higher than 2 on the misophonia emotions and behavior scale 
of the MQ, and at least a 7 on the misophonia severity scale of the MQ.
For Study 1, nine people were screened for eligibility for the 
present study. One person did not qualify based on the MQ score 
criteria. Therefore, eight patients were enrolled in the first study, which 
included adults with an average age of 35 years old ( SD = 13.8), seven 
women and one man, all white, and mostly single ( n = 5; 62.5%). For 
Study 2, 11 people were screened and one person did not qualify based 
on the MQ score criteria. Thus, 10 patients were enrolled in the second 
study and included adults who were 33.5 (SD = 11.7) years on average, 
eight women and two men, six white people, one Native American, 
two Western Asian, one multi-racial individual, and mostly single 
(n = 6; 60%). Patients from both studies met criteria for a range of 
psychiatric diagnoses. For more detailed demographic and clinical 
information on patients in both studies, see Table 2 .
Procedure
In Study 1, eight patients received the UP as written in the 
currently available manual and in Study 2, 10 patients received the UP 
adapted based on patient and therapist feedback from Study 1. Both 
studies used a multiple baseline single-case experimental design 
(SCED; Barlow et al., 2009 ). This design allows for both within and 
between subject comparisons. In SCED each patient serves as their 
own control providing strong internal validity; replication of outcomes 
across patients provides preliminary external validity.
All patients in both studies completed the initial assessment 
including the diagnostic assessment (SCID-5 and SCID-5-PD), 
outcome measures (MQ, OASIS, ODSIS, OAnSIS, DMQ) and other 
measures beyond the scope of this study via a REDCap online survey. 
Data from the SCID-5 and SCID-5-PD were entered into REDCap by 
the assessor and double-checked by a second assessor. Diagnostic data 
was only used if it was verified, which they were for all patients except 
one (patient 10 in Study 1) due to missing original paper copies of the 
SCID-5 interview.
After this initial assessment, patients were randomized to either a 
two- or four-week baseline phase in which they do not receive 
treatment but complete the assessment measures at the end of each 
week via online survey. Randomizing the length of the baseline phase 
allowed for an observation as to whether change in symptoms 
occurred when, and only when, the intervention was introduced and 
controls for changes in symptoms that may occur due to life events or 
stressors ( Barlow et al., 2009 ).
After the baseline phase, patients completed 16 sessions of the UP 
(Study 1) or revised UP (Study 2). Treatment in Study 1 was delivered 
by one of this study’s authors (CCR) who is also an author of the 
current UP manual and has been certified in the delivery of the UP by 
Unified Protocol Institute.2 Study 2 was delivered by the first author 
(KM) who was trained in the UP by the first therapist and supervised 
weekly while delivering the treatment to ensure adherence to the 
UP . To maintain fidelity to the original protocol of the UP , all patients 
2 www.unifiedprotocol.comreceived 16 sessions of UP . Patients had a 20-week window in which 
to complete all sessions. Patients completed the outcome measures 
before each session as an assessment of their symptoms for the 
week prior.
When all 16 sessions of treatment ended, patients completed exit 
measures, including the acceptability questionnaire and qualitative 
interview with a trained assessor (only in Study 1). Then, patients 
started the four-week follow-up phase. During this phase, patients also 
complete the online survey with outcome measures at the end of each 
week. Therefore, patients would have completed the main outcome 
measures (MQ, OASIS, ODSIS, OAnSIS) once at intake, two or four 
times in baseline, 16 times during treatment and four times at 
follow-up for a total of 23 or 25 assessments. Patients completed the 
DMQ at intake, pre-treatment, week 8, post-treatment, and end of 
follow-up. The DMQ is a longer measure and was only administered 
five times to reduce patient burden. At the end of data collection, 
patients received $10 for each assessment they completed.
Interventions
The UP ( Barlow et al., 2018 ) is an evidence-based treatment that 
targets core psychological processes underlying emotional disorders. 
Specifically, the UP is a 16-session psychotherapy protocol that teaches 
skills for managing strong emotions to increase acceptance of the 
emotions. For this study, treatment was delivered over a secure 
telehealth platform. Importantly, the UP assigns homework between 
sessions for which patients are expected to practice the skills or read 
the psychoeducational material in the accompanying workbook. 
Treatment progress is also assessed and monitored every week with 
the patients using the weekly outcome measures collected via online 
self-report questionnaires.
This treatment has eight total modules. Therapists have flexibility 
regarding how much time they spend in each module; however, for 
this study they were required to spend at least 4 sessions in module 7 
(emotion exposure). The first module, “Setting Goals and Maintaining 
Motivation, ” focuses on patients’ reasons and motivation for change 
by articulating goals and identifying pros and cons of changing. The 
second module “Understanding Y our Emotions” focuses on teaching 
patients about the function of emotions in order to understand how 
emotions are adaptive. In this module patients also learn to break their 
experience into three components (psychological, cognitive, and 
behavioral). Finally, patients begin to put their experiences in context 
by identifying the antecedents to emotions and exploring the short- 
and long-term consequences of their responses.
The third module, “Mindful Emotional Awareness, ” provides 
psychoeducation about the value of taking a non-judgmental, 
present-focused awareness of emotions and provides several 
mindfulness activities that patients practice in order to cultivate this 
awareness. The fourth module, “Cognitive Flexibility, ” teaches 
patients to identify how they interpret and understand situations and 
how these interpretations relate to their emotional responses. It then 
teaches skills for how to generate several alternative interpretations. 
In the fifth module, “Countering Emotional Behaviors, ” patients 
identify behaviors they employ to avoid or control emotional 
experiences and which of those are unhelpful for living in line with 
values. Then they generate different ways of responding behaviorally 
to intense emotions that are more effective. The sixth module, “Facing

McMahon et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1294571
Frontiers in Psychology 05 frontiersin.orgPhysical Sensations, ” focuses on increasing patients’ tolerance of 
physical sensations associated with intense emotions through the use 
of interoceptive exposure. In the seventh module, “Emotion 
Exposure, ” patients increase their tolerance of emotional experiences 
by gradually and repeatedly approaching situations or other triggers 
that bring up intense emotions. Examples of such situations include 
watching online videos, having the therapist create the trigger sound 
in session, or interacting with friends and family members while they 
create trigger sounds (e.g., at a dinner table). Even if patients still find 
these triggers aversive, they learn new positive associations with the 
triggers through inhibitory learning by applying their skills from 
previous modules. In the eighth and final module, “Moving UP From 
Here, ” patients review the principles of treatment they learned and plan for practicing their skills when they experience intense emotions 
and symptoms after treatment ends.
In the first study, the UP was delivered according to the existing 
treatment protocol ( Barlow et al., 2018 ). Upon completion of the UP 
in Study 1, patients completed a qualitative assessment (see Measures) 
to provide feedback about their experience in treatment. This 
information was used to inform edits and adaptations to the treatment 
delivered in Study 2. Through their qualitative feedback, patients from 
Study 1 reported not having significant recommendations for 
improving the treatment beyond the option to receive in-person 
treatment and the option to extend the 16 sessions to include 
discussion of other personal issues or longer time on specific skills 
according to individual needs (see results section). Because both TABLE 2  Study 1 and Study 2 patient characteristics.
Study Patient Age Sex Gender Race Ethnicity Marital 
StatusEducation Income Principal 
DxAdditional 
Dx
1 101 33 F F C NH S College 
graduate0–10 k MDD PDD, AG, 
SOC, GAD, 
BPD
1 104 54 F F C NH M College 
graduate>100 k AG AFI
1 105 49 F F C NH M Master’s degree 65–100 k None
1 106 50 F F C NH P College 
graduate65–100 k SAD
1 107 25 M M C NH S Some graduate 
school20–40 k None
1 108 20 F F C NH S Some college 10–20 k SAD
1 109 23 F F C NH S College 
graduate20–40 k OSA
1 110 26 F F C NH S College 
graduate40–65 k
2 201 27 M M OA H S Master’s degree 0–10 k GAD OSO
2 202 37 F F C NH D Some graduate 
school40–65 k GAD MDD, SOC
2 203 46 F F NA H M Some graduate 
school>100 k GAD PMD, OSO
2 204 45 M M C NH M College 
Graduate> 100 k OSA
2 206 28 F F MR NH S College 
graduate65–100 k GAD AUD, SOC, 
PTSD
2 207 23 F F C NH S College 
graduate25–40 k GAD CD, PMD, 
OCD
2 208 27 F F C NH S Master’s degree 20–40 k GAD
2 209 28 F F C NH S Master’s degree 10–20 k ADHD MDD, GAD
2 210 19 F F OA NH S High school 
graduate0–10 k None
2 212 55 F F C NH P Some college >100 k SP ADHD
Only current and full clinical diagnoses presented. Dx, diagnosis; F, female; M, male; C, Caucasian; MR, more than one other racial group; NA, Native American, American Indian, or Alaska 
Native; OA, Other Asian or other Asian American (includes India, Malaysia, Pakistan, Philippines); H, Hispanic or Latino; NH, non-Hispanic; D, divorced; M, married, P , living with partner; 
S, single (never married); Education, highest level of education received; Income, annual household salary in USD; AFI, avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder; AG, agoraphobia; AUD, 
alcohol use disorder; BPD, borderline personality disorder; CD, cyclothymic disorder; GAD, generalized anxiety disorder; MDD, major depressive disorder; None, no current mental disorder; 
OSA, other specified anxiety disorder; OSO, other specified obsessive compulsive and related disorder; PDD, persistent depressive disorder; PMD, premenstrual dysphoric disorder; PTSD, 
posttraumatic stress disorder; SAD, social anxiety disorder; SP , specific phobia.

McMahon et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1294571
Frontiers in Psychology 06 frontiersin.orgchanges would not allow for a controlled investigation of a standard 
treatment across different patients, the original structure of the UP 
was maintained. However, the feedback from the study therapist in 
Study 1 was that her spontaneous generation of misophonia examples 
in sessions helped patients generalize the UP material to their 
misophonia symptoms. Therefore, we  developed standardized 
misophonia examples and psychoeducational materials to supplement 
the existing UP protocol. These materials intended to help patients 
understand how they can apply the treatment’s descriptions of skills 
and psychoeducation about emotions like anxiety to their misophonia 
experiences. A general description of the adaptations to each module 
and some examples are included in Table  3 . Misophonia-specific 
materials developed for this study are available upon request.
In both studies, the therapists instructed the patients to practice 
the skills on their misophonia experiences and triggers. Because of the 
UP’s transdiagnostic approach and the prevalence of comorbid 
emotional disorders in our sample, patients were also allowed to 
practice skills on their emotional responses outside of misophonia 
contexts (e.g., fear of enclosed spaces). If they did so, the therapists 
made sure that skills were also applied to misophonia or emotions 
related to misophonia.
Measures
Structured clinical interview for DSM-5, 
research version (SCID-5)
The SCID-5 is a psychometrically validated semi-structured 
interview used to assess current and lifetime symptoms of DSM-5 
disorders ( First et al., 2015a ,b). Variables used in this study included 
current and lifetime diagnoses of DSM-5 disorders. All diagnostic 
variables were coded dichotomously as 0 (did not meet criterion) or 1 
(above threshold and met criteria for presence of disorder). Inter-rater 
reliability was assessed in the parent study ( Rosenthal et al., 2022 ) by 
a blind rater randomly rating 8% of SCID-I interviews via recorded 
interviews. Significant Cohen’s κ ranged from 0.63 to 1.00 (all 
ps < 0.05) for most disorders, reflecting acceptable inter-rater 
reliability. However, due potentially to the low rate of observed values 
in randomly selected interviews, Cohen’s κ was not significant for 
lifetime agoraphobia ( κ = 0.43, p = 0.09) or generalized anxiety disorder 
(κ = 0.57, p = 0.06).
Structured clinical interview for DSM-5 
personality disorders (SCID-5-PD)
The SCID-5-PD is a semi-structured interview and was used to 
assess diagnostic symptoms of personality disorders from the DSM-5 
by a trained assessor ( First et al., 2015a ,b). All traits of personality 
disorders were coded by the assessor as 0 (does not meet criteria), 1 
(subthreshold), or 2 (threshold). Severity of symptoms for each 
disorder was calculated by summing the ratings of 0, 1, and 2 for all 
diagnostic criteria for each personality disorder. Categorical diagnoses 
of personality disorders were rated dichotomously as 0 (did not meet 
criterion) or 1 (met criteria for presence of disorder). Inter-rater 
reliability was assessed in the parent study ( Rosenthal et al., 2022 ) by 
a blind rater randomly rating 8% of SCID-5-PD interviews via recorded interviews. Inter-rater reliability on total personality disorder 
symptoms was evaluated using intraclass correlation coefficients 
(ICCs) with Cohen’s κ analyses. There was agreement among the 
different raters for the personality disorders (all κ = 1, p < 0.001).
Demographics
A self-report measure developed for this study was used to obtain 
demographic and descriptive information, including age, ethnicity, 
marital status, and income.
Misophonia questionnaire (MQ)
This is a three-part self-report questionnaire that assesses 
misophonia symptom presence, resulting emotions and behaviors, 
and the overall severity of sound sensitivities ( Wu et al., 2014 ). The 
first subscale, the Misophonia Symptom Scale, examines the 
presence of specific sound sensitivities to different types of sound 
stimuli (e.g., “people eating, ” or “rustling”). Cronbach’s α was 0.21 
for Study 1 and 0.59 for Study 2 at intake. The second subscale, the 
Misophonia Emotions and Behaviors Scale, examines emotional and 
behavioral reactions associated with misophonia. Cronbach’s α was 
0.71 for Study 1 and 0.43 for Study 2 at intake. The first two parts are 
rated on a scale from 0 (not at all true) to 4 (always true). The third 
section, named the Misophonia Severity Scale allows the patient to 
rate their sound sensitivity on a scale from 1 (minimal) to 15 
(very severe).
Overall anxiety severity and impairment 
scale (OASIS)
The OASIS contains five items assessing severity and impairment 
from anxiety; items are scored from 0 to 4 and are summed to provide 
a total score ( Campbell-Sills et  al., 2009 ). Higher scores indicate 
greater anxiety severity and impairment over the past week. Studies 
have shown the OASIS to have good internal reliability (Cronbach’s 
alpha 0.80–0.84; Norman et al., 2006 ; Campbell-Sills et al., 2009 ) and 
one-month test–retest reliability (0.82; Norman et al., 2006 ). Changes 
in the OASIS have been found to correlate with changes in other 
anxiety measures during CBT, suggesting that it is sensitive to change 
(Moore et al., 2015 ). Cronbach’s α was 0.88 for Study 1 and 0.73 for 
Study 2 at intake.
Overall depression severity and impairment 
scale (ODSIS)
The ODSIS is a modified version of the OASIS designed to capture 
severity and impairment related to symptoms of depression. Its five 
items are each scored from 0 to 4 and are summed to calculate the total 
score ( Bentley et al., 2014 ). Higher scores indicate greater symptoms. A 
study assessed this measure in three distinct populations and found that 
the ODSIS has excellent validity with a Cronbach’s alpha of 0.94 in the 
outpatient sample, 0.91 in the student sample, and 0.92 in the community 
sample ( Bentley et al., 2014 ). Additional research has suggested that

McMahon et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1294571
Frontiers in Psychology 07 frontiersin.orgTABLE 3  Adaptations to unified protocol for transdiagnostic treatment of emotional disorders modules and examples in Study 2.
UP module Adaptations to misophonia Examples of adaptations
 1 Setting goals and 
maintaining motivation-Provide an additional description of misophonia and a case 
example to Chapter 1 of the UP manual.
-Encourage patients to generate clear, specific goals for treatment 
of misophonia symptoms.
-Discuss the pros and cons of completing the full 16 sessions of 
treatment vs. not engaging in treatment-Case example: A 1-page description of “Eva, ” who has suffered from 
intense anxiety, anger, and avoidance in response to the sound of 
chewing.
-Goals: Eating Sunday dinner with the family; not yelling at spouse when 
he/she chews gum; going into the office 2x a week where there might 
be trigger sounds.
 2 Understanding your 
emotions-Provide psychoeducation of emotions that are common in 
misophonia.
-Provide an additional three-component model to illustrate the 
emotions, physical sensations, thoughts, and behaviors associated 
with misophonia.
-Provide an additional Antecedents, Responses, and 
Consequences (ARC) form to illustrate the antecedents and 
consequences of ways of misophonia responses.-Emotions: anxiety in anticipation of a trigger sound, anger toward a 
person generating the sound, guilt and shame in response to unhelpful 
ways of responding to the sound (e.g., yelling at a person).
-Three-component model: anxiety and anger in response to chewing 
sound during dinner, thoughts like “I cannot stand it when he chews like 
this, ” a physical sensation of clenched jaw, and the behavioral response of 
leaving the dinner table.
-ARC form: highlight short-term distress reduction and long-term 
loneliness at mealtimes due to misophonia responses.
 3 Mindful emotion 
awareness-Teach the basic skills as instructed using an additional recorded 
version of the guided mindfulness exercise from Chapter 7 with 
the therapist’s voice, inducing emotion with music.
-Help the patient plan how to apply mindfulness skills to 
misophonia experiences.-Bring present-focused and nonjudgmental attention to trigger sounds 
(e.g., noticing the timbre and pitch of the sound) or own reactions (e.g., 
tension in body).
-Use anchoring during trigger situations (e.g., meal with friends) to 
notice reactions before reorienting attention to the conversation.
 4 Cognitive flexibility-Teach cognitive flexibility skills as instructed with the provided 
ambiguous photo in Chapter 8.
-Provide psychoeducation on common thinking traps in 
misophonia (probability overestimation, catastrophizing).
-Explore core beliefs related to misophonia.-Probability overestimation: assuming a trigger sound will definitely 
occur and end badly. (e.g., “If I go to the movie theater, someone will 
definitely eat popcorn behind me and my whole day will be ruined. ”)
-Catastrophizing: assuming inability to cope healthily with trigger 
sounds (e.g., “if I hear that sound, I’ll turn into a mess, scream at my 
spouse and run away like a lunatic. ”)
-Core beliefs: controlling the environment or inner experiences is always 
necessary; they are unable to cope with distress or discomfort; they are 
defective or “broken” because of misophonia and will never improve; and 
people make trigger sounds to harm them.
 5 Countering emotional 
behaviors-Provide psychoeducation about how people engage in different 
emotional behaviors in response to misophonia.
-Provide additional examples of emotional behaviors common in 
misophonia.
-Help patients generate alternative behaviors that involve 
engaging with the sound or misophonia experiences instead of 
avoiding.-Avoidance and escape behaviors in misophonia: subtle avoidance: 
avoiding restaurants, locating sound sources, cell phone use during 
dinner; cognitive avoidance: ruminating over sound origin; safety signal: 
carrying headphones everywhere.
-Emotional behaviors: leaving the room.
-Alternative behaviors: engaging with trigger sounds or experiences.
 6 Facing physical 
sensations-Provide psychoeducation about the physical sensations common 
to misophonia.
-Practice tolerating those physical sensations by intentionally 
bringing them up repeatedly.-Physical sensations: shoulder tension, shallow breath.
-Exposure exercise: intentionally squeezing shoulders up to ears for 
1 min or breathing into a small coffee straw for 30 s.
 7 Emotion exposure-Provide psychoeducation about exposures for misophonia
-Create hierarchy of situations that bring up misophonia 
experiences and plan skills to use during the exposure.-The goal of exposures: learning to tolerate misophonia triggers using 
skills from previous modules (e.g., mindfulness, cognitive flexibility, 
etc.).
-Exposures are introduced gradually with increasingly difficult 
situations. For example, starting with 30 s of watching an online video of 
people chewing without sound, then 1 min of watching the same video 
with sound, then 5 min of observing a close friend while they eat, and 
finally having an entire meal with the same friend.
 8 Moving UP from here-Identify remaining goals for improving symptoms of 
misophonia.
-Plan to practice skills in service of these goals.-Remaining goals: address challenging or unavailable situations during 
treatment, such as big family dinners.
-Identifying helpful skills and making concrete plans for practicing them 
in new situations (e.g., practicing mindfulness skills for 5 min at the 
same time each morning; setting a phone reminder to practice 
mindfulness during the big family dinner).

McMahon et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1294571
Frontiers in Psychology 08 frontiersin.orgduring CBT, the ODSIS is sensitive to change ( Osma et  al., 2019 ). 
Cronbach’s α was 0.98 for Study 1 and 0.95 for Study 2 at intake.
Overall anger severity and impairment 
scale (OAnSIS; unpublished)
This is a five-item self-report questionnaire based on the 
OASIS. Items are scored from 0 to 4 with a maximum of 20; higher 
scores indicate greater anger severity and impairment. To create the 
OAnSIS, the research team replaced the word “anxiety” with “anger” 
in the OASIS ( Campbell-Sills et al., 2009 ). No other changes to the 
measure’s language were made, indicating a high level of similarity 
between the two questionnaires. As the measure is unpublished, its 
psychometric properties are currently unknown. Cronbach’s α was 
0.97 for Study 1 and 0.95 for Study 2 at intake.
Duke Misophonia Questionnaire (DMQ)
The Duke Misophonia Questionnaire (DMQ) is a 
psychometrically validated self-report measure of misophonia using 
factor analytic procedures combined with item response theory in an 
English-speaking sample ( Rosenthal et al., 2021 ). The DMQ has 86 
items and includes subscales: (1) trigger frequency (16 items), (2) 
affective responses (8 items), (3) physiological responses (5 items), 
(4) cognitive responses (10 items), (5) coping Before (6 items), (6) 
Coping During (10 items), (7) Coping After (5 items), (8) Impairment 
(12 items), and Beliefs (14 items). The composite scale overall 
Symptom Severity combined Affective, Physiological, and Cognitive 
Subscales with scores ranging from 0 to 83. Clinical impairment 
scores (derived from the Impairment Subscale) ranging from 0 to 13 
are considered “minimal-mild impairment, ” scores between 14 and 
38 are considered “moderate impairment, ” and scores between 39 and 
48 are considered “severe to very severe impairment. ” Cronbach’s α 
was 0.93 for the Symptoms subscale, 0.91 for the Impairment 
subscale, and 0.94 for the Beliefs subscale for Study 1 at intake. For 
Study 2 at intake Cronbach’s α was 0.94 for the Symptoms subscale, 
0.70 for the Impairment subscale, and 0.91 for the Beliefs subscale.
Acceptability measures
Data regarding acceptability of the treatment were collected by 
qualitative and quantitative self-report measures in both Study 1 and 
Study 2. All questions were developed by the research team.
In Study 1, the acceptability measure consisted of two quantitative 
questions answered on a scale of 1 (not at all) to 5 (extremely): (1) 
How acceptable the treatment was and (2) How satisfied they were 
with it. Patients also answered qualitative, open-ended questions 
about their reactions to the treatment, including what they thought of 
the treatment in general, what were the most helpful parts of 
treatment, changes they would recommend, and most important 
things they learned. Responses to these questions were collected by an 
online survey and interview with a trained assessor.
In Study 2, patients answered three quantitative questions on a 
scale of 1 (not at all) to 5 (extremely): (1) How acceptable the treatment 
was; (2) How satisfied they were with it; and (3) How helpful it was for their misophonia. They also answered qualitative, open-ended 
questions about their reactions to the treatment, including what they 
thought of the treatment in general, what were the most helpful parts 
of treatment, changes in misophonia because of the treatment, other 
changes in their lives or problems because of the treatment, changes 
they would recommend, and most important things they learned. 
Responses to these questions were collected by online survey to reduce 
participant burden that an interview would have added.
Data analytic plan
To evaluate the acceptability of the UP for patients with 
misophonia, we  derived descriptive statistics for the quantitative 
questions in the acceptability questionnaires in both studies. We then 
identified key themes in the patients’ qualitative answers in the online 
questionnaire and interview with the trained assessor in Study 1. This 
was done by conducting an informal thematic analysis, guided by 
Braun and Clarke’s (2006)  steps, following the methodology from a 
study that validated the Amsterdam Misophonia Scale ( Naylor et al., 
2021 ). The primary steps included coding the responses to each 
question and then organizing these codes into broader themes.
To evaluate the impact of the UP on misophonia and symptoms 
of anxiety, depression and anger, data analyses followed established 
guidelines for analyzing SCED data using both visual inspection and 
statistical methods ( Barlow et  al., 2009 ). Visual inspection is a 
conservative approach to analyzing SCED data ( Kazdin, 2011 ). To 
conduct these analyses, data from the weekly assessments are plotted 
with lines connecting data points with each phase (baseline, treatment, 
follow-up), as well as horizontal, dashed lines indicating the mean for 
each measure within each phase. Changes in the level (i.e., mean) 
across phases indicate the magnitude of intervention effects. For 
example, a lower average score on a symptom measure in the 
treatment phase compared to the baseline phase would indicate a 
reduction in symptoms. Changes in slope indicate the rate of change. 
For example, a steeper downward slope in the treatment phase 
compared to the baseline phase would indicate a faster rate of change 
in symptoms. Two co-authors (KM and AG) first conducted visual 
analyses of both Study 1 and Study 2 independently. They then 
compared their analyses and resolved any discrepancies. The final 
visual analyses reflect the agreement between both authors.
In addition to the visual inspection, effect sizes were calculated to 
estimate the magnitude of change on all outcome measures across 
patients using a d statistic developed for SCED studies with correction 
for small sample sizes ( Shadish et al., 2014 ). These effect sizes were 
calculated using the DHPS SPSS macro ( Shadish, 2015 ) and with 
those effect sizes, 95% confidence intervals (CI) were calculated 
(Shadish et  al., 2014 ). An effect size was considered statistically 
significant at the alpha level p < 0.05 if the CI did not include zero. A 
d of 0.2 was considered a small effect, 0.5 was considered a medium 
effect, and 0.8 was considered a large effect ( Cohen, 1988 ). Using this 
strategy, the following comparisons were made: (1) The treatment 
phase compared to the baseline phase to determine the effects of the 
UP . (2) The follow-up period compared to the treatment phase to 
capture any further changes in symptoms after the therapy sessions 
end. Regarding missing data, one patient did not complete outcome 
measures once during treatment and another patient did not complete 
them at three timepoints during follow up in Study 1. In the second

McMahon et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1294571
Frontiers in Psychology 09 frontiersin.orgstudy, two patients missed one timepoint during follow up. This 
missing data was attributed to patients forgetting to fill them out or 
failing to do so because of life circumstances (e.g., moving houses or 
job transitions). One patient did not have data for 1 week in baseline 
due to an administration error. The DHPS SPSS macro treats these 
missing data with the available data method when calculating effect 
sizes ( Shadish et al., 2014 ; Peng and Chen, 2021 ).
Because we administered the DMQ during fewer timepoints than 
the outcome measures, we only derived descriptive statistics for this 
measure. We also calculated effect sizes with the Hedges’ correction 
for the changes from pre-treatment to post-treatment scores without 
significance testing.
Results
Study 1
Acceptability
On self-report questionnaires, patients rated the acceptability of 
the treatment as high ( M = 4.38, SD = 0.74, out of 5). They also rated 
their satisfaction with the treatment as good ( M = 3.75, SD = 1.04, out 
of 5). All subsequent responses were gathered from interviews with 
the patients. In response to the question about what they thought 
about the treatment overall, patient responses indicated: (1) The 
treatment was worthwhile completing, helpful, and valuable as it 
resulted in many positive changes; (2) They learned a lot about 
misophonia and how it affects their lives; (3) The treatment taught 
useful skills that had impact on experiences beyond misophonia (e.g., 
anxiety), and (4) They felt that their skills for managing misophonia 
had improved as a result of the treatment. Some patients voiced 
dissatisfaction with elements of the treatment in response to this 
question, including not liking the basic nature of the skills or feeling 
frustrated with structured therapy that did not allow for venting.
When asked about what they thought were the most helpful parts of 
treatment, they said: (1) the individual support from the therapist; (2) 
homework exercises and worksheets that helped them track their 
emotions; (3) learning and practicing new skills; and (4) Meeting 
once a week.
As mentioned previously, the changes they would recommend for 
the treatment include the option of receiving the treatment in-person 
or in a hybrid model instead of only telehealth, and that they could 
have the option to extend the treatment beyond 16 sessions to discuss 
other personal issues or to further practice skills.
Finally, patients said that the most important things they learned 
in treatment were: (1) It is possible to get better and reduce symptoms 
of misophonia; (2) They can use the mindfulness, cognitive, and 
behavioral skills to manage feelings in response to misophonia; and 
(3) It’s important to accept emotions. See the Supplementary Table  for 
themes and example quotes.
Visual inspection of outcome measures
Line graphs for Study 1 outcome measures for each patient are 
displayed in Figure 1 .
MQ symptoms
Visual inspection revealed that treatment was associated with 
reductions from baseline in misophonia symptoms for four patients (105, 106, 108, 110), with a faster rate of change for two patients (108, 
110) from baseline to treatment. Patient 108 reported an increasing 
rate of change toward the last few treatment sessions. During the 
follow-up phase, two patients continued to maintain their treatment 
gains (105, 110) and three patients showed improvements from 
treatment (104, 108, 109). Three patients did not show major changes 
in misophonia symptoms due to the treatment (104, 107, 109).
MQ emotions
Treatment was associated with reductions in emotional and 
behavioral responses associated with misophonia from baseline for 
four patients (101, 105, 108, 110). For two of these patients (105, 108), 
the rate of change was faster toward the end of treatment. During the 
follow-up phase, two patients continued to maintain their treatment 
gains (101, 110) and three patients continued to show improvements 
from treatment (105, 108, 109). One patient showed a worsening of 
symptoms from treatment (107) but has valid data from only one 
timepoint at follow up. Of note, patient 107 started experiencing 
worsening of these symptoms toward the end of treatment. Clinical 
observation suggested this patient’s worsening was due to the onset of 
a major depressive episode associated with social stressors. Two 
patients did not show major changes in emotional and behavioral 
responses as a result of the treatment (106, 109).
MQ severity
Treatment was associated with small reductions in misophonia 
severity from baseline for two patients (104, 108), with a faster rate of 
change for one patient, especially toward the end of treatment (104). 
During the follow up phase, two patients (104, 105) continued to 
maintain their treatment gains and two patients (108, 109) continued 
to show improvements from treatment. Five patients did not show 
major changes in misophonia severity (101, 106, 110, 105, 109).
OASIS
Treatment was associated with reductions in anxiety symptoms 
during the treatment phase for five patients. For three of the patients 
(104, 107, 108) these changes were large in magnitude and for two 
patients (106, 110) they were small in magnitude. During the 
follow-up phase, all five patients maintained their treatment gains 
(104, 106, 107, 108, 100) and one patient showed improvements 
compared to the baseline and treatment phases (109). Three patients 
did not show major changes in anxiety (101, 105, 109), one of which 
reported low anxiety throughout the study (105).
ODSIS
Floor effects were present for patients 105, 106, 108, 109; these 
patients reported no or minimal symptoms on the ODSIS throughout 
the study. Treatment was associated with reduction in depression 
symptoms from baseline for one patient (104) with an increasing rate 
of change. However, treatment was associated with an increase in 
symptoms for two patients (110, 109), one of whom experienced these 
worsening of symptoms toward the end of treatment (110). During 
the follow up phase, one patient maintained their treatment gains 
(104), one patient’s symptoms reduced to baseline (109) and one 
patient’s symptoms got worse from treatment (101). Clinical 
observation of patients 101 and 110 indicated their symptoms of 
depression worsened due to interpersonal conflicts and social 
stressors. Three patients did not show major changes in depression

McMahon et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1294571
Frontiers in Psychology 10 frontiersin.orgTABLE 4  Mean summary scores and effect sizes for all Study 1 outcomes.
Baseline Treatment Follow-up
M (SD) M (SD) d 95% CI M (SD) d 95% CI
MQ symptoms 2.51 (0.50) 2.26 (0.58) 0.35 [0.05, 0.65] * 1.84 (0.33) 0.72 [0.63, 1.14] *
MQ emotions 2.11 (0.43) 1.82 (0.50) 0.50 [0.40, 0.92] * 1.54 (0.68) 0.34 [0.25, 0.74] *
MQ severity 8.17 (2.21) 7.85 (2.47) 0.09 [0.07, 0.27] * 7.14 (2.99) 0.27 [0.24, 0.49] *
OASIS 6.93 (4.19) 6.02 (4.93) 0.27 [0.24, 0.52] * 5.34 (5.45) 0.12 [0.10, 0.31] *
ODSIS 3.70 (5.57) 4.46 (5.66) 0.00 [−0.01, 0.17] 4.07 (6.35) 0.04 [0.02, 0.22] *
OANSIS 4.10 (3.94) 3.79 (3.68) 0.05 [0.01, 0.35] * 2.79 (4.03) 0.31 [0.25, 0.64] *
All effect sizes were calculated such that positive d values indicate the expected direction of change (i.e., decreases in symptoms). MQ, Misophonia Questionnaire; OASIS, Overall Anxiety 
Severity and Impairment Scale; ODSIS, Overall Depression Severity and Impairment Scale; OANSIS, Overall Anger Severity and Impairment Scale. N = 8.
*Significant improvement at p < 0.05.symptoms because of the treatment (106, 107, 105), one of which was 
due to floor effects as mentioned above (106).
OAnSIS
Treatment was associated with reduction in anger from baseline 
for three patients (101, 105, 109), one of which has a faster rate of 
change toward the end of treatment (109). On the other hand, there 
was an increase in symptoms for two patients (106, 107), one of 
which has an increasing rate of change especially toward the end of 
treatment (107). During the follow-up phase, one patient continued 
to maintain their treatment gains (105) and one continued to show 
improvements from treatment (109). There was a floor effect present 
for patient 108. Three patients did not show major changes in anger 
(104, 110, 108).
Effect sizes of outcome measures
Effect sizes and 95% confidence intervals for Study 1 are presented 
in Table 4 . UP treatment was associated with significant reductions in 
emotional and behavioral responses to misophonia that were medium 
in magnitude. Reduction in misophonia symptoms and anxiety were 
significant and small in magnitude. Finally, reductions in misophonia 
severity and anger were significant and small. The treatment was not 
associated with significant changes in depression. The follow-up phase 
was associated with medium to large changes in misophonia 
symptoms, small changes in emotional and behavioral responses to 
misophonia, anger and misophonia severity, and very small changes 
in anxiety and depression.
Duke Misophonia Questionnaire descriptives
Average scores for the misophonia symptoms, beliefs, and 
impairment scales from the DMQ are displayed in Table  5 . Line 
graphs are displayed in Figure 2 . Patients’ average scores decreased 
from intake to end of follow up. Specifically, patients reported small 
changes in symptoms (Hedges’ g = 0.28) and impairment (Hedges’ 
g = 0.31) and medium changes in beliefs (Hedges’ g = 0.70) in the 
DMQ from pre to post treatment.
Study 2
Acceptability
On self-report questionnaires, patients rated the acceptability of 
the treatment ( M = 4.50, SD = 0.53, out of 5), their satisfaction with the treatment ( M = 4.70, SD = 0.48, out of 5), and the helpfulness of the 
treatment for misophonia ( M = 4.40, SD = 0.52, out of 5) as high.
Patients also wrote about their responses in open text boxes 
within the online acceptability questionnaire. In response to the 
question about what they thought about the treatment overall, patients 
thought: (1) Treatment was worthwhile, helpful and extremely 
valuable as it resulted in many positive changes, many that were 
unexpected; (2) The treatment taught very useful information and 
skills that had impact beyond misophonia (e.g., anxiety); (3) They felt 
that their skills for managing misophonia had improved as a result of 
the treatment. However, some patients had some complaints about the 
treatment, including not knowing how to balance discussing other 
personal issues and misophonia symptoms during treatment.
Patients reported that the most helpful parts of treatment were: 
(1) The individual support of the therapist; (2) Homework exercises 
and worksheets; (3) Learning and practicing new skills; (4) Learning 
about emotions, how they work and how to identify them; (5) 
Learning about cognitive flexibility skills; (6) Practicing exposures; 
and (7) Meeting once a week.
When asked about the specific changes in misophonia symptoms 
because of the treatment, patients said: (1) Reduced levels of emotions 
in general and in response to triggers; (2) Reduced emotional and 
physical misophonia symptoms; and (3) More manageable symptoms 
as a result of being less reactive to triggers and being able to generate 
alternative thoughts or actions.
Changes they observed in their social interactions or relationships 
because of the treatment included: (1) Can spend time with triggering 
people and settings, including mealtimes; (2) That it was easier to 
engage in social interactions and relationships; (3) That relationships 
at home have improved so that they can enjoy their family’s company 
(including pets and children); and (4) They experienced more positive 
interactions with others because emotions are less intense.
Furthermore, patients said other changes in their lives or problems 
because of the treatment included: (1) A better understand what they 
are feeling and why; (2) The ability to apply skills to manage other 
symptoms like grief, depression, and anxiety; and (3) Increased hope 
for the future.
The main change patients recommended for the treatment was the 
option to add more time to spend on specific skills or other topics, 
particularly exposures. Otherwise, they reported not having any other 
major suggestions for ways to change the treatment.
Finally, when asked about the most important things they learned 
from the treatment, patients said that they learned (1) It is possible to

McMahon et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1294571
Frontiers in Psychology 11 frontiersin.orgget better and have reduced misophonia symptoms; (2) They can use 
skills to manage misophonia; (3) The role and function of emotions; 
and (4) That they are capable of handling more than they think they 
could. See the Supplementary Table .
Visual inspection of outcome measures
Line graphs for Study 2 outcome measures for each patient are 
displayed in Figure 3 .
MQ symptoms
Visual inspection revealed that treatment was associated with 
reductions in misophonia symptoms from baseline for seven patients 
(201, 202, 203, 204, 206, 210, 212), all of whose symptoms changed at 
a faster rate during treatment than baseline. Two of these patients 
(202, 212) experienced improvements in the last sessions of treatment. 
One patient’s symptoms got worse from baseline to treatment (209). 
From clinical observation, this patient was more socially isolated 
during the baseline phase and therefore rated sensitivity to certain 
consonant sounds as lower than during the treatment phase, when she 
exposed to more people. During the follow-up phase, five patients 
continued to maintain their treatment gains (203, 204, 206, 210, 212) 
and two patients showed improvements from treatment (201, 202). 
The treatment did not change misophonia symptoms for one 
patient (208).
MQ emotions
Treatment was associated with reductions from baseline for 10 
patients. For four of these patients (203, 204, 209, 210), these changes 
were medium in magnitude and for six patients (201, 202, 206, 207, 
208, 212) they were small in magnitude. For three of these patients 
(201, 202, 212), the rate of change was faster toward the end of 
treatment (201, 202, 212). Furthermore, seven of those patients who 
improved had a faster rate of change in symptoms in treatment than 
in baseline (202, 203, 204, 206, 208, 209, 212). During the follow-up 
phase, seven patients maintained their treatment gains (202, 206, 207, 
209, 210, 208, 212) and three patients continued to show improvements 
from treatment (201, 203, 204).
MQ severity
Treatment was associated with reductions from baseline for nine 
patients (201, 202, 203, 204, 206, 207, 208, 209, 210), eight of which 
have faster rates of change in symptoms than baseline (202, 203, 204, 
206, 207, 208, 209, 210). One patient did not have overall average 
changes in symptoms from baseline to treatment, but had a reduction in symptoms across the last four sessions (212). During the follow-up 
phase, 10 patients maintained their treatment gains (201, 202, 203, 
204, 206, 207, 208, 209, 210, 212). Treatment was not associated with 
changes in misophonia severity for one patient (212).
OASIS
Treatment was associated with reductions from baseline for seven 
patients (202, 203, 204, 206, 207, 208, 209) with faster rates of change for 
six patients (203, 204, 206, 209, 210, 212). Patients 206 and 212 improved 
particularly in the last sessions of treatment. During the follow-up phase, 
six patients maintained their treatment gains (201, 203, 204, 207, 209, 
212) and six patients had slower rates of improvement from treatment to 
follow up (201, 203, 204, 206, 207, 212). Three patients did not show 
major changes in anxiety (201, 210, 212).
ODSIS
Floor effects were present for patient 212 as this patient reported 
no or minimal symptoms on the ODSIS throughout the study except 
for 1 week during baseline due to personal stressors. Treatment was 
associated with reduction from baseline for six patients, two of which 
were larger changes in magnitude (202, 207) and four of which were 
smaller changes in magnitude (203, 206, 209, 212). Two of those 
patients had faster rates of change (203, 206) and three others had 
slower rates of change (202, 207, 209) from baseline to treatment. 
However, four patients had slight worsening of symptoms from 
baseline to treatment (201, 204, 210, 208), two of which changed from 
positive in the baseline phase to negative slope in the treatment phase, 
or in other words changed from worsening to improving symptoms 
(204, 208). During the follow up phase, two patients maintained their 
treatment gains (202, 203) and two patients continued to show 
improvements from treatment (204, 208). Three patients show a 
worsening of symptoms (206, 207, 210).
OAnSIS
Treatment was associated with reductions from baseline for seven 
patients (201, 202, 203, 204, 206, 208, 212), all of which had faster rates 
of change from baseline to treatment. Patient 212 experienced a faster 
rate of change toward the end of treatment. One patient did not have 
overall changes in symptoms but the slope changed from positive in 
baseline to negative during treatment, or from worsening to improving 
(209). During the follow-up phase, five patients continued to maintain 
their treatment gains (202, 203, 204, 208, 212). One patient had an 
improvement in symptoms (209) and another patient showed a 
worsening of symptoms (206). Although 208 did report changes in 
symptoms, there was a floor effect as this patient reported no symptoms 
from third week of treatment until the end of the study. Two patients 
did not show changes in anger due to the treatment (210, 207).
Effect sizes of outcome measures
Effect sizes and 95% confidence intervals for Study 2 are presented 
in Table  6 . In this study, the treatment was associated with large 
changes in emotional and behavioral responses to misophonia, 
severity of misophonia, and anxiety, medium changes in anger and 
misophonia symptoms, and relatively smaller changes in depression. 
Follow-up was associated with large changes in emotional and 
behavioral responses to misophonia, medium changes in misophonia 
symptoms, misophonia severity and anxiety, and small changes in 
depression. The change in anger was not significant.TABLE 5  Mean scores from the Duke Misophonia Questionnaire for Study 1.
Timepoint DMQ 
symptomsDMS 
impairmentDMS 
beliefs
Intake 45.63 15.50 28.01
Pre-Tx 43.38 15.63 25.88
Tx Week 8 41.32 14.38 25.25
Post Tx 37.12 13.75 17.63
End of Follow-up 32.29 10.71 18.86
Mean scores from the Symptom Severity (combined Affective, Physiological, and Cognitive 
subscales), Impairment, and Beliefs subscales from the Duke Misophonia Questionnaire 
(DMQ; Rosenthal et al., 2021 ). Timepoints include intake, pre-treatment (right before first 
session), week 8 of treatment, post-treatment (right after last session) and end of follow-up.

McMahon et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1294571
Frontiers in Psychology 12 frontiersin.orgTABLE 6  Mean summary scores and effect sizes for all Study 2 outcomes.
Baseline Treatment Follow-up
M (SD) M (SD) d 95% CI M (SD) d 95% CI
MQ symptoms 2.97 (0.54) 2.54 (0.85) 0.54 [0.45, 0.98] * 2.06 (1.04) 0.50 [0.42, 0.91] *
MQ emotions 2.33 (0.42) 1.79 (0.60) 1.03 [0.89, 1.54] * 1.29 (0.72) 0.81 [0.69, 1.29] *
MQ severity 10.24 (1.69) 8.10 (2.18) 0.96 [0.82, 1.47] * 6.53 (2.76) 0.63 [0.53, 1.07] *
OASIS 10.11 (2.89) 7.30 (3.72) 0.88 [0.75, 1.38] * 5.16 (3.73) 0.59 [0.48, 1.05] *
ODSIS 6.22 (4.37) 4.83 (3.66) 0.33 [0.27, 0.70] * 4.13 (3.82) 0.13 [0.07, 0.49] *
OANSIS 6.22 (3.88) 4.21 (3.55) 0.63 [0.56, 0.99] * 3.00 (3.41) 0.27 [−0.06, 0.61]
All effect sizes were calculated such that positive d values indicate the expected direction of change (i.e., decreases in symptoms). MQ, Misophonia Questionnaire; OASIS, Overall Anxiety 
Severity and Impairment Scale; ODSIS, Overall Depression Severity and Impairment Scale; OANSIS, Overall Anger Severity and Impairment Scale. N = 10.
*Significant improvement at p < 0.05.
Duke Misophonia Questionnaire descriptives
Average scores for the misophonia symptoms, beliefs, and 
impairment scales from the DMQ are displayed in Table 7 . Line graphs 
are displayed in Figure 4 . Patients’ average scores decreased from intake 
to end of follow up. Patients reported large changes in symptoms (Hedges’ 
g = 1.02), impairment (Hedges’ g = 1.28) and beliefs (Hedges’ g = 1.19) in 
the DMQ from pre to post treatment.
Discussion
Misophonia is a disorder characterized by intense aversion to 
specific repetitive everyday sounds, usually those that are oral or 
facial and produced by others. This newly defined clinical 
condition is associated with significant functional impairment, yet there are no established treatments. To address this gap in the 
literature, this study gathered preliminary support for using the 
UP ( Barlow et  al., 2018 ) to treat misophonia in adults. 
We conducted two studies. Study 1 delivered the standard version 
of the UP to eight patients to receive their initial feedback, and 
Study 2 delivered a version of the UP that has been adapted based 
on that feedback to 10 patients. Notably, this study used a single-
case experimental design to examine the effects of the treatment 
in depth across a 2 or 4-week baseline phase, the 16-week 
treatment phase, and a 4-week follow up period. The findings 
from this study suggested that patients found both the original 
and adapted versions of the UP to be acceptable and taught them 
skills for how to manage their misophonia symptoms. 
Importantly, the findings also suggested that the UP can help 
remediate symptoms of misophonia, particularly the emotional 
FIGURE 1
Graphs of Study 1 outcome measures in baseline, treatment and follow-up phases. MQ, Misophonia Questionnaire; OASIS, Overall Anxiety Severity and 
Impairment Scale; ODSIS, Overall Depression Severity and Impairment Scale; OANSIS, Overall Anger Severity and Impairment Scale. N =  8. Patients 101, 
104, 106, 107, and 110 were assigned the 2-week baseline and patients 105, 108, 109 were assigned 4-week baseline.

McMahon et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1294571
Frontiers in Psychology 13 frontiersin.organd behavioral responses. To our knowledge, this is the first study 
to use this approach to demonstrate the UP’s efficacy for 
misophonia in adults.
Patients in both study phases indicated that they found the 
treatment acceptable and helpful in treating misophonia. Because the 
patients in Study 1 generally responded positively to the standard 
version of the UP , the general structure of the UP was maintained for 
Study 2. However, because patients found it useful when the therapist 
(CCR) specifically applied the transdiagnostic skills and concepts to 
misophonia symptoms, our team developed standard protocols and 
materials for misophonia patients. For example, when different 
emotional disorders are described in chapter one with case description, 
we provided a standardized description of misophonia and a typical 
case description of someone who has a strong aversion to the sound 
of chewing. As a result of these efforts combined, patients learned they 
can manage their misophonia symptoms with cognitive-behavioral 
skills. Many patients reported feeling hopeful to experience such an 
improvement, especially since many of them have suffered from their 
misophonia all their lives with no evidence-based care.
On the other hand, some patients in both studies expressed a 
desire for more flexibility in the length of treatment so they could have 
the option to spend more time on specific modules or skills. From our 
clinical observations, some patients had difficulty understanding some 
of the more complex concepts in the UP and other patients had 
symptoms of other disorders interfere with completing the homework. Although this flexibility was sacrificed to maintain standardization 
across study participants, future research can explore the UP’s effects 
on misophonia in real clinical settings where providers can use their 
clinical judgment to adapt the treatment to patients’ individual needs.
Results from the visual and effect size analyses suggested that 
the UP was associated with a reduction in multiple misophonia-
related outcomes. In Study 1, patients reported moderate 
improvements in emotional and behavioral responses to 
misophonia, and small improvements in misophonia symptoms 
(i.e., sensitivity to different types of sounds and the intensity of the 
sensitivity) and anxiety as a result of treatment that continued into 
follow up. Patients in Study 2 reported large changes in emotional 
and behavioral responses to misophonia, misophonia severity, and 
anxiety due to the treatment. They also reported moderate 
improvements in anger and misophonia symptoms. These changes 
mostly continued into follow up. Therefore, the most robust effect 
may be  the UP’s ability to improve the way patients reacted to 
misophonia cues behaviorally and emotionally. Because these 
effects were stronger than those on misophonia symptoms, these 
findings combined highlight how this treatment can teach patients 
to react differently and cope effectively with their misophonia even 
if they still find their trigger sounds uncomfortable. These findings 
are in line with Lewin et al. ’s (2021)  study that demonstrated how 
youth with misophonia benefitted from learning skills to manage 
their symptoms. Furthermore, the pattern of findings was robust 
across both studies even though some of the effects in Study 2 were 
larger than those in the first study. Some of the differences in the 
findings between studies could be  attributable to differences 
between the therapists. Of note, because the therapist in Study 1 
(CCR) supervised the therapist in Study 2 (KM), patients in the 
second study benefitted from two therapists’ input and the clinical 
insights from the first study. Although there was not enough power 
to conduct hypothesis testing with the DMQ, the descriptive data 
on the DMQ also showed improvements in symptoms, impairment, 
and associated beliefs in this sample. On the other hand, the 
treatment did not have such effects on depression symptoms. 
However, this finding may be due to the low rates of depressive 
symptoms in this particular sample. Floor effects also explained 
why some of the patients across both studies did not report 
improvements due to the treatment. Other patients who did not TABLE 7  Mean scores from the Duke Misophonia Questionnaire for Study 2.
Timepoint DMQ 
symptomsDMS 
impairmentDMS 
beliefs
Intake 62.40 24.10 31.90
Pre-Tx 56.10 23.70 32.40
Tx Week 8 51.80 22.80 29.30
Post Tx 33.10 10.80 14.80
End of Follow-up 32.90 11.70 15.60
Mean scores from the Symptom Severity (combined Affective, Physiological, and Cognitive 
subscales), Impairment, and Beliefs subscales from the Duke Misophonia Questionnaire 
(DMQ; Rosenthal et al., 2021 ). Timepoints include intake, pre-treatment (right before first 
session), week 8 of treatment, post-treatment (right after last session) and end of follow-up.
FIGURE 2
Mean scores from the Duke Misophonia Questionnaire for Study 1 by patient. DMQ Symptoms, Physical Symptom subscale of the Duke Misophonia 
Questionnaire; DMQ Impairment, Impairment subscale of the Duke Misophonia Questionnaire; DMQ Beliefs, Beliefs subscale of the Duke Misphonia 
Questionnaire; N =  8.

McMahon et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1294571
Frontiers in Psychology 14 frontiersin.orgshow notable improvements in misophonia may have had comorbid 
conditions (e.g., ADHD, trauma) or other life circumstances that 
interfered with learning and practicing the skills. More research 
with large, diverse samples is needed to determine if there are 
systematic reasons why the UP may be contraindicated for some 
potential patients.
Although the UP teaches similar cognitive- behavioral skills 
taught in the other previous CBT studies for misophonia ( Schröder 
et al., 2017 ; Jager et al., 2021 ; Rosenthal et al., 2023 ), this treatment 
follows a curriculum of eight modules that culminates in inhibitory learning-based exposures. The sequence of modules builds on itself, 
as patients gradually gain new insight into their thoughts, avoidance 
behaviors, and physical sensations in response to sounds and slowly 
learn how to engage differently. For example, patients often became 
aware of beliefs that drove misophonia, such as not being able to 
tolerate the discomfort, the discomfort will last “forever, ” or it would 
lead them to engage in behaviors that would damage their lives (e.g., 
“I’ll scream at my parents and ruin my relationship with them”). 
Patients then challenged these beliefs directly during the later sessions 
when they practiced skills like mindfulness during exposures, such as 
FIGURE 3
Graphs of Study 2 outcome measures in baseline, treatment and follow-up phases. MQ, Misophonia Questionnaire; OASIS, Overall Anxiety Severity and 
Impairment Scale; ODSIS, Overall Depression Severity and Impairment Scale; OANSIS, Overall Anger Severity and Impairment Scale. N =  10. Patients 
201, 203, 204, 206, 209, and 210 were assigned the 2-week baseline and patients 202, 207, 208, and 212 were assigned 4-week baseline.
FIGURE 4
Mean scores from the Duke Misophonia questionnaire for Study 2 by patient. DMQ Symptoms, Physical Symptom subscale of the Duke Misophonia 
Questionnaire; DMQ Impairment, Impairment subscale of the Duke Misophonia Questionnaire; DMQ Beliefs, Beliefs subscale of the Duke Misphonia 
Questionnaire; N =  10.

McMahon et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1294571
Frontiers in Psychology 15 frontiersin.orgwhile watching an online video of people chewing. In these instances, 
they learned that they can respond to aversive sounds differently than 
their habitual freeze, flight, or fight responses.
This approach of building skills prior to engaging in inhibitory 
learning exposures might explain why several patients experience 
large improvements in their symptoms within the final sessions of the 
treatment. Our patients’ generally positive response to exposures were 
surprising given the negative perceptions of exposures as a treatment 
option for misophonia ( Smith et al., 2022 ). However, in this study, 
many of our patients endorsed core beliefs that their discomfort is 
intolerable and they would be  unable to cope with it without 
avoidance. Thus, exposure in the UP allowed them to challenge this 
belief by engaging in a situation where they encountered the sound 
while using their skills and learned whether the distress was truly 
intolerable or unending. If they had been treated with habituation-
based exposure methods instead (i.e., being presented their trigger 
sounds repeatedly with the expectation that distress will extinguish 
over time), experiencing their discomfort and their maladaptive 
coping mechanisms might provide further evidence for these beliefs. 
In contrast, patients treated with the UP are specifically instructed to 
practice their skills during exposures, which create new experiences 
through inhibitory learning ( Craske et al., 2014 ). While the use of 
habituation-based exposure is not indicated with this population at 
this point due to patient lack of acceptability ( Smith et al., 2022 ), 
exposures using an inhibitory learning model for misophonia have 
been proposed for use by others ( Frank and McKay, 2019 ). Thus, the 
UP’s approach to exposures might be  particularly beneficial for 
patients with misophonia, similar to interventions in the group-based 
CBT Schröder et al., 2017 ; Jager et al., 2021  that involved pairing 
trigger sounds with new stimuli, positive memories or emotions. 
From our anecdotal experience and casual feedback from the patients, 
they were receptive to the exposure module in the UP because the 
stated purpose was to “practice their skills in situations that feel 
challenging or bring up intense emotions. ” By the time they reached 
this final module, many patients had already practiced their skills in 
misophonia contexts on their own or felt enough mastery to engage 
in exposure by then. Patients who felt less confident benefitted from 
the freedom to choose their own exposure assignments.
Our findings also revealed some potential drawbacks of the UP 
for misophonia. Some patients found the structured nature of the 
treatment challenging and reported having difficulty balancing 
discussions of their misophonia symptoms versus other symptoms or 
life challenges in therapy. The UP is designed as a transdiagnostic 
treatment, so patients were able to apply skills to misophonia or other 
issues as they learned them. However, many patients struggled with 
other comorbid conditions such as attention deficit/hyperactivity 
disorder or trauma symptoms that were either more impairing or 
interfered with acquisition of the material. More research is needed to 
understand if targeting other symptoms or disorders with evidence-
based treatments before addressing misophonia would be beneficial. 
In addition, providers can implement the UP in a more flexible way 
by targeting other symptoms or adjusting the length of each module 
to suit the individual needs of their patients. Although such flexibility 
is difficult in controlled research, implementing and studying the UP 
for misophonia in non-research clinical settings can shed light on how 
this flexibility would influence outcomes. Alternatively, it may 
be useful for future research to explore the use of other transdiagnostic 
evidence-based treatment frameworks capable of treating the co-occurring combination of misophonia and a range of mental health 
problems. Process based therapy (PBT; Hofmann and Hayes, 2019 ) is 
one candidate model to consider, as such an approach uses 
interventions to target, in a personalized and patient empowered 
manner, the network of interrelated biological, psychological, and/or 
social processes underlying a given individual’s impairment 
(Rosenthal et al., 2023 ).
Although the findings from this study provide promising support 
for the use of the UP (especially the adapted version) for treating 
misophonia, this study had several limitations that are worth noting. 
First, while the single case experimental design allowed for rigorous 
and thorough assessment of the treatments’ effects on individual 
patients, the sample sizes were small. The small sample sizes allow for 
outliers to bias the results, which may have led to significant 
differences for most of the comparisons. Replication of these results 
with larger sample sizes using different controlled trial methodology 
is the logical next step to this line of research. Second, the treatment 
was delivered by only two therapists, one in the first study and another 
in the second study. Both therapists were Ph.D.-level clinical 
psychologists trained in delivering cognitive behavioral therapies, 
which may not represent the approach of all the community providers 
who may treat patients with misophonia. More research with multiple 
study therapists is needed to understand the effects of the treatment 
itself across a range of providers. Third, we did not include established 
measures of therapy satisfaction questionnaires, such as the Client 
Satisfaction Questionnaire ( Attkisson and Zwick, 1982 ). Finally, a 
limitation of this study is the low Cronbach’s alphas for the symptoms 
and emotional and behavioral responses (for Study 2) subscales of the 
Misophonia Questionnaire at the intake session. These poor scale 
reliability results may be attributed to the small sample size, but they 
can also suggest that patients with misophonia may have different 
profiles. For example, some patients in our study endorsed strong 
reactions to specific types of sounds (e.g., chewing) but low or no 
reactions to other types of sounds, which made the interitem 
correlations among the symptoms subscale of the MQ very low. In 
addition, there is emerging research suggesting that misophonia can 
manifest in either internalizing and externalizing presentations 
(Vitoratou et al., 2023 ) so patients in our study who reacted with fear, 
panic and shame did not endorse the items in that subscale that 
capture aggressive responses. Again, studies with larger samples and 
other measures of misophonia are needed to determine the UP’s 
efficacy for different aspects of the disorder.
Third, at the time of study development the MQ was a 
predominant self-report measure of misophonia ( Wu et al., 2014 ). 
The MQ, however, is limited by its focus on presence of triggers and 
frequency of emotional and behavioral responses, as well as a single 
item to capture impairment of sound sensitivities broadly rather 
than misophonia specifically. Since the current study began, several 
new measures of misophonia have been validated that have more 
comprehensive assessment and stronger psychometric support [e.g., 
S-5 ( Vitoratou et al., 2021 ); Misoquest ( Siepsiak et al., 2020 ); Duke 
Misophonia Questionnaire ( Rosenthal et al., 2021 ); Duke-Vanderbilt 
Misophonia Screening Questionnaire ( Williams et  al., 2022 )]. 
Although we used the Duke Misophonia Questionnaire ( Rosenthal 
et al., 2021 ) in this study, we did not administer it on a weekly basis 
to reduce patient burden and therefore could not include it in our 
outcomes measures analyses. Future work on changes in misophonia 
before, during, and after treatments should include additional

McMahon et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1294571
Frontiers in Psychology 16 frontiersin.orgmeasure of misophonia that are both sensitive to change and have 
strong face validity. Because of these limitations in measurement, 
we are limited in our ability to draw inferential conclusions about 
how misophonia as a comprehensive construct beyond its 
measurement in the MQ changed across treatment. Future work 
should include measures that have evidenced strong discriminant 
validity for sensory intolerance conditions that often co-occur with 
misophonia (e.g., hyperacusis, sensory over-responsivity). Lastly, the 
OANSIS is also not an empirically validated measure of anger. This 
measure was used in this study because instead of focusing on 
externalizing symptoms often assessed by other anger measures (e.g., 
yelling), it focused more on functional impairment (e.g., how often 
did you  avoid situations, places, objects or activity because 
of anger?).
Despite these limitations, this is the first study to our knowledge 
that used this approach to demonstrate initial promise for using the 
UP as a treatment for misophonia in adults. Because it can 
be delivered by an individual therapist in 16 sessions in a wide range 
of clinical settings, this treatment provides an accessible and effective 
solution for patients struggling with misophonia. In line with 
previous findings (review of treatment studies), learning skills to 
manage emotional responses to misophonia can improve their 
symptoms and daily functioning. In this study, the UP helped patients 
learn to tolerate their discomfort in their misophonia contexts and 
use specific skills to react to the situation in heathier ways. Patients 
who were unable to join family dinners for years reported hardly even 
noticing their trigger sounds at the dinner table by the end of 
treatment. Although larger studies are warranted, this study offers 
hope that the UP is a viable treatment option for those suffering 
from misophonia.
Data availability statement
The datasets presented in this article are not readily available 
because we  will comply with Duke University Medical Center’s 
policies regarding sharing clinical research data. Requests to access the 
datasets should be directed to mark.rosenthal@duke.edu .
Ethics statement
The studies involving humans were approved by DUHS 
Institutional Review Board. The studies were conducted in accordance 
with the local legislation and institutional requirements. The 
participants provided their written informed consent to participate in 
this study.Author contributions
KM: Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Investigation, Project 
administration, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. 
CC-R: Conceptualization, Data curation, Funding acquisition, 
Investigation, Methodology, Project administration, Resources, 
Writing – review & editing. AG: Formal analysis, Methodology, 
Visualization, Writing – review & editing. RG: Formal analysis, 
Visualization, Writing – review & editing. EF-A: Visualization, 
Writing – review & editing, Data curation. LK: Data curation, Project 
administration, Writing – review & editing. MR: Conceptualization, 
Funding acquisition, Investigation, Methodology, Supervision, 
Writing – original draft.
Funding
The author(s) declare financial support was received for the 
research, authorship, and/or publication of this article. The REAM 
Misophonia Research Fund provided funding to support the efforts of 
the KM and the research materials (grant number: FE 256617).
Conflict of interest
The authors declare that the research was conducted in the 
absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could 
be construed as a potential conflict of interest.
The author(s) declared that they were an editorial board member 
of Frontiers, at the time of submission. This had no impact on the peer 
review process and the final decision.
Publisher’s note
All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the 
authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated 
organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the 
reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or 
claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or 
endorsed by the publisher.
Supplementary material
The Supplementary material for this article can be found online 
at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1294571/
full#supplementary-material
References
Andermane, N., Bauer, M., Simner, J., and Ward, J. (2023). A symptom network model 
of misophonia: from heightened sensory sensitivity to clinical comorbidity. J. Clin. 
Psychol.  79, 2364–2387. doi: 10.1002/jclp.23552
Attkisson, C. C., and Zwick, R. (1982). The client satisfaction questionnaire: 
psychometric properties and correlations with service utilization and psychotherapy 
outcome. Eval. Program Plann.  5, 233–237. doi: 10.1016/0149-7189(82)90074-X
Barlow, D. H., Farchione, T. J., Sauer-Zavala, S., Latin, H. M., Ellard, K. K., Bullis, J. R., 
et al. (2018). Unified protocol for transdiagnostic treatment of emotional disorders: 
therapist guide . New Y ork, NY: Oxford University Press.Barlow, D. H., Nock, M. K., and Hersen, M. (2009). Single case experimental designs: 
strategies for studying behavior change . 3rd. Boston, MA: Pearson.
Bentley, K. H., Gallagher, M. W ., Carl, J. R., and Barlow, D. H. (2014). Development 
and validation of the overall depression severity and impairment scale. Psychol. Assess.  
26, 815–830. doi: 10.1037/a0036216
Braun, V ., and Clarke, V . (2006). Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qual. Res. 
Psychol.  3, 77–101. doi: 10.1191/1478088706qp063oa
Bullis, J. R., Boettcher, H., Sauer-Zavala, S., Farchione, T. J., and Barlow, D. H. (2019). 
What is an emotional disorder? A transdiagnostic mechanistic definition with

McMahon et al. 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1294571
Frontiers in Psychology 17 frontiersin.orgimplications for assessment, treatment, and prevention. Clin. Psychol. Sci. Pract.  
26:e12278. doi: 10.1111/cpsp.12278
Campbell-Sills, L., Norman, S. B., Craske, M. G., Sullivan, G., Lang, A. J., 
Chavira, D. A., et al. (2009). Validation of a brief measure of anxiety-related severity and 
impairment: the overall anxiety severity and impairment scale (OASIS). J. Affect. Disord.  
112, 92–101. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2008.03.014
Cassiello-Robbins, C., Anand, D., McMahon, K., Guetta, R., Trumbull, J., Kelley, L., 
et al. (2020a). The mediating role of emotion regulation within the relationship between 
neuroticism and misophonia: a preliminary investigation. Front. Psych.  11:847. doi: 
10.3389/fpsyt.2020.00847
Cassiello-Robbins, C., Southward, M. W ., Tirpak, J. W ., and Sauer-Zavala, S. (2020b). 
A systematic review of unified protocol applications with adult populations: facilitating 
widespread dissemination via adaptability. Clin. Psychol. Rev.  78:101852. doi: 10.1016/j.
cpr.2020.101852
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences . 2nd Edn. New 
Y ork, NY: Academic press.
Craske, M. G., Treanor, M., Conway, C. C., Zbozinek, T., and Vervliet, B. (2014). 
Maximizing exposure therapy: an inhibitory learning approach. Behav. Res. Ther.  58, 
10–23. doi: 10.1016/j.brat.2014.04.006
Dibb, B., and Golding, S. E. (2022). A longitudinal investigation of quality of life and 
negative emotions in misophonia. Front. Neurosci.  16:900474. doi: 10.3389/
fnins.2022.900474
First, M. B., Williams, J. B. W ., Benjamin, L. S., and Spitzer, R. L. (2015a). User’s guide 
for the SCID-5-PD (structured clinical interview for DSM-5 personality disorder)  
Arlington, V A: American Psychiatric Association.
First, M. B., Williams, J. B., Karg, R. S., and Spitzer, R. L. (2015b). Structured clinical 
interview for DSM-5—Research version (SCID-5 for DSM-5, research version; SCID-5-RV)  
Arlington, V A: American Psychiatric Association.
Frank, B., and McKay, D. (2019). The suitability of an inhibitory learning approach in 
exposure when habituation fails: a clinical application to misophonia. Cogn. Behav. 
Pract.  26, 130–142. doi: 10.1016/j.cbpra.2018.04.003
Guetta, R. E., Cassiello-Robbins, C., Trumbull, J., Anand, D., and Rosenthal, M. Z. 
(2022). Examining emotional functioning in misophonia: the role of affective instability 
and difficulties with emotion regulation. PLoS One  17:e0263230. doi: 10.1371/journal.
pone.0263230
Guzick, A. G., Cervin, M., Smith, E. E., Clinger, J., Draper, I., Goodman, W . K., et al. 
(2023). Clinical characteristics, impairment, and psychiatric morbidity in 102 youth 
with misophonia. J. Affect. Disord.  324, 395–402. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2022.12.083
Harris, P . A., Taylor, R., Thielke, R., Payne, J., Gonzalez, N., and Conde, J. G. (2009). 
Research electronic data capture (REDCap)—a metadata-driven methodology and 
workflow process for providing translational research informatics support. J. Biomed. 
Inform.  42, 377–381. doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2008.08.010
Hofmann, S. G., and Hayes, S. C. (2019). The future of intervention science: process-
based therapy. Clin. Psychol. Sci.  7, 37–50. doi: 10.1177/2167702618772296
Jager, I., de Koning, P ., Bost, T., Denys, D., and Vulink, N. (2020). Misophonia: 
phenomenology, comorbidity and demographics in a large sample. PLoS One  
15:e0231390. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0231390
Jager, I. J., Vulink, N. C., Bergfeld, I. O., van Loon, A. J., and Denys, D. A. (2021). 
Cognitive behavioral therapy for misophonia: a randomized clinical trial. Depress. 
Anxiety  38, 708–718. doi: 10.1002/da.23127
Jastreboff, M. M., and Jastreboff, P . J. (2001). Components of decreased sound 
tolerance: hyperacusis, misophonia, phonophobia. ITHS News Lett  2, 1–5.
Kazdin, A. E. (2011). Single-case research designs: methods for clinical and applied 
settings . 2nd ed . New Y ork, NY: Oxford University Press.
Lewin, A.B. (2023). Transdiagnostic treatment for youth with misophonia [Conference 
presentation] . Misophonia Research Fund Convention: Chicago, IL, United States.
Lewin, A. B., Dickinson, S., Kudryk, K., Karlovich, A. R., Harmon, S. L., Phillips, D. A., 
et al. (2021). Transdiagnostic cognitive behavioral therapy for misophonia in youth: 
methods for a clinical trial and four pilot cases. J. Affect. Disord.  291, 400–408. doi: 
10.1016/j.jad.2021.04.027
Mattson, S. A., D'Souza, J., Wojcik, K. D., Guzick, A. G., Goodman, W . K., and 
Storch, E. A. (2023). A systematic review of treatments for misophonia. Pers. Med. 
Psychiatry  39-40:100104. doi: 10.1016/j.pmip.2023.100104
Möllmann, A., Heinrichs, N., Illies, L., Potthast, N., and Kley, H. (2023). The central 
role of symptom severity and associated characteristics for functional impairment in 
misophonia. Front. Psych.  14:1112472. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2023.1112472
Moore, S. A., Welch, S. S., Michonski, J., Poquiz, J., Osborne, T. L., Sayrs, J., et al. 
(2015). Psychometric evaluation of the Overall Anxiety Severity And Impairment Scale 
(OASIS) in individuals seeking outpatient specialty treatment for anxiety-related 
disorders. Journal of Affective Disorders , 175, 463–470.Norman, S. B., Hami Cissell, S., Means‐Christensen, A. J., and Stein, M. B. (2006). 
Development and validation of an overall anxiety severity and impairment scale (OASIS). 
Depression and anxiety  23, 245–249.
Naylor, J., Caimino, C., Scutt, P ., Hoare, D. J., and Baguley, D. M. (2021). The prevalence and 
severity of misophonia in a UK undergraduate medical student population and validation of 
the Amsterdam misophonia scale. Psychiatry Q.  92, 609–619.
Osma, J., Quilez-Orden, A., Suso-Ribera, C., Peris-Baquero, O., Norman, S. B., 
Bentley, K. H., et al. (2019). Psychometric properties and validation of the Spanish 
versions of the overall anxiety and depression severity and impairment scales. Journal 
of affective disorders , 252:9–18.
Payne, L. A., Ellard, K. K., Farchione, T. J., Fairholme, C. P ., and Barlow, D. H. (2014). 
“Emotional disorders: a unified transdiagnostic protocol” in Clinical handbook of 
psychological disorders: a step-by-step treatment manual . ed. D. H. Barlow. 5th ed (New 
Y ork, NY: Guilford Press), 237–274.
Peng, C. Y . J., and Chen, L. T. (2021). Assessing intervention effects in the presence of 
missing scores. Educ. Sci.  11:76. doi: 10.3390/educsci11020076
Rinaldi, L. J., Simner, J., Koursarou, S., and Ward, J. (2023). Autistic traits, emotion 
regulation, and sensory sensitivities in children and adults with Misophonia. J. Autism 
Dev. Disord.  53, 1162–1174. doi: 10.1007/s10803-022-05623-x
Rosenthal, M. Z., Anand, D., Cassiello-Robbins, C., Williams, Z. J., Guetta, R. E., 
Trumbull, J., et al. (2021). Development and initial validation of the duke misophonia 
questionnaire. Front. Psychol.  12:709928. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.709928
Rosenthal, M. Z., McMahon, K., Greenleaf, A. S., Cassiello-Robbins, C., Guetta, R., 
Trumbull, J., et al. (2022). Phenotyping misophonia: psychiatric disorders and medical 
health correlates. Front. Psychol.  13:941898. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.941898
Rosenthal, M. Z., Shan, Y ., and Trumbull, J. (2023). Treatment of Misophonia. Adv. 
Psychiatry Behav. Health  3, 33–41. doi: 10.1016/j.ypsc.2023.03.009
Sauer-Zavala, S., and Barlow, D. H. (2014). The case for borderline personality 
disorder as an emotional disorder: implications for treatment. Clin. Psychol. Sci. Pract.  
21, 118–138. doi: 10.1111/cpsp.12063
Savard, M. A., Sares, A. G., Coffey, E. B., and Deroche, M. L. (2022). Specificity of 
affective responses in misophonia depends on trigger identification. Front. Neurosci.  
16:879583. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2022.879583
Schröder, A. E., Vulink, N. C., van Loon, A. J., and Denys, D. A. (2017). Cognitive 
behavioral therapy is effective in misophonia: an open trial. J. Affect. Disord.  217, 
289–294. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2017.04.017
Shadish, W . R. (2015). Software for meta-analysis of single-case design DHPS version 
March 7 2015. Available at: http://faculty.ucmerced.edu/wshadish/software/software-
meta-analysis-singlecase-design/dhps-version-march-7-2015
Shadish, W . R., Hedges, L. V ., Pustejovsky, J. E., Boyajian, J. G., Sullivan, K. J., 
Andrade, A., et al. (2014). A d-statistic for single-case designs that is equivalent to the 
usual between-groups d-statistic. Neuropsychol. Rehabil.  24, 528–553. doi: 
10.1080/09602011.2013.819021
Siepsiak, M., Rosenthal, M. Z., Raj-Koziak, D., and Dragan, W . (2022). Psychiatric and 
audiologic features of misophonia: use of a clinical control group with auditory over-
responsivity. J. Psychosom. Res.  156:110777. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychores.2022.110777
Siepsiak, M., Śliwerski, A., and Łukasz Dragan, W . (2020). Development and 
psychometric properties of misoquest—a new self-report questionnaire for misophonia. 
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health  17:1797. doi: 10.3390/ijerph17051797
Smith, E. E., Guzick, A. G., Draper, I. A., Clinger, J., Schneider, S. C., Goodman, W . K., 
et al. (2022). Perceptions of various treatment approaches for adults and children with 
misophonia. J. Affect. Disord.  316, 76–82. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2022.08.020
Swedo, S. E., Baguley, D. M., Denys, D., Dixon, L. J., Erfanian, M., Fioretti, A., et al. 
(2022). Consensus definition of Misophonia: a delphi study. Front. Neurosci.  16:841816. 
doi: 10.3389/fnins.2022.841816
Vitoratou, S., Uglik-Marucha, N., Hayes, C., and Gregory, J. (2021). Listening to 
people with misophonia: exploring the multiple dimensions of sound intolerance using 
a new psychometric tool, the S-five, in a large sample of individuals identifying with the 
condition. Psych , 3, 639–662.
Vitoratou, S., Hayes, C., Uglik-Marucha, N., Pearson, O., Graham, T., and Gregory, J. 
(2023). Misophonia in the UK: prevalence and norms from the S-five in a UK 
representative sample. PLoS One  18:e0282777. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0282777
Williams, Z. J., Cascio, C. J., and Woynaroski, T. G. (2022). Psychometric validation 
of a brief self-report measure of misophonia symptoms and functional impairment: the 
duke-vanderbilt misophonia screening questionnaire. Front. Psychol.  13:897901. doi: 
10.3389/fpsyg.2022.897901
Wu, M. S., Lewin, A. B., Murphy, T. K., and Storch, E. A. (2014). Misophonia: 
incidence, phenomenology, and clinical correlates in an undergraduate student sample. 
J. Clin. Psychol.  70, 994–1007. doi: 10.1002/jclp.22098