Under graduate Resear ch Symposium P osters OUR Digital Under graduate Resear ch Reposit ory 
12-9-2022 
Musicality , Misophonia Sensitivity , and Responsiv eness t o Musicality , Misophonia Sensitivity , and Responsiv eness t o 
Misophonia Videos Misophonia Videos 
Alexis Rice 
Univ ersity of Ne vada, Las V egas , ricea4@unlv .nevada.edu 
Jennif er Hsu 
Univ ersity of Ne vada, Las V egas , hsuj11@unlv .nevada.edu 
Kaela Omengan 
Univ ersity of Ne vada, Las V egas , omengan@unlv .nevada.edu 
Sivan Bar ashy 
Univ ersity of Ne vada, Las V egas 
Follow this and additional works at: https:/ /digitalscholarship.unlv .edu/dur ep_posters 
 Part of the Cognition and P erception Commons , Cognitiv e Neur oscience Commons , and the 
Musicology Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Rice, Alexis; Hsu, Jennif er; Omengan, Kaela; and Bar ashy , Sivan, "Musicality , Misophonia Sensitivity , and 
Responsiv eness t o Misophonia Videos" (2022). Under graduate Resear ch Symposium P osters . 149. 
https:/ /digitalscholarship.unlv .edu/dur ep_posters/149 
This Pr esentation is pr otected b y cop yright and/or r elated rights. It has been br ought t o you b y Digital 
Scholarship@UNL V with permission fr om the rights-holder(s). Y ou ar e free to use this Pr esentation in any wa y that 
is permitted b y the cop yright and r elated rights legislation that applies t o your use. F or other uses y ou need t o 
obtain permission fr om the rights-holder(s) dir ectly , unless additional rights ar e indicated b y a Cr eativ e Commons 
license in the r ecor d and/or on the work itself. 
 
This Pr esentation has been accepted for inclusion in Under graduate Resear ch Symposium P osters b y an 
authoriz ed administr ator of Digital Scholarship@UNL V. For mor e information, please contact 
digitalscholarship@unlv .edu .

Musicality, Misophonia Sensitivity, and Responsiveness to 
Misophonia Videos 
Alexis Rice, Jennifer Hsu, Kaela Omengan, 
Sivan Barashy, Solena Mednicoff, Erin Hannon 
Introduction 
 Research Question 
Results 
Methods Conclusion 
References Department of Psychology, University of Nevada, Las Vegas 
1.Swedo, S. E., Baguley, D. M., Denys, D., Dixon, L. J., Erfanian, M., Fioretti, A., Jastreboff, P. J., Kumar, S., Rosenthal, M. Z., Rouw, R., Schiller, D., Simner, J., Storch, E. A., Taylor, S., Werff, K., Altimus, C. M., & Raver, S. M. (2022). Consensus Definition of Misophonia: A Delphi 
Study. Frontiers in neuroscience , 16, 841816. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2022.841816 
2.Mednicoff, S. D., Barashy, S., Gonzales, D., Benning, S. D., Snyder, J. S., & Hannon, E. E. (2022). Auditory affective processing, musicality, and the development of misophonic reactions. Frontiers in neuroscience , 16, 924806. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2022.924806 
3.Müllensiefen, D., Gingras, B., Musil, J., & Stewart, L. (2014a). Measuring the facets of musicality: The Goldsmiths Musical Sophistication Index (Gold-MSI). Personality and Individual Differences , 60, S35–S35. 
Edelstein, M., Brang, D., Rouw, R., & Ramachandran, V . (2013). Misophonia: Physiological investigations and case descriptions. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 7, 296. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum Acknowledgements 
 N = 60 adults 
 Measures: 
•Misophonia Sensitivity: Amsterdam Misophonia Scale (A-MISO-S)3 
•Musicality: Gold’s Musical Sophistication Index (Gold-MSI), with 
subfactors of active engagement, perceptual abilities, musical training, 
singing abilities, and emotions4
 
•Emotional Responses: Button clicks indicating 
real-time response to videos of misophonia triggers 
(snoring, slurping, gulping, etc) • Misophonia  - A disorder of decreased tolerance 
to specific sounds and associated contexts.1 
• Previous research has suggested that self-reported 
misophonia was  lower in individuals who were musicians (practiced 
for 1-7 hours daily)2•Do musicality and misophonia sensitivity predict emotional 
responses to videos of misophonia triggers? 
•No correlation between GOLD-MSI scores and emotional 
responses to misophonia trigger videos 
•r = -0.159, p = 0.224 
•Participants with higher A-MISO-S scores had more frequent 
emotional responses 
•r = 0.280, p = .030 
•Misophonia sensitivity as measured by the A-MISO-S predicts 
emotional responses to misophonia trigger videos, but musical 
sophistication (Gold MSI scores) did not. 
•A measure of real-time responses to videos can capture a meaningful 
aspect of misophonic experience in the general population. 
•Future research should investigate whether 
more direct measures of musicality such as 
perceptual tasks will show a relationship 
between musicality and misophonic reactions. 
•Funding was provided through the 
Misophonia Research Fund Grant 
from the REAM Foundation.