Citation: Natalini, E.; Fioretti, A.;
Eibenstein, R.; Eibenstein, A.
Metacognitive Interpersonal Therapy
for Misophonia: A Single-Case Study.
Brain Sci. 2024 ,14, 717. https://
doi.org/10.3390/brainsci14070717
Academic Editor: Maria E. Rubio
Received: 23 June 2024
Revised: 11 July 2024
Accepted: 16 July 2024
Published: 17 July 2024
Copyright: ©2024 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
brain sciences 
Case Report
Metacognitive Interpersonal Therapy for Misophonia:
A Single-Case Study
Eleonora Natalini1, Alessandra Fioretti1,*, Rebecca Eibenstein1
and Alberto Eibenstein2
1Tinnitus Center, European Hospital, Via Portuense 700, 00149 Rome, Italy;
eleonora.natalini@gmail.com (E.N.); rebecca.eibenstein95@gmail.com (R.E.)
2Department of Biotechnological and Applied Clinical Sciences, University of L’Aquila, 67100 L’Aquila, Italy;
alberto.eibenstein@univaq.it
*Correspondence: abfioretti@gmail.com
Abstract: Background: Misophonia is a chronic condition in which the exposure to specific sounds
increases the arousal and recurrence of specific intense negative emotions. We hypothesized that
misophonia may be strongly related to maladaptive interpersonal schemas that create difficulties in
interpersonal relationships. Subjects with maladaptive interpersonal schemas think that other people
try to subjugate, criticize, dominate, exploit, deceive, disregard, and humiliate them. Furthermore,
these patients typically endorse a representation of self as mistreated, constricted, harmed, damaged,
humiliated, impotent, inadequate, or fragile. Methods: We describe the course of a treatment of
Metacognitive Interpersonal Therapy (MIT) in a young man presenting misophonia and co-occurrent
obsessive–compulsive personality disorder (OCPD) and avoidant personality disorder (AvPD),
with narcissistic traits and normal hearing. We collected qualitative and quantitative data at the
beginning of the intervention and at 2 years follow-up. Results: The therapy aimed at increasing
awareness of maladaptive interpersonal schemas and promoting a healthy self. The results reported
a significant decrease in misophonia; behavioural experiments were used to increase the quality of
social relationships and tolerance to the trigger sounds. Conclusions: MIT can be an effective therapy
for the treatment of misophonia.
Keywords: misophonia; maladaptive schema; Metacognitive Interpersonal Therapy; personality
disorder; hearing disorder
1. Introduction
Misophonia is a disorder of decreased tolerance to specific sounds or stimuli (triggers)
associated with such sounds, as reported by the consensus definition of Swedo et al. [ 1].
Specific sounds and/or related sensory inputs produce strong negative emotional and
behavioral reactions (anger, disgust, and frustration) not typically observed in the general
population. The expression of misophonic symptoms is typically first observed in child-
hood or early adolescence. The estimated prevalence of misophonia is about 8% to 20% [ 2].
Some authors suggest that misophonia may be classified as a psychiatric disorder [ 3,4].
Some psychiatric disorders, like anxiety, depression, and obsessive compulsive-related
disorders, may be represented as a comorbidity of misophonia [ 5]. Auditory disorders
like hearing loss, tinnitus, recruitment, phonophobia, and hyperacusis must be evaluated
in patients with misophonia. Tinnitus is a phantom auditory perception and, based on
the neurophysiological model of Jastreboff, the neuronal networks involved in tinnitus
and misophonia are identical [ 6]. The auditory system is needed for the perception of
tinnitus and misophonia, but the limbic and autonomic nervous systems are the main
systems responsible for negative tinnitus- and misophonia-evoked reactions. Conditioned
reflexes explain why there are problems with tinnitus or misophonic triggers. There are
two paths in the network processing of tinnitus signals and activity evoked by bothersome
Brain Sci. 2024 ,14, 717. https://doi.org/10.3390/brainsci14070717 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/brainsci

Brain Sci. 2024 ,14, 717 2 of 10
sounds: a conscious path, which involves cognitive processing of the signal, and which is
dominant at the initial stages of tinnitus or misophonia; and a subconscious path governed
by the principles of conditioned reflexes, which appears to be dominant in chronic tinnitus
or misophonia. Hyperacusis is defined as a decreased sound tolerance described as a
“physical discomfort or pain” in response to sound levels typically tolerable in the general
population [ 7]. Tyler and al. described four subtypes of hyperacusis: loudness, annoyance,
fear, and pain [ 8]. Case history, questionnaires, psychiatric and/or psychological evalua-
tion of comorbid psychiatric disorders, and audiologic evaluation of comorbid auditory
disorders are strongly suggested to determine diagnostic and therapeutic efficacy [9].
Research and health care regarding misophonia are currently scarce. Specific studies on
the treatment of misophonia are also limited. The most widely used therapeutic approach
is Cognitive-Behavioural Therapy (CBT) [10].
Basic CBT techniques, such as cognitive restructuring and the use of functional be-
havioural coping strategies, are frequently used tools [ 11–14]. Cognitive restructuring is
used to modify patients’ distorted thoughts, e.g., “he makes this sound voluntarily to annoy
me”, while behavioural strategies are mainly used to contrast the avoidance tendency.
In addition, relaxation techniques and task concentration exercises are useful in miso-
phonia to manage emotions, especially anger [ 15–17]. The article by Gregory and Foster [ 18]
describes in detail the five sessions (12 h in total) of CBT treatment of misophonia on a
young patient. The work focuses on the patient’s difficulties in expressing her needs,
her view of others as disrespectful and uncaring, and her perception of herself as wrong
and problematic. Similar observations emerged in the case series by Gregory et al. [ 19].
Some works use third-wave approaches. In the study by Jager and colleagues [ 20], Eye
Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing (EMDR) is used on 10 patients to process
memories associated with early misophonia experiences in order to reduce symptoms
and improve the quality of life. The article by Kamody and Del Conte [ 21] reports the
use of Dialectical Behaviour Therapy (DBT) in a young patient. The treatment focuses
on anger management with an improvement of extreme to moderate misophonia. The
patient was also given drug treatment. Mindfulness and the components of Acceptance and
Commitment Therapy (ACT) and DBT were used in the treatment of a young adult [ 22].
The work focused on the development of acceptance, non-judgement, and mindfulness.
The strategy of opposite action was used to counter dysfunctional behaviours related to
misophonia. The application of CBT techniques enhanced with elements of ACT, DBT,
and Mindfulness was carried out online with a 16-year-old girl. The 15 week treatment
focusing on emotional regulation resulted in an improvement of misophonia from severe
to mild [23].
Metacognitive Interpersonal Therapy (MIT) belongs to third-wave therapies and is an
integrated approach mainly used for the treatment of personality disorders [24–26].
The therapy aims to modify the patient’s maladaptive interpersonal schemas. Inter-
personal schemas indicate how the patients see themselves and others [ 25,27,28]. When a
need or desire is activated, people predict how others will react to their demands. Typically,
when maladaptive schemas are active, patients see others as critical, judgmental, reject-
ing, indifferent, or dominant. At the same time, they view themselves as wrong, fragile,
vulnerable, powerless, or submissive.
The intentions that people attribute to others direct their emotions, thoughts, and
actions. For example, if I think a person may criticize me for something I want to do, I may
feel shame and sadness, think I am worthless, and withdraw before I even begin any action.
Often the same dysfunctional patterns hinder patients in achieving their goals. Starting
with specific autobiographical episodes, a shared formulation of the patient’s functioning is
constructed with the patient in order to make him/her aware of his/her own patterns. MIT,
over the years, has integrated many experiential techniques, including guided imagery
and rescripting, role-play and two-chair approaches, bodily exercises, and behavioural
experiments [26,29].

Brain Sci. 2024 ,14, 717 3 of 10
Our hypothesis is that in patients with misophonia, these maladaptive interpersonal
schemas underlie and sustain the disorder [ 30,31]. Indeed, patients with misophonia often
think that the actions of others are intentional and disrespectful of their needs [ 11,13,18,30].
The onset of misophonia also depends on the context or source of the sound [ 30,32]. In
patients with misophonia, the view of self is impaired. They may feel wrong, powerless,
or guilty [ 18,23]. The presence of maladaptive interpersonal patterns can lead to one or
more personality disorders. The purpose of our study is to detail the MIT treatment of a
patient with misophonia in order to highlight the importance of interpersonal schemas
in maintaining the disorder. To our knowledge, this is the first study of misophonia
successfully treated with MIT.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Presenting Problem
Marco is a 25-year-old man with symptoms of misophonia since the age of 10. In the
early years, however, certain sounds were rarely perceived as threatening and they did not
create great discomfort.
The problems with misophonia became stronger after high school, at the age of 18,
when he spent more time at home, went to university, and started his first job. During
university, which he did not complete, he had difficulties with his roommate’s breathing,
which he felt was too heavy. While studying, he was annoyed by the music he heard
coming from his earphones.
During his first job, working and living at home with the same people, the trigger
sounds were those related to swallowing and chewing, the same ones he was currently
complaining of in his family. The difficulties with sounds were less with friends or strangers.
Marco used earphones. Initially, the volume was low, then increased to the point
where he could no longer hear the family’s conversations at the table. When he got up
from the table, his anger was so intense that he often vented it by slamming doors or
kicking objects.
Marco presented overcontrol and rigidity that were also visible in his posture. His
life was characterized by self-imposed habits and rules. He set the alarm clock early every
day even if he had no commitments, his diet was very controlled by excluding certain
foods (e.g., carbohydrates because they make him drowsy), and he had significant difficulty
with spending money. There is little space for spontaneous desire and no awareness of the
difference between what he wanted and what was right to do or what he had to do. The
tendency to perfectionism is a coping strategy that emerges from the narratives and the fear
of making mistakes and of not doing everything as it should be, which hampers the paths
he takes. Faced with the possibility of a difficulty, he generally tended towards avoidance.
As previously reported, Marco has often changed study or work paths. He worked in a
company in the administration office and sometimes helped his father in one of the family
businesses. He joined a group of close friends and has never had an intimate relationship.
Marco came to the Tinnitus Center in Rome, in July 2021, having previously tried two
other therapeutic paths for the problem.
2.2. Assessment and Instruments
The diagnosis of misophonia was made by a clinical interview based on the criteria
described by Schröder and colleagues and with the Amsterdam Misophonia Scale (A-MISO-
S) [3]. A structured clinical interview for DSM-IV personality disorders (SCID-II) [ 33], thet
Beck Depression Inventory-II (BDI-II) [ 34], and the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (form-Y)
(STAI-Y) [35] were also administered at the beginning of treatment.
The A-MISO-S is a semi-structured interview that is not validated. On a six-item
scale (range 0–24), patients were asked about the (1) time they spend on misophonia,
(2) interference with social functioning, (3) level of anger, (4) resistance against the impulse,
(5) control they had over their thoughts and anger, and (6) time they spend avoiding

Brain Sci. 2024 ,14, 717 4 of 10
misophonic situations. Scores from 0 to 4 are considered subclinical misophonic symptoms,
5–9 mild, 10–14 moderate, 15–19 severe, and 20–24 extreme.
The SCID-II is a structured clinical interview that assesses the full range of PD traits
found in DSM IV PD. The interview was administered by the treating clinician before the
beginning of any physical or psychological treatment.
The BDI-II is a 21-item measure assessing depression over the previous 2 weeks.
Higher scores suggest a high level of depression. The cutoff used are the following: 0–
13 corresponded to minimal depression, 14–19 to mild depression, 20–28 to moderate
depression and 29–63 to severe depression.
The STAI-Y is a self-report instrument measuring state-anxiety (anxiety about an
event) and trait-anxiety (anxiety level as a stable characteristic). All items were rated on a
4-point Likert Scores range from 20 to 80. Higher scores have a correlation with a higher
level of anxiety.
The score obtained from the A-MISO-S by the patient at the beginning of the treatment
was 16, a severe grade. The SCID-II showed the presence of obsessive–compulsive person-
ality disorder (OCPD) and avoidant personality disorder (AvPD), with narcissistic traits.
The BDI-II reported a minimal depression (score 12) and the STAI-Y a medium-low level
of both state-anxiety (score 46) and trait-anxiety (score 49). Normal hearing was defined
with a hearing threshold < 25 dB HL in all tested frequencies (0.25–8 kHz) in both ears at
the audiometric evaluation. Hyperacusis was excluded by testing the loudness discomfort
levels (LDLs) at the frequencies of 0.25, 0.5, 1, 2, 4, and 8 kHz. The patient had normal
hearing and normal LDLs.
2.3. Course of Treatment
In the first year, Marco’s therapy was carried out in person on a weekly basis. There
was a break of about 6 months requested by the patient himself who was abroad for work
reasons. Subsequently, therapy was resumed in online mode. Currently, sessions aree held
every fortnight.
The treatment was carried out by a psychotherapist with MIT training and work
experience of about 10 years, 8 of which in hearing disorders.
2.3.1. Shared Formulation of Functioning
As indicated by MIT, the first part of the treatment focused on the construction
of a shared formulation of the patient’s functioning. In the first meetings, exercises of
exploration and observation of the internal state were assigned to improve narrative and
self-reflective skills.
Marco was asked to remove the earphones at trigger moments related to misophonia
to check which thoughts, emotions, physical sensations, and action tendencies he was
experiencing. Attentional techniques to be used in case of excessive discomfort were
described and explained. Marco was already familiar with mindfulness, and this helped
the process. In addition, he was given descriptive emotion cards to help the patient name
his feelings.
The first part of the treatment was used to collect narrative episodes, i.e., detailed
autobiographical memories that are well located in time and space. The focus was then
placed on the details of these episodes to search for feelings, ideas, and motivations for
actions. The observation and narration of the episodes led to the identification of several
interesting points. Anger, typical of misophonia, emerged because Marco felt forced by
others not only to witness unpleasant sounds but because others ate unhealthy food. This
last observation was related to the feeling of disgust, of a moral kind, which also emerged
in another observation. Marco felt more misophonia-related distress towards people who
did not help tidy up the table and whom he judged to be rude, with no respect for others.
The exercises also helped to identify problems within the family. At the table, quarrels
and discontent were the order of the day, and Marco suffered especially due to his mother,
who was described as complaining and discontented. His mother often refused to eat with

Brain Sci. 2024 ,14, 717 5 of 10
them when she was angry and this aroused feelings of anger and guilt in Marco. In the
past, there was aggressive behaviour when the parents argued, with the father breaking
objects and the mother damaging her own person as a demonstrative act of her suffering.
On a bodily level, Marco’s physical sensations were characterized by stomach tension
and muscular rigidity that could result in aggressive behaviour that Marco later regretted.
Marco began with the therapist to see how misophonia was the only way to express
anger because, from his point of view, his complaints were correct and the others were in
the wrong.
After analysing the misophonia episodes, he was asked to bring back other episodes
related to the emotion of anger in therapy to see what interpersonal patterns might be
activated. The investigation was not easy because, outside of misophonia, for the reasons
described above, it was difficult for Marco to tell himself that he was feeling that emotion.
It was possible to identify moments of strong stress related to his father’s requests
for help at work. Marco did not want often to help him but did so because he would
otherwise feel selfish. The feeling of guilt also came back when his mother showed signs of
impatience or sadness.
A healthy desire to live alone emerged during the interviews. The family owned a
house that was sometimes used by the father because it was closer to work and because
of his bad relationship with his wife. Some meetings were dedicated to the possibility of
using this house, but Marco found it very difficult to ask—he felt he did not deserve this
possibility. During the session, the therapist led Marco to evoke autobiographical memories
related to the current situation in order to show the patient the existence of recurrences in
the way of relating.
T: Does this belief that you don’t deserve things remind you of something from the
past? Where could you have heard it?
P: When I was a child, I never had fashionable clothes and I was very ashamed. My
mother wouldn’t buy them for me not to spend money. I was angry but then I stopped
asking . . .I don’t know then at some point it felt right. Once, however, I had asked for a
game and she bought it for me . . .I wanted it so much, I was happy, but then my mother . . .
(she turns dark)
T: What’s happening? I can see sadness on your face. . .
P: Yes . . .I remember that I saw her suffering . . .it wasn’t a gesture made in joy, I felt
that it was wrong, that the shopping was damaging the family, that I was a bad child . . .
instead I had to be a good child, I didn’t have to cause problems.
T: And how did you feel towards your mother?
P: I felt guilty. Both she and dad always said they stayed together for us children
and did things for us. I felt . . .I don’t know . . .ungrateful, if I only thought of myself. It’s
dawning on me that my mother also used to complain a lot when she had to take me to
football school, she made me feel it was weighing on me. . .
The information obtained through the narrative episodes and autobiographical mem-
ories allowed the reconstruction of interpersonal schemas. The desire for autonomy was
hindered by the perception of himself as selfish and ungrateful if he took care of his own
needs, and he felt guilt for this. The perception of the other was of a person who could be
hurt by his desires or needs. In this case he felt the relationship threatened. Sometimes,
however, the feeling of anger was present when he perceived the other as controlling and
domineering. In this case, Marco felt that the other wanted to subjugate him, and his
self-image as a person capable and deserving of autonomy was activated. In this case the
healthy part emerged, as it is called in MIT. Perceiving the other as dominant also activated
the motivational schema of social rank. This emerged to counter the self-image, not only as
inferior because of submissiveness, but also inadequate and incapable. High morality and
the need to follow certain rules were used in order to perceive oneself as better than others
and wiser. The dysfunctional coping strategies related to the schemas were perfectionism,
the use of high morality, and avoidance.

Brain Sci. 2024 ,14, 717 6 of 10
The reconstruction of the patterns was accepted by Marco with great interest and
openness. Marco agreed with the reported reflections, and this allowed the transition to
the next phase of therapy concerning change.
2.3.2. Change Promoting
At the change promoting stage, clients are helped to take a critical distance from
their schemas to build new ways of thinking and feeling in order to implement more
adaptive behaviours.
A first step towards differentiation, that is, taking a critical distance from one’s schemas,
was obtained with the use of mindfulness and guided imagination to remind Marco how
some doubts about the present comes from thoughts anchored in the past. His belief
that he did not deserve to live in his father’s house was linked to past episodes in which
he perceived himself as selfish and ungrateful. Validating his desire for independence
on several occasions lead to an explicit request to his father to move. Fortunately, the
request was accepted by his parents with little resistance and Marco lived alone for a few
months. His relationship with his parents changed enormously as did his misophonia,
which was no longer present or of mild intensity when he returned for family lunches.
He felt that his desire for autonomy could be satisfied, and he saw his parents again with
more pleasure and when he wanted to. At the same time, not only in family but also in
friendship relationships, we worked on the recognition of his own needs and the ability to
put limits on the demands of others. In carrying out these exercises, Marco realized that it
was not easy for him to identify his own desires because he was conflicted by the need to
be ‘good’. By sharing how he functioned, he noticed that misophonia was often triggered
when his friends ate food that he desired but considered unhealthy and denied himself
in order to emerge as the wiser and more righteous one. Understanding this mechanism
made it possible to read the presence of the sounds in a different way, realizing that the
sense of constriction was often linked to his internal mechanism.
Two similar episodes that happened a few days apart were interesting.
P: On Monday I went to the cinema with a guy I just met, I ate what I wanted before
going in, he was nice, he even drove without letting me take the car. He was complaining
about some people eating in the hall. I was surprised because I had no misophonia! I
wondered why and realized that I was happy and satisfied with the day, I had done what
I wanted.
T: Well I’m glad! When your needs are met and you know you have chosen, you are
more quiet.
P: Yes exactly, as we said. In fact, listen . . .on Saturday, when I went back to the cinema,
I noticed that I was annoyed by some girls who were eating chips . . .so I asked myself how
I felt and what was happening to me . . .before going to the cinema I had been persuaded
by friends to get a sandwich that I didn’t like and I hadn’t taken the chips. I was hungry
and those girls were eating what I wanted but was denying myself for the reasons we know.
After doing this I felt better and was able to concentrate on the film. However, I couldn’t
bring myself to buy the chips . . .partly because of the unhealthy food issue, partly because
I still think eating at the cinema is rude. . . (laughs).
Another important step was to realize that it was not his responsibility to meet his
parents’ needs in order to see them happy and consequently have a better self-perception.
Marco was able to tell himself that ‘mum is always dissatisfied and fighting with the world,
I realized that it is not my problem and that I am not the cause of this. The same for my
father, I see him sad but he is the one who decided for this life, he cannot take it out on
us sons’.
Working on interpersonal cycles with exposure exercises, Marco realized how his
tendency to complacency and submission contributed to their activation. By eliminating
these tendencies, e.g., with his father for work requests, he realized that when he was
able to say ‘no’, he did not feel annoyed by the sounds his father made. By working on
these dynamics, Marco realized that misophonia did not arise when he perceived that

Brain Sci. 2024 ,14, 717 7 of 10
his demands were taken into account, accepted, and listened to. The improvements on
misophonia are remarkable, but the work with Marco is not finished. The awareness of
his functioning has paved the way for new therapeutic goals. Work is now focusing on
the final stages of MIT treatment with the construction of a new self-narrative and the
promotion of advanced mastery strategies, consisting of knowing how to voluntarily use
learned psychological knowledge to cope with emotional distress, manage interpersonal
conflicts, realize one’s own desires, and cooperate appropriately with others.
3. Results
The questionnaires were resubmitted after approximately two years of the treatment.
The score obtained from the A-MISO-S was 8, a mild grade. The BDI-II reported no
depressive symptoms (score 3) and the STAI-Y a medium-low level of both state-anxiety
(score 34) and trait-anxiety (score 35). The SCID-II confirms the personality profile, as
frequently happens, because patients are more aware of their own functioning.
Tables 1 and 2 report the results at the beginning and after two years of the treatment.
Table 1. Results at the beginning of the treatment for Amsterdam Misophonia Scale (A-MISO-S),
Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Personality Disorders (SCID-II), Beck Depression Inventory-
II (BDI-II), and State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI-Y). Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder
(OCPD). Avoidant Personality Disorder (AvPD).
A-MISO-S Score SCID-II BDI-II ScoreSTAI-Y
State-Anxiety
Trait-Anxiety Score
16OCPD1246
AvPD 49
Table 2. Results after two years of the treatment for Amsterdam Misophonia Scale (A-MISO-S),
Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Personality Disorders (SCID-II), Beck Depression Inventory-
II (BDI-II), and State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI-Y). Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder
(OCPD). Avoidant Personality Disorder (AvPD).
A-MISO-S Score SCID-II BDI-II ScoreSTAI-Y
State-Anxiety
Trait-Anxiety Score
8OCPD334
AvPD 35
Marco went back to live with his parents after returning from his work experience
abroad. He no longer had angry outbursts and did not wear earphones at the dinner
table. He recognised moments of stress and duress and shifted his attention to his internal
dynamics or different stimuli. Misophonia, in the presence of friends and acquaintances,
was absent. He understood and increasingly saw that constricting situations were due to
active interpersonal patterns. He has increased his ability to stop and identify his needs in
order to give them a voice in his relationship with others.
Therapy continued to solidify a different self-image as some work failures, such as
the one abroad, and increased his sense of inadequacy and confusion about his life goals.
He had mood swings at times, but he generally maintained an optimistic outlook; he paid
more attention to his appearance by working out at the gym, and he dedicated himself to
finding new job opportunities. As soon as economically possible, he will move back to
living alone.

Brain Sci. 2024 ,14, 717 8 of 10
4. Discussion
The case study described and emphasised the importance of an accurate assessment
to evaluate the presence of co-morbidity with other disorders and to identify interpersonal
maladaptive schemas.
Despite the obvious limitations of single case studies, these have the advantage of
going into detail about the thoughts and emotions patients have in relation to trigger events.
The attribution of intentionality to the actions of others is an element that often recurs,
associated with viewing others as disrespectful, prevaricating, or rude [14,18,19,22].
Another element to consider is the image that patients have of themselves in their
relationships with others; they often feel wrong, inadequate, vulnerable, constrained, or
inferior [ 18,23]. Furthermore, the importance of interpersonal cycles is evident in the
dynamic, also revealed in this case study, whereby if the other person does something
for the patient, taking care of him/her, or if the patient thinks that he or she has hurt
the other person, misophonia does not occur or decreases [ 30]. Interpersonal schemas
originate from the child’s first attachment relationships with care givers. A hostile and
unsupportive environment can condition the child’s way of relating to the world, hinder-
ing the achievement of his or her goals. An in-depth analysis of attachment styles and
communication patterns within the family environment may be of interest in the study
of misophonia in order to understand which particular conditions contribute to the onset
of the interpersonal schemas underlying the disorder (e.g., parents separated at home,
high conflict, aggression, or excessive control). In addition, misophonia often arises in
late childhood and adolescence [ 3,12,36,37] when the individual, as the schemas become
established, begins to have his or her own view of interpersonal relationships and begins
to be increasingly autonomous from care givers. The details of the case presented and
the results of the treatment point us to a framing of misophonia in the field of psychiatric
disorders rather than hearing disorders. Further investigation is certainly necessary.
5. Conclusions
We think that emotional regulation and attention shifting techniques are useful for
the treatment of misophonia but not sufficient. More specific work on managing relation-
ships with others and thus on interpersonal patterns is necessary to diminish or eliminate
symptoms. On this basis, we believe that MIT can be an effective therapy for the treatment
of misophonia because, in addition to working on interpersonal schemas and continuous
modulation and attention in the therapeutic relationship, it adds experiential techniques
useful for managing arousal in the presence of misophonic stimuli.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization: E.N., A.F. and A.E.; methodology: E.N. and A.F.; writing—
original draft preparation: E.N. and A.F.; writing—review and editing: E.N., A.F., A.E. and R.E. All
authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Informed consent was obtained from the patient involved in the study.
Written informed consent has been obtained from the patient to publish this paper.
Data Availability Statement: The original contributions presented in the study are included in the
article, further inquiries can be directed to the corresponding author.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
References
1. Swedo, S.E.; Baguley, D.M.; Denys, D.; Dixon, L.J.; Erfanian, M.; Fioretti, A.; Jastreboff, P .J.; Kumar, S.; Rosenthal, M.Z.; Rouw, R.;
et al. Consensus definition of misophonia: A delphi study. Front. Neurosci. 2022 ,16, 841816. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2. Brennan, C.R.; Lindberg, R.R.; Kim, G.; Castro, A.A.; Khan, R.A.; Berenbaum, H.; Husain, F.T. Misophonia and Hearing
Comorbidities in a Collegiate Population. Ear Hear. 2024 ,45, 390–399. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Brain Sci. 2024 ,14, 717 9 of 10
3. Schroder, A.; Vulink, N.; Denys, D. Misophonia: Diagnostic criteria for a new psychiatric disorder. PLoS ONE 2013 ,8, e54706.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
4. Dozier, T.H.; Lopez, M.; Pearson, C. Proposed diagnostic criteria for misophonia: A Multisensory conditioned aversive reflex
disorder. Front. Psychol. 2017 ,8, 1975. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
5. Rosenthal, M.Z.; McMahon, K.; Greenleaf, A.S.; Cassiello-Robbins, C.; Guetta, R.; Trumbull, J.; Anand, D.; Frazer-Abel, E.S.; Kelley,
L. Phenotyping misophonia: Psychiatric disorders and medical health correlates. Front. Psychol. 2022 ,13, 941898. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
6. Jastreboff, P .J. The Neurophysiological Model of Tinnitus and Decreased Sound Tolerance. In Textbook of Tinnitus , 2nd ed.; Schlee,
W., Langguth, B., De Ridder, D., Vanneste, S., Kleinjung, T., Moller, A.R., Eds.; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2024;
Chapter 20.
7. Henry, J.A.; Theodoroff, S.M.; Edmonds, C.; Martinez, I.; Myers, P .J.; Zaugg, T.L.; Goodworth, M.C. Sound tolerance conditions
(hyperacusis, misophonia, noise sensitivity, and phonophobia): Definitions and management. Am. J. Audiol. 2022 ,31, 513–527.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
8. Tyler, R.S.; Pienkowski, M.; Roncancio, E.R.; Jun, H.J.; Brozoski, T.; Dauman, N.; Andersson, G.; Keiner, A.J.; Cacace, A.T.; Martin,
N.; et al. A Review of hyperacusis and future directions. Part 1. Definitions and manifestations. Am. J. Audiol. 2014 ,23, 402–419.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
9. Campbell, J. Misophonia: A Need for audiologic diagnostic guidelines. J. Am. Acad. Audiol. 2023 . [CrossRef]
10. Mattson, S.A.; D’Souza, J.; Wojcik, K.D.; Guzick, A.G.; Goodman, W.K.; Storch, E.A. A systematic review of treatments for
misophonia. Pers. Med. Psychiatry 2023 ,39–40 , 100–104. [CrossRef]
11. Bernstein, R.E.; Angell, K.L.; Dehle, C.M. A brief course of cognitive behavioural therapy for the treatment of misophonia: A case
example. Cogn. Behav. Ther. 2013 ,6, e10–e13. [CrossRef]
12. McGuire, J.F.; Wu, M.S.; Storch, E.A. Cognitive-behavioral therapy for 2 youths with misophonia. J. Clin. Psychiatry 2015 ,76,
573–574. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
13. Reid, A.M.; Guzick, A.G.; Gernand, A.; Olsen, B. Intensive cognitive-behavioral therapy for comorbid misophonic and obsessive-
compulsive symptoms: A systematic case study. J. Obs.-Compuls. Rel. Disord. 2016 ,10, 1–9. [CrossRef]
14. Altınöz, E.; Ünal, N.; Altınöz, ¸ S. The effectiveness of Cognitive Behavioral Psychotherapy in Misophonia: A Case Report. J. Clin.
Psychiatry 2018 ,21, 414–417. [CrossRef]
15. Schröder, A.E.; Vulink, N.C.; van Loon, A.J.; Denys, D.A. Cognitive behavioral therapy is effective in misophonia: An open trial. J.
Affect. Disord. 2017 ,217, 289–294. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
16. Jager, I.J.; Vulink, N.C.C.; Bergfeld, I.O.; van Loon, A.J.J.M.; Denys, D.A.J.P . Cognitive behavioral therapy for misophonia: A
randomized clinical trial. Depress. Anxiety 2020 ,38, 708–718. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
17. Roushani, K.; Mehrabizadeh Honarmand, M. The Effectiveness of Cognitive-behavioral Therapy on Anger in Female Students
with Misophonia: A Single-Case Study. Iran. J. Med. Sci. 2021 ,46, 61–67. [PubMed]
18. Gregory, J.; Foster, C. Session-by-session change in misophonia: A descriptive case study using intensive CBT. Cogn. Behav. Therap.
2023 ,16, e18. [CrossRef]
19. Gregory, J.; Graham, T.; Hayes, B. Targeting beliefs and behaviours in misophonia: A case series from a UK specialist psychology
service. Behav. Cogn. Psychother. 2024 ,52, 33–48. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
20. Jager, I.; Vulink, N.; de Roos, C.; Denys, D. EMDR therapy for misophonia: A pilot study of case series. Eur. J. Psychotraumatol.
2021 ,12, 1968613. [CrossRef]
21. Kamody, R.C.; Del Conte, G.S. Using Dialectical Behavior Therapy to Treat Misophonia in Adolescence. Prim. Care Companion
CNS Disord. 2017 ,19, 26256. [CrossRef]
22. Schneider, R.L.; Arch, J.J. Case study: A novel application of mindfulness- and acceptance- based components to treat misophonia.
J. Context. Behav. Sci. 2017 ,6, 221–225. [CrossRef]
23. Zarotti, N.; Tuthill, A.; Fisher, P . Online emotion regulation for an adolescent with misophonia: A case study. J. Cogn. Psychother.
2022 . [CrossRef] [PubMed]
24. Dimaggio, G.; Semerari, A.; Carcione, A.; Nicol ò, G.; Procacci, M. Psychotherapy of Personality Disorders: Metacognition, States of
Mind and Interpersonal Cycles ; Routledge: London, UK, 2007.
25. Dimaggio, G.; Montano, A.; Popolo, R.; Salvatore, G. Metacognitive Interpersonal Therapy for Personality Disorders: A Treatment
Manual ; Routledge: London, UK, 2015.
26. Dimaggio, G.; Ottavi, P .; Popolo, R.; Salvatore, G. Metacognitive Interpersonal Therapy: Body, Imagery and Change ; Routledge:
London, UK, 2020.
27. Benjamin, L.S. Interpersonal Diagnosis and Treatment of Personality Disorders , 2nd ed.; Guilford: New York, NY, USA, 1996.
28. Young, J.E.; Klosko, J.S.; Weishaar, M.E. Schema Therapy: A Practitioner’s Guide ; Guilford: New York, NY, USA, 2003.
29. Centonze, A.; Popolo, R.; MacBeth, A.; Dimaggio, G. Building the alliance and using experiential techniques in the early phases
of psychotherapy for avoidant personality disorder. J. Clin. Psychol. 2021 ,77, 1219–1232. [CrossRef]
30. Natalini, E.; Dimaggio, G.; Varakliotis, T.; Fioretti, A.; Eibenstein, A. Misophonia, Maladaptive Schemas and Personality Disorders:
A Report of Three Cases. J. Contemp. Psychother. 2020 ,50, 29–35. [CrossRef]
31. Stalias-Mantzikos, M.; Barahmand, U.; Aguero, K.; Peters, L.; Shamsina, N. Early maladaptive schemas in misophonia. Clin.
Psychol. 2023 ,27, 196–209. [CrossRef]

Brain Sci. 2024 ,14, 717 10 of 10
32. Edelstein, M.; Brang, D.; Rouw, R.; Ramachandran, V .S. Misophonia: Physiological investigations and case descriptions. Front.
Hum. Neurosci. 2013 ,7, 296. [CrossRef]
33. First, M.B.; Gibbon, M.; Spitzer, R.L.; Williams, J.B.W.; Benjamin, L.S. Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Axis II Personality
Disorders (SCID-II) ; American Psychiatric Press Inc.: Washington, DC, USA, 1997.
34. Beck, A.T.; Steer, R.A.; Brown, G.K. Manual for the Beck Depression Inventory–II ; Psychological Corporation: San Antonio, TX,
USA, 1996.
35. Spielberger, C.D.; Gorsuch, R.L.; Lushene, R.; Vagg, P .R.; Jacobs, G.A. Manual for the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory ; Consulting
Psychologists Press: Palo Alto, CA, USA, 1983.
36. Kumar, S.; Tansley-Hancock, O.; Sedley, W.; Winston, J.S.; Callaghan, M.F.; Allen, M.; Cope, T.E.; Gander, P .E.; Bamiou, D.E.;
Griffiths, T.D.; et al. The brain basis for misophonia. Curr. Biol. 2017 ,27, 527–533. [CrossRef]
37. Rouw, R.; Erfanian, M. A large-scale study of misophonia. J. Clin. Psychol. 2018 ,74, 453–479. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.