Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=tsep20
Social Epistemology
A Journal of Knowledge, Culture and Policy
ISSN: 0269-1728 (Print) 1464-5297 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/tsep20
Discerning the Primary Epistemic Harm in Cases of
Testimonial Injustice
Gaile Pohlhaus Jr.
To cite this article:  Gaile Pohlhaus Jr. (2014) Discerning the Primary Epistemic Harm in Cases of
Testimonial Injustice, Social Epistemology, 28:2, 99-114, DOI: 10.1080/02691728.2013.782581
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/02691728.2013.782581
© 2013 Taylor & Francis
Published online: 05 Nov 2013.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 8385
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 38 View citing articles

Discerning the Primary Epistemic
Harm in Cases of Testimonial Injustice
Gaile Pohlhaus, Jr.
This article examines the primary epistemic harm of testimonial injustice, or, as
deﬁned by Miranda Fricker, the injustice of perceiving another epistemic agent as less
credible due to an identity prejudice. I ﬁrst analyze Fricker’s account of the harm,
which she posits in terms of a subject/object relation as “epistemic objectiﬁcation.” Myanalysis, however, shows that (1) testimonial injustice does not render its victim to an
object-like status and (2) testimonial injustice necessarily treats its victim as a subject,
albeit a truncated subject. Drawing on the work of Ann Cahill and Simone de Beau-voir, I demonstrate that the primary harm of testimonial injustice is more aptly
described in terms of a subject/other relation, or a relation that circumscribes the sub-
jectivity of its victim within the conﬁnes of the perpetrator’s subjectivity. Using theseconceptual resources to examine the primary epistemic harm of testimonial injustice
not only avoids the problems I raise with the notion of epistemic objectiﬁcation, but
also greatly enhances our understanding of testimonial injustice, and consequently ofwhat more epistemically just relations look like.
Keywords: Epistemic Justice; Testimonial Injustice; Epistemic Agency; Epistemic
Autonomy; Miranda Fricker
In her recent book, Epistemic Injustice , Miranda Fricker argues that there are some
kinds of injustices that are distinctly epistemic. Mapping the contours of epistemic
injustice can help to reveal previously uncharted relations among knowers insofar
as becoming clear on what happens when we fail in our epistemic relations makes
more evident what we are doing when we navigate them successfully. With this
aim in mind, I examine an idea that Fricker calls “epistemic objectiﬁcation” andthat she uses to characterize the intrinsic harm of the kind of epistemic injustice
Gaile Pohlhaus, Jr. is an associate professor of Philosophy at Miami University. Her primary areas of research
are Social Epistemology, Feminist Philosophy, and the later Wittgenstein. Correspondence to: Gaile Pohlhaus,
Miami University, Oxford, OH, USA. Email: pohlhag@muohio.eduSocial Epistemology , 2014
Vol. 28, No. 2, 99–114, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/02691728.2013.782581
/C2112013 Taylor & Francis

she calls “testimonial injustice.” Ultimately, however, I will conclude that the idea
of epistemic objectiﬁcation raises philosophical quandaries that appear to mischar-
acterize our epistemic relations. Supplementing Fricker’s work with a richer under-
standing of subjective possibilities as can be found in the work of Simone de
Beauvoir, I propose that the intrinsic epistemic harm of testimonial injustice is
more aptly described in terms of a subject/other relation rather than the subject/
object relation proposed by Fricker. Describing testimonial injustice in terms of a
subject/other ——as opposed to a subject/object ——relation not only alleviates the
problems I examine in the concept of epistemic objectiﬁcation, but also expands
our understanding of the social dimensions of knowing. My aim is not to suggestthat we abandon the work Fricker has begun, but rather to extend and enrich it by
developing a more adequate description of the intrinsic epistemic harm of testimo-
nial injustice and by spelling out the implications of this type of harm through the
frame of a subject/other relation.
Analysis and Diagnosis of the “Objectiﬁcation” Model
One of the advantages of Fricker’s notion of epistemic injustice is that it helps us
to think about the sociality of knowing without losing sight of the individual
knower and her relations with other knowers. Epistemic injustice, as Fricker con-
ceives it, wrongs a person, “ speciﬁcally in her capacity as a knower ” (2007, italics in
original, 20). The concept, therefore, implies that there are certain things to which
knowers have a right (or at the very least can reasonably expect) in relation to
other knowers. Moreover, Fricker notes that while epistemic injustice is a wrong
that happens to an individual ——and one that can be perpetrated by an individ-
ual——it nevertheless happens within the context of socially situated capacities (4)
and displays, “a moment of dysfunction in the overall epistemic … system” (43).
Under this general account, knowers are not solitary individuals but rather agentswithin a larger community whose interdependency with one another as knowers
requires something of them in relation to one another. Fricker’s path for remedy-
ing epistemic injustice also implies a view of knowing that sees our epistemic lives
as interdependent. Epistemic justice, she argues, requires knowers to develop par-
ticular virtues that facilitate our relations with one another, as well as our ability
to perceive and respond to one another in particular ways. But what exactly is it
that knowers owe one another in light of Fricker’s account? And why? In order to
examine these questions, I ﬁrst spell out some of the details regarding the type of
epistemic injustice that Fricker calls “testimonial injustice.”
Testimonial injustice, Fricker writes, “occurs when prejudice causes a hearer to
give a deﬂated level of credibility to a speaker’s word” (1). To illustrate testimonial
injustice and what it does, Fricker offers her readers two primary examples: the
case of Marge Sherwood, drawn from the ﬁlm based on Patricia Highsmith’s novel
The Talented Mr. Ripley , and the trial of Tom Robinson, drawn from Harper Lee’s
To Kill a Mockingbird . In the ﬁrst example, Marge Sherwood and her potential
father-in-law, Herbert Greenleaf, are investigating the disappearance of Dickie,100 G. Pohlhaus

who is Sherwood’s ﬁance ´e and Greenleaf’s son. When Sherwood comes to suspect
that Dickie’s recent acquaintance, Tom Ripley, may have had a hand in the disap-
pearance, she brings her suspicions to the attention of Greenleaf. Despite good rea-
son to trust Sherwood and very little reason to trust Ripley, Greenleaf summarily
dismisses Sherwood, saying “Marge, there’s female intuition, and then there are
facts” (as quoted by Fricker, 9). In Fricker’s second example, Tom Robinson, a
black man in 1930s Alabama, is tried and convicted for a crime of rape he did not
commit. On Fricker’s reading, despite more than sufﬁcient evidence to acquit,
members of the all-white jury for the trial cannot bring themselves to believe sig-
niﬁcant portions of Robinson’s testimony due to the fact that he is black (25–26)and so ﬁnd him guilty. A signiﬁcant feature of both accounts is that Fricker reads
them as failures to believe (as opposed to choices to disregard information) in
cases where one ought to believe.
In both cases, hearers do not believe the testimony of a speaker whom they
would otherwise have believed had the speaker not been a member of a particular
social group (female in the case of Sherwood and black in the case of Robinson).
In both cases, prejudice against the social identity of the speaker causes the hearer
to perceive the speaker as less credible. This deﬂation of credibility prevents the
speakers from transferring knowledge to those whom they wish to give it, leading
to a number of secondary harms of an epistemic and nonepistemic sort (since, in
both cases, speakers stand to lose a great deal if they are not believed). However,for the purposes of this paper, it is the primary epistemic harm that requires fur-
ther clariﬁcation if we are to understand more fully what is intrinsically epistemi-
cally unjust in cases where one knower fails to believe another without proper
warrant. The difﬁculty of detailing testimonial injustice as an intrinsic epistemic
harm lies in the fact that if we take away all of the secondary harms that may hap-
pen to someone who is not believed when she ought to be and we look at the situ-
ation strictly from an epistemic point of view, we are left with at least one person
who remains ignorant of some piece of information and another person who has
the information that the ﬁrst one lacks. So wherein lay the intrinsic epistemic harm
to this second person, to the one who knows?
To answer this question, Fricker draws upon Bernard Williams and Edward
Craig to argue that the pooling of knowledge is a basic necessity of any epistemic
community conceived under the conditions of an imaginary “State of Nature”
(Fricker, 110). In other words, consideration of a minimal human society reveals
that the sharing or pooling of information is a basic epistemic requirement arising
from the need to possess enough truths about the world to facilitate survival.
Insofar, as testimonial injustice unfairly excludes particular epistemic agents from
participating fully in this most basic of social epistemic practices based on an
unwarranted, but widely held, identity prejudice, we can see that it constitutes an
epistemic wrong on both a communal and an individual level. On a communalepistemic level, it is harmful because it forestalls conditions that are maxi-
mally truth-conducive for the epistemic community; it prevents the transmission
of potential knowledge from one agent to another and, in preventing thatSocial Epistemology 101

transmission, it prevents any knowledge that might have arisen from the effect this
piece of potential knowledge might have had on other beliefs held by the commu-
nity (as when a justiﬁed true belief adds support for or counteracts other held
beliefs). On an individual level, it is harmful because it unfairly excludes the victim
of testimonial injustice from a basic epistemic practice and so treats that victim as
less than a full epistemic subject.
Elaborating on the latter wrong, Fricker compares testimonial injustice to sex-
ual objectiﬁcation as treated by Martha Nussbaum and Catharine MacKinnon,
since both kinds of harm (epistemic and sexual) seem to deny the status of subject
to one who ought to be treated as a subject. To further this comparison, Frickerdraws upon Craig’s distinction between a “source of information,” from which
one gleans knowledge as from an object, and an “informant,” who actively conveys
information as a subject. This distinction allows Fricker to account for cases, where
victims of testimonial injustice are not entirely excluded from the pooling of infor-
mation altogether, while bolstering her claim that the victim of testimonial injus-
tice is being demoted to a sort of object. Making use of this distinction, Fricker
notes that people are sometimes unproblematically used as sources of information
in the way that objects are, “as when the fact that one’s guest arrives bedraggled
and shaking her umbrella may allow one to infer that it has been raining” (132).
Like Nussbaum in the case of sexual objectiﬁcation, Fricker contends that the
wrong of epistemic objectiﬁcation lies in treating another solely as an object in a
manner that does not recognize her as a subject capable of being an informant.
This type of treatment, Fricker contends, is exactly what is happening in cases of
testimonial injustice. In this comparison, it is the attribution of passivity to episte-
mic objects that allows Fricker to characterize testimonial injustice as epistemic
objectiﬁcation, for in the case of testimonial injustice, the determining factors as
to whether information is transferred seem to reside solely with the hearer.
1Rather
than giving testimony as an informant, which is then received by the listener if
properly delivered, the speaker must instead wait to see whether the hearer believes
her this time or not. In a certain sense then the speaker is not an active2partici-
pant in the epistemic transaction who might herself have an effect on the listener.
Fricker concludes that the victim of testimonial injustice, “is thus demoted from
subject to object, relegated from the role of active epistemic agent, and conﬁned to
the role of passive states of affairs from which knowledge might be gleaned …
[revealing] the intrinsic harm of testimonial injustice as epistemic objectiﬁcation :
when a hearer undermines a speaker in her capacity as a giver of knowledge, the
speaker is epistemically objectiﬁed” (132–133).
While the idea that testimonial injustice treats an epistemic agent as less than a
full epistemic subject seems correct, there is something odd about characterizing
this mistreatment as treating someone like an object. We can begin to notice this
oddity if we consider Fricker’s own (and only) examples of “sources of informa-tion” or states of affairs from which information can be gathered: a felled tree and
a woman shaking rain off of her umbrella. When I count the rings on a felled tree,
I cannot plausibly deny that it has the number of rings that I have just counted.102 G. Pohlhaus

When I see a woman shaking rain off her umbrella, I cannot reasonably fail to
believe that her umbrella is wet. Moreover, if I cannot bring myself to believe these
things, others may rightly question my judgment and call me irrational. Further-
more, if I am not irrational, in the face of my inability to believe that the tree has
the number of rings I have counted or that the umbrella is wet, I might wish to
seek professional help concerning my cognitive state. Indeed, certain forms of
agnosia present us with exactly the kind of case where there is no sensory impair-
ment but a person cannot bring himself to believe what he ought to infer from his
senses——for example, that this is his very own leg or that is his very own child.
And yet, in cases of testimonial injustice, it is precisely this kind of inability tobelieve that becomes viable. Epistemic objects, in this sense, make a kind of claim
on the knower that is denied to the victim of testimonial injustice.
3In other
words, while it might be said that I can reasonably regard objects in a nonepistem-
ic sense with a wide range of attitudes (some of which are utterly inappropriate
for regarding subjects, for example, as disposable), the same cannot be said in the
epistemic sense and it is the epistemic sense with which we are concerned. A fail-
ure to believe when one ought is an epistemic failure regardless of whether the fail-
ure is in relation to a source of information or an informant. While Fricker herself
describes what it means to gather information from an object using only examples
of knowledge derived from common inferences based on straightforward sensory
perception, this problem still arises in more complicated cases (e.g. where onemust make several complex inferences and/or use scientiﬁc instruments). In such
cases, when one engages in practices that are designed to ascertain the truth about
a state of affairs, one cannot simply claim the results to be unreliable if one fails
to believe the outcome when one ought.
4Moreover, even in cases when typical
procedures and/or rules of epistemic practices are abandoned to be replaced by
other ways of perceiving or organizing data, there must be some reason that can
be shared with and followed by others for doing so (e.g. the new way is more
coherent, or makes sense of more facets of the data). In other words, when a per-
son follows a procedure for ascertaining the truth from a particular state of affairsbut then ﬂat out fails to believe what the results of those procedures indicate with
no reasonable grounds for doubting, one is rightly recognized as being irrational
(or incompetent in some way). And yet, in cases of testimonial injustice, it
becomes viable to act in exactly this way without sanction: one hears and under-
stands another’s words, perhaps even after one has asked a question in search of
an answer (as in the case of Tom Robinson), and yet one fails to believe what the
speaker has said without any grounds for doubt (except simply that the speaker is
not trustworthy with no rational basis for maintaining such distrust). Following
Fricker, we must remember that the case of testimonial injustice is not a case of
discarding information or even of refusing to interact with another epistemic
agent. Instead, testimonial injustice occurs when, engaging in ordinary epistemicpractices for ascertaining truth from another epistemic agent based on testimony,
the hearer fails in one aspect of that practice: perceiving the speaker as trustworthySocial Epistemology 103

when he ought to. In this manner, the relation between perpetrator and victim is
quite unlike that between an epistemic subject and an epistemic object.
Still, it is clearly the case that testimonial injustice treats another as less than a
full epistemic subject. Might we not say then at least this much: that the victim of
testimonial injustice is treated like an object, insofar as both are not treated assub-
jects? If we examine the two primary examples that Fricker offers as paradigmatic
cases of testimonial injustice, the answer is: no. For it is precisely because Sher-
wood and Robinson are perceived as subjects that makes it possible for hearers in
both cases to avert the kind of claim their testimony ought rightly to make upon
hearers and to do so without the hearers risking the charge of irrationality. Inother words, it is precisely because both speakers are seen as epistemically unreli-
able subjects , with the capacity to deceive and/or to be deceived by a variety of
sources, that allows perpetrators to perceive their testimony as not credible. More-
over, it is because Sherwood and Robinson are seen as semi-subjects that allows
perpetrators of testimonial injustice to use them to their own epistemic ends. In
other words, neither Sherwood nor Robinson are perceived as wholly outside the
epistemic economy governing epistemic subjects;
5both persons are regarded as
subject to the normative force of (and so sanctionable in accordance with) episte-
mic practices, even while they are not permitted to draw upon that same norma-
tive force in relation to their perpetrators. This aspect of their treatment is
obscured by the subject/object lens employed by Fricker, but wholly consonantwith her treatment of social power as governing our epistemic relations in ways
that can be vicious or virtuous.
If the victim of testimonial injustice is treated in a way that is distinct from the
way that both objects and full subjects are treated, how exactly ought we to char-
acterize her treatment? Moreover, how might characterizing her treatment more
adequately give us further insight into the primary epistemic wrong of testimonial
injustice? Furthermore, how might understanding the predicament of the victim of
testimonial injustice who is treated as a semi-subject, but not as an object, help to
clarify what it means to know well when testimonial injustice is not operative?
An Alternate Model: “Derivatized” Subjects
Within the context of sexual assault and mistreatment, Ann Cahill has argued that
the notion of “objectiﬁcation” misidentiﬁes what is wrong in cases where women
are not treated as full subjects and, in part, for reasons similar to those I am using
to argue against using the idea of objectiﬁcation in the epistemic context: there isan element of subjectivity (even while less than full) required on the part of the
victim in both contexts.
6While I do not have space to elaborate on Cahill’s cri-
tique, her remedy for this mischaracterization is helpful within the epistemic con-
text, since she, too, seeks to describe more clearly what it means to treat someone
as a partial subject. While drawing primarily on the work of Luce Irigaray, Cahill’s
characterization of the treatment of women as less than full subjects has its roots
in the work of Simone de Beauvoir.7The status of the “other” within The Second104 G. Pohlhaus

Sex(and the line of feminist thought developed in its wake since its publication in
1949) is not only distinct from the status of an object, but also plays a crucial role
in the formation of subjects within masculine dominated, or phallocentric regimes.
Beauvoir notes, in relation to man as subject, woman as other, “is the perfect
intermediary between nature that is foreign to man and the peer who is too identi-
cal to him [pitting] neither the hostile silence of nature nor the hard demand of
reciprocal recognition against him” (160). Here, Beauvoir focuses our attention on
the important yet precarious role that subjects play in relation to one another: that
of recognition. It is not possible for objects to ﬁll this role. However, the “hard
demand of reciprocal recognition,” or a truly intersubjective relation with other
subjects, requires one to negotiate one’s understanding of the world with others
who may experience it differently (due, for example, to different interests or differ-
ent habits of attention). As Beauvoir carefully delineates throughout the entirety of
The Second Sex , one way of alleviating the vulnerability that can arise due to our
need for recognition from others is to deﬁne one class of persons as “other” or
semi-subjects whose sole purpose is to recognize the class of persons deemed fully
as subjects. Applying this idea to the epistemic context, we might say that the sole
purpose of the epistemic other is to provide epistemic support for navigating the
experienced world of those deemed subjects. In this relation, those persons treated
as “other” serve to recognize and maintain epistemic practices that make sense of
the world as experienced from dominant subjectivities, but do not receive the sameepistemic support with regard to their distinct lived experiences in the world. In
the subject/other relation, recognition is monodirectional as opposed to intersub-
jective. This type of relation is not one in which objects are capable of participat-
ing; it is also a kind of relation that Beauvoir judges to be fundamentally
unethical, since it denies a person’s full status as a free subject capable of experi-
encing and giving signiﬁcance to the world uniquely.
In light of this aspect of the subject/other relation, Cahill recommends that we
replace the notion of objectiﬁcation with that of “derivatization,” since, as she
argues, what we normally identify as sexual objectiﬁcation is characterized byattributing a truncated or circumscribed subjectivity to its victim. As opposed to
treating another as an object, when one “derivatizes” another,
(t)he derivatized subject becomes reducible in all relevant ways to the derivatizing sub-
ject’s existence ——other elements of her… being or subjectivity are disregarded,
ignored, or undervalued. Should the derivatized subject dare to demonstrate aspects of
her subjectivity that fall outside of the derivatizer’s being ——assuming such a demon-
stration can even be perceived (it may well be so incomprehensible so as to be beyondthe perceptual range of the derivatizer) ——she will be perceived as arrogant, treasonous,
and dangerously rebellious. (Cahill, 32)
In such cases, the other’s capacities as a subject are reduced to attending only to
that which stems from the perpetrator’s subjectivity, so that anything the victim
might try to express that exceeds the range of the perpetrator’s subjectivity is
actively prohibited and/or left unrecognized by the perpetrator, even while heSocial Epistemology 105

recognizes the victim as capable of having experiences, interests, and desires. Epi-
stemically speaking, we might say that the derivatizer treats the derivatized as
though she has nothing unique to contribute to the intersubjective relations that
maintain epistemic practices, even while he does recognize her as capable of some
sorts of epistemic labor. In other words, she is treated as if her own lived experi-
ence from which she draws in order to add to the communal knowledge pool is
simply a mirror (or perhaps shadow) of his own, but certainly not capable of con-
tributing to our understanding of the world beyond (and in ways that might
change the shape of) the scope of the derivatizer’s experienced world.
When examining the harm of testimonial injustice, replacing the subject/object
relation with that of the subject/other relation obviates the problems I have raised
with the notion of epistemic objectiﬁcation. First, it does not depend on any par-
ticular view of the relation between epistemic subjects and epistemic objects. Sec-
ond, it does not deny the fact that the victim of testimonial injustice is seen as a
type of subject. Moreover, characterizing the harm of testimonial injustice as insti-
tuting a subject/other relation has the further advantage of foregrounding the
degree to which epistemic agency cannot be divorced from structural issues.
To begin, recognition plays a very important role among epistemic subjects.
Consider, for example, the kind of instability experienced by the main character of
George Orwell’s 1984; in a world where what one experiences is systematically not
recognized, one can lose one’s sense of what is real and what is not. In mutuallyrecognizing the experienced world with rules governing our epistemic practices,
epistemic agents provide for one another both epistemic stability (making it possi-
ble to know) and potential sources of conﬁrmation for what one believes to be
true (making that belief more or less certain). At the same time, as already noted,
recognition (when reciprocal) places epistemic subjects in a relation of vulnerabil-
ity
8to one another: in recognizing another, I place myself in a position in which
that other has a form of power over me. Consider, for example, what follows from
my recognizing another as an epistemic authority. When she makes claims within
the bounds of her authority, so long as I recognize her as an authority of this sort,Iought to believe her (or give some sort of reasonable justiﬁcation for my disbe-
lief).
9A general kind of epistemic authority concerning matters of perception and
nonspecialized experiencing of the world, mutually conferred, allows epistemic
subjects to know basic features of the world and to work together in the world
with a greater deal of stability and certainty. However, this epistemic gain is at the
cost of having to answer to the world as mutually experienced.
When one views this type of relation at the level of epistemic communities,
one sees that it is beneﬁcial because it is truth conducive for the community as a
whole. An individual epistemic agent can only approach the world from a ﬁnite
space within it, but a group of such agents working in coordination with one
another, attuned to multiple loci of experience via which they can constrain oneanother to avoid error, have a much greater chance at getting things right about
the world. Important to this kind of cognitive coordinating is each individual
agent’s ability (1) to call others’ attention to aspects of the world that those others106 G. Pohlhaus

do not notice and (2) to identify when particular individuals are not following the
general rules (where appropriate responses depend upon the reason for breaking
the rule). From the level of the individual, however, things look a bit different.
The cognitive coordinating that increases truth conduciveness on a communal
level, places a set of constraints on the individual knower that may focus one’s epi-
stemic attention and cognitive labor in directions that do not begin from one’s
own subjectivity. This situation may pull one’s cognitive labor away from that
which one wants to know. Alternately, it may focus one’s cognitive attention
toward matters concerning which it is in one’s interest to keep unknown (to one-
selfandothers).10Epistemic agents standing in such a relation, while given greater
capacity to know, are constrained by and with one another even though practically
speaking they may not share mutual interest in cognitively attending to the same
aspects of the world.
Given the need for epistemic coordination and diverging social interests, treat-
ing another as one whose subject capacities exist solely in support of and never in
tension with my own describes precisely the way in which an epistemic agent (or a
set of epistemic agents) with social power might come to regard and treat other
epistemic agents with less social power. This treatment is precisely the kind of
treatment that perceives the epistemic agent as somewhere between an epistemic
subject and object. As a subject, she is able to engage in epistemic practices that
support the epistemic community;11consequently individual members of that
community beneﬁt epistemically (at least in part) from her role as an epistemic
subject. Moreover, she is subject to the rules of epistemic practices and faces sanc-
tion for their violation. However, unlike a subject (and more like an object), she is
not seen as capable of contributing to epistemic practices uniquely , that is, from
her own distinct lived experience in the world. Consequently, her epistemic labor
contributes to the community via which epistemic interests are pursued, but she is
not permitted to contribute in ways that would redirect epistemic practices toward
those parts of her experienced world that extend beyond or trouble the veracity of
the dominantly experienced world. Any contribution that might do so is summar-ily denied epistemic support and uptake by dominant members of the community
(and perhaps even other marginalized members). Being treated as though one’s
subjectivity is merely derivative of another’s, capable of performing epistemic labor
but not of negotiating the direction of that labor, seems a more likely candidate
for describing the primary epistemic harm encountered in cases of testimonial
injustice. Under this model, the primary harm of testimonial injustice is deﬁned
as:being relegated to the role of epistemic other, being treated as though the range of
one’s subject capacities is merely derivative of another’s .
Advantages of the Subject/Other Lens for Analyzing Testimonial Injustice
While alleviating the issues I have raised with regard to the notion of epistemic
objectiﬁcation, a description of the primary harm of testimonial injustice that
highlights the truncated form of subjectivity found in the subject/other relationSocial Epistemology 107

has four additional advantages over the subject/object model. First, it has more
explanatory power with regard to the phenomenon of denying another’s credibility
in some cases but not others. Second, it highlights simultaneously the agential and
structural aspects of testimonial injustice, something Fricker has been criticized for
not recognizing (Alcoff 2010; Langton 2010; Maitra 2010). Third, in highlighting
simultaneously the agential and structural aspects at play in testimonial injustice,
the subject/other frame illuminates important aspects of epistemic agency. Finally,
those aspects of epistemic agency brought to the fore when viewing testimonial
injustice from the subject/other lens make evident not only the oppressive aspects
of testimonial injustice, but also possibilities for resistance.
While Fricker notes that testimonial injustice is often not a wholesale exclusion
of an epistemic agent from being believed (130–131), her characterization of this
partial exclusion as being treated like an object gives us no understanding as to
what alters perception across different cases. Since the subject/object description
functions to highlight and relies upon a distinction between the perpetrator as
active and the victim as passive, it leaves the impression that the mechanism
whereby one is sometimes believed and sometimes not believed lies with the will
or choice of the perpetrator. However, Fricker is very clear that testimonial injus-
tice is a failure of perception and not a choice to disregard information (25); in
fact, this is part of what makes the act an epistemic wrong and not just a moral
wrong. To return to the case of Highsmith’s Sherwood, Greenleaf believes manythings that Sherwood reports, for example, at what time Dickie was last seen, that
Ripley is someone with whom Dickie had recently become friends, etc. But he does
not simply choose to disregard Sherwood’s claim that Ripley is suspect worthy; he
fails to believe it. Likewise, in the case of Tom Robinson, the jurors have no doubt
that Robinson is who he says he is, that he accurately reports many aspects of the
day under investigation; it is his report that he helped a white woman out of kind-
ness and that he did her no harm that they failto believe. In both cases, hearers
do not fail to believe mere pieces of information that would simply add to what it
is they know, but rather they fail to believe precisely the kind of information thatwould signiﬁcantly move the hearers’ epistemic attention beyond the parts of the
world in which those hearers have a social investment. In other words, hearers per-
ceive the speaker as credible only when the speaker’s testimony does not trouble
the scope of the hearers’ subjectivity. The effect is to rule out the possibility that
there might be aspects of the world that go beyond the experiences and interests
of those with social power.
For example, if Greenleaf were to take Sherwood’s testimony as credible, he
would be forced to shift his entire investigation in another direction, one that
Alcoff (2010) notes, “could compromise his own sense of himself” (134) and that
“might lead to a disclosure of homosexuality or some other revelation that would
affect his own identity in the world” (134). Indeed to allow himself to be movedin an unexpected direction by the word of a woman would go against Greenleaf’s
fundamental belief in male superiority and the afﬁnity he thinks is shared among
men, exempliﬁed when he says to Sherwood that there is a clear difference108 G. Pohlhaus

between, “what a man may say to his sweetheart and what he’ll admit to another
fellow” (as quoted by Fricker, 87).12Importantly, Sherwood’s insight is not the
kind of information that could have initiated from Greenleaf and it does not ﬁll in
gaps that are sensed from Greenleaf’s epistemic position (in the way that Sher-
wood’s prior information does and which Greenleaf thus perceives as credible).
Sherwood’s later insight provides the kind of information that requires Greenleaf
to alter his own attention in ways that would allow him to see the set of patterns
that indicate that Ripley is a suspicious character. In other words, if Greenleaf were
to accept the information Sherwood forwards as even potentially viable, he would
have to shift his manner of viewing the situation based on the subjective experi-ences of Sherwood. However, Greenleaf, as a dominantly situated subject, is not
disposed to seeing the world from the eyes of nondominantly situated subjects in
ways that displace the centrality of his own subjective experiencing of the world.
In the case of Robinson, if the white jurors were to believe those parts of Rob-
inson’s testimony that they do not, speciﬁcally his testimony concerning his rela-
tionship to the woman he is accused of raping, the jurors would need to call into
question some of their beliefs concerning race and gender relations. Calling these
beliefs into question would require the jury to shift their cognitive attention
beyond their own interests and experiences as white men in a white supremacist
society. In contrast, the jury perceives as perfectly credible the quite incredible testi-
mony of Mayella Ewell, the impoverished white woman Robinson is accused ofraping and who is also likely to be the victim of testimonial injustice in other situ-
ations. Ewell’s testimony in this instance is perceived as credible precisely because
her testimony does not disrupt, but rather reinforces, beliefs that stem from a
white supremacist and patriarchal subjectivity (Medina 2011, 26). Deﬁning the pri-
mary epistemic harm of testimonial injustice as using another’s subject capacities
in such a way that circumscribes those capacities to the range of the perpetrator’s
subjectivity gives us a plausible way of understanding the mechanism that func-
tions to alter perception of credibility in these cases.
This further reveals that testimonial injustice does not just prevent information
from being circulated, but rather it prevents a particular kind of information from
being circulated: that which moves epistemic attention beyond the immediate
experiences, desires, and interests of dominant knowers and toward those of non-
dominant knowers. Identifying the kind of information stymied in testimonial
injustice allows us to highlight the structural aspects of testimonial injustice with-
out losing sight of the fact that it is an injustice , something that Fricker herself
claims that her model cannot do. Fricker notes that we can look at these examples
from both an agential and a structural viewpoint, but she insists that she focuses
on the agential view because her aim, “is to highlight the injustice that is occur-
ring, and the sense in which the hearers are preventing the speakers from convey-
ing knowledge” (90). Because Fricker sees the primary harm of testimonialinjustice in terms of a subject/object relation, she has not identiﬁed the speciﬁc
kind of information that speakers are prevented from conveying in cases of
testimonial injustice. As a result, she notes that the structural aspects of theSocial Epistemology 109

situation, “effectively control … Greenleaf and Marge [Sherwood], jurors and Tom
Robinson alike” (90). However, the structural aspects of the situation do not con-
trol each party in the same way, since the kind of information stymied by testimo-
nial injustice is exactly the kind that would redirect epistemic agents toward that
which stems uniquely from the subjectivity of nondominantly situated agents.
Examining Fricker’s examples through the subject/other lens not only allows us
to see the way in which the structural and agential aspects of testimonial injustice
work in tandem to prevent a particular kind of information from being known,
but also brings to the fore the degree to which epistemic agency,13one’s ability to
pursue epistemic projects, and epistemic autonomy, one’s ability to pursue episte-mic projects that stem speciﬁcally from one’s distinct lived experience, are interde-
pendent with other epistemic agents. Moreover, it highlights the manner in which
testimonial injustice can signiﬁcantly impair one’s epistemic agency and epistemic
autonomy. The intrinsic harm done in such cases is not just mere (even if deep)
disrespect. If we regard cases of testimonial injustice in terms of a subject/object
relation imposed on its victims, we can miss the degree to which knowers, and
dominantly situated knowers, in particular, rely on the epistemic labor of other
knowers. Moreover, we fail to recognize the degree to which epistemic agency is
intersubjectively maintained. Imagine, for example, that a person fails to believe
me when I say that there is no Santa Claus, or alternately that the world is more
than 7000 years old, and suppose he disbelieves me because he holds a prejudiceagainst non-Christians. Have I really suffered an injustice? In the former case, it
seems clear that I have not. Moreover, it seems that the extent to which the latter
case might be considered a form of epistemic injustice depends on the degree to
which our shared epistemic communities regard me as irrational for making such
a claim and not my disbeliever for disbelieving it. When intersubjective epistemic
support is altogether removed, one suffers curtailment of one’s epistemic agency
and autonomy.
If cases of testimonial injustice are examined solely on the agential level, we fail
to recognize how this kind of epistemic injustice prevents the development ofinformation in a manner that systematically and asymmetrically disadvantages the
pursuits of particular epistemic agents. Examining testimonial injustice with both
agential andstructural features in focus as the subject/other model allows us to do,
we can see the ways in which testimonial injustice infringes upon epistemic agency
and autonomy. In Sherwood’s case, Greenleaf’s failure to believe that Ripley might
be suspect thwarts Sherwood’s epistemic efforts considerably. If Greenleaf were to
take Sherwood seriously, he would either have to follow the lead, admit that he
does not really desire to ﬁnd his son, or give some reason for not following the
lead that would enlighten Sherwood in her epistemic pursuits.
14However, because
Greenleaf fails to believe her due to unwarranted prejudice, and because he is sup-
ported in this failure by a communally shared stereotype, Sherwood is denied theopportunity to have her knowledge developed further by and with another who,
given his stated commitments, ought to help her. While Sherwood could certainly
follow up on the lead herself, in order to do so, there are a number of avenues for110 G. Pohlhaus

investigation that, practically speaking, require more than one person: multiple
locations may need to be visited and visited simultaneously so as to ascertain
Ripley’s location, police records might need to be accessed, phone calls made, etc.
all within a short amount of time. Without the cooperation of others (which could
be heightened by Greenleaf’s resources and connections), Sherwood is unlikely to
be able to know more than she does at the moment she suspects Ripley. Clearly,
this is a matter about which Sherwood strongly desires to know more. One might
even say, given that her suspicion is not unreasonable and given that Greenleaf
also claims to care about what has happened to his son, Sherwood has a right not
only to Greenleaf’s trust in her but also to his epistemic help in following thislead. If Greenleaf is unwilling to give it, he ought to deny that he cares about his
son or be deemed unreasonable, in which case Sherwood would have more lever-
age for garnering the support of others to lend their cognitive abilities toward her
epistemic pursuits.
In the case of Robinson, we have an epistemic agent whose own ability to
know is not stymied, perhaps because, unlike Sherwood, he has an alternate
epistemic community in which to develop his epistemic pursuits (i.e. the black
community in which he lives). Nonetheless, his epistemic agency, in the sense of
his ability to contribute information that would move the epistemic attention of
the community of knowers, to whom he has been tied through the court pro-
ceeding, is signiﬁcantly thwarted. Moreover, his agency here is speciﬁcallythwarted with regard to those aspects of the world that stem from his own lived
experience and history. The type of information Robinson attempts to convey is
of a wholly unfamiliar sort to the jury.
15Because Robinson is viewed as an epi-
stemic subject, he must submit to the rules of epistemic practice, but because he
is viewed as an epistemic subject whose subjectivity is derivative of dominantly
situated subjects, he is perceived as a vicious epistemic subject when his informa-
tion moves beyond the scope of the world experienced from dominant subject
positions.16
While the subject/other lens foregrounds the ways in which epistemic agency
and epistemic autonomy are stymied by testimonial injustice, it simultaneously
reveals places of epistemic resistance in ways that the subject/object model does
not. Since the subject/object model emphasizes passivity on the side of the victim
and does not distinguish which kind of information is likely to trigger a perception
of less credibility, the subject/object lens offers no insight into possibilities for epi-
stemic resistance to testimonial injustice. While it is certainly the case that testimo-
nial injustice stymies agency, the transmission of testimony depends not only on
the listener to receive it, but also on the speaker to offer it. Stressing passivity on
the side of the speaker in relation to the perpetrator, the subject/object frame
obscures the fact that nondominantly situated subjects can actively withhold infor-
mation as well as present information selectively.17,18Moreover, because the sub-
ject/object model does not distinguish the kind of information that is likely to be
believed from that kind of information that is not, it offers no insight into the
ways in which epistemic subjects who are not dominantly situated can and oftenSocial Epistemology 111

do aptly negotiate instances of testimonial injustice. The subject/other model, how-
ever, does offer this kind of insight, since it highlights the ways in which epistemic
agency may still be operative within speciﬁcally delineated regions of the experi-
enced world, even while it may be stymied in others. When one is aware of one’s
status in the community as a truncated subject, one can have a sense of the
regions of one’s experienced world about which one can offer information without
risking unwarranted loss of credibility and how far one can pull the epistemic
attention of dominantly situated agents, both generally speaking and with regard
to particular individuals with whom one has had a history of epistemic
interactions.
Conclusion
Understanding the primary harm of testimonial injustice as derivatization, charac-
teristic of the subject/other relation, elucidates the sociality of knowing and helps
us to see more clearly the larger context that surrounds testimonial injustice. Epi-
stemic relations with other knowers allow the individual knower to verify andcoordinate with others’ experiences in ways that facilitate reliability about what is
true and what is false concerning the experienced world. Moreover, individual
knowing depends on the individual’s relations with other knowers
19via epistemic
practices that are not changeable at will, providing a normative dimension to those
relations. This interdependency makes knowledge of the world possible, but also
leaves epistemic agents vulnerable in relation to one another. Ultimately, the vul-
nerability in interdependency that makes knowing possible is also what leaves open
the possibility of testimonial injustice and so the possibility of communal and
individual epistemic harm.
Notes
[1] I say “seem” because, as Fricker herself notes, identity power plays an important role in
such cases. While Fricker places emphasis on identity power in the form of prejudicetoward the victim of testimonial injustice, it is worth noting that lack of social sanction
for what otherwise ought to be seen as irrational, or at the very least, epistemically suspect,
behavior allows the perpetrator to proceed without much friction in cases of testimonialinjustice. In this sense, the perpetrator’s ability to commit testimonial injustice is aided
greatly by a social context that maintains her sense that her mistrust is warranted when in
fact it is not.
[2] While activity on the part of the victim is not seen when viewing the situation strictly in
terms of injustice or oppression, quite a bit of activity may very well be present if the situ-
ation is viewed in terms of resistance to injustice. For example, one might know what kindof information will be found credible by dominant knowers and what kind will not. More-
over, one can certainly withhold information regardless of whether one is afforded less
credibility than one ought to be. These points will become important later in the paper.
[3] One might even go further to argue that Fricker’s characterization of objects as lacking
any sort of agency is misguided. To do so here would go beyond the scope of this paper,
insofar, as it is the focus of this essay to examine relations among epistemic subjects.112 G. Pohlhaus

For arguments concerning the possible agency of epistemic objects, see e.g. Barad (2007)
and Hekman (2010).
[4] Note that this is not a stricture on declaring results to be unreliable or on failing to believe
what particular results indicate when there are grounds for doubt, but rather, followingFricker’s deﬁnition of the conditions of testimonial injustice, failing to believe where one
ought. The point here is that epistemic practices put constraints on our relations with
epistemic objects.
[5] There is at least one type of case distinct from those of Sherwood and Robinson for which
we might reserve the term “epistemic objectiﬁcation”: cases where one perceives another
as wholly outside the epistemic economy, for example, as an animal not subject to the
rules governing epistemic practices as in the conquest of the Americas by Europe and inUS slavery. I owe thanks to Naomi Scheman and to one of my anonymous reviewers for
reminding me that these kinds of cases have existed and continue to exist. These cases
deserve fuller treatment of their own and reveal that there are signiﬁcantly distinct ways inwhich one might be excluded from the social pooling of information. For the purposes of
this paper, I limit myself to the kind of case Fricker offers in her account so as to elucidate
the ways in which the subject/object lens can miss important aspects of at least one kindof testimonial injustice.
[6] See Cahill (2011).
[7] Cahill herself ﬁnds fault with the way Beauvoir seems to regard the body as immanent
and to favor subjectivity as capable of transcendence from the body (Cahill, 2–4). None-theless, the relation between subjectivities found in Beauvoir’s Subject/Other relation is the
basis for Irigaray’s work from which Cahill develops the notion of derivatization.
[8] Gilson (2011) has recently argued that vulnerability is a kind of ability that is fundamental
to knowing insofar as learning requires one to affect and be affected by others and the
world.
[9] Even in cases where one cannot quite formulate the reason behind one’s disbelief, one
generally acknowledges that other epistemic agents will ﬁnd this odd, unreasonable, or
unacceptable. One says, for example, “I know that you claim x is true, but I just cannot
get myself to believe it. There is something about x that is very counterintuitive tome——let me mull over it for a while. It might just be me.”
[10] For example, if one is systematically advantaged in one’s society, it might be in one’s
interest not to know that this is the case (to maintain a sense of one’s own self-worth asdeserved through merit) and it might be in one’s interest that others not know so as well(to maintain one’s advantage over others and the illusion that one’s good fortune is
deserved).
[11] I have in mind a wide range of practices from simply perceiving and responding to one’s
environment ——which can offer others conﬁrmation of what they, too, perceive ——to
answering questions posed by other subjects when asked. The latter, which seems uncon-
troversially labeled as an “epistemic practice,” is certainly operative in both of the mainexamples treated by Fricker.
[12] While it might be argued that Greenleaf ’s failure to believe runs counter to his expressed
interest to ﬁnd his son, this interest stands in tension with Greenleaf ’s ﬁrm belief thatSherwood, a woman, could not possibly have an insight that goes beyond his own estima-tion of the situation. I think it is reasonable to surmise that, in this case, Greenleaf ’s
investment and trust in his own lived experience of the world (perhaps unconsciously)
overrides his desire to ﬁnd his son.
[13] For a longer treatment of epistemic agency and the harm done to one whose testimony is
not believed that is consonant with my account, see Townley (2003).
[14] While it is possible that Sherwood could fail to be enlightened by a good reason against
her own suspicions, the fault would then lie with her and not Greenleaf.Social Epistemology 113

[15] In fact, Robinson’s case requires the jurors not only to shift their epistemic attention
beyond their immediately experienced world, but also to acquire epistemic tools that have
been developed speciﬁcally in relation to the experienced world of marginalized subjects,
revealing this particular case to be one of willful hermeneutical ignorance (see Pohlhaus
2012).
[16] It is worth noting that perceiving another in this manner bears a strong resemblance to, if
it is not in fact an instance of, what Frye (1983) calls “arrogant perception.”
[17] While I am emphasizing the resistant agency that can be seen in the withholding of infor-
mation, it is important also to note the oppressive conditions that lead one to withhold
information in various contexts and the distinct epistemic harm that such withholding
indicates is present. For a detailed account of these aspects of such situations, see Dotson(2011), especially her notion of “testimonial smothering” (244–251).
[18] For a more detailed account of ways in which resistance may come in the form of with-
holding information and transferring information in ways that are unrecognizable to dom-inantly situated subjects, see Bailey (2007).
[19] For a well-developed notion of the epistemic agent as an “individual-in-community” com-
patible with my understanding of testimonial injustice, see Grasswick (2004).
References
Alcoff, L. M. 2010. Epistemic identities. Episteme 7 (2): 128–36.
Bailey, A. 2007. Strategic ignorance. In Race and epistemologies of ignorance , edited by N. Tuana
and S. Sullivan, pp. 77–94. Albany, NY: SUNY Press.
Barad, K. 2007. Meeting the universe halfway: Quantum physics and the entanglement of matter
and meaning . Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Beauvoir, S. 2010. The second sex. Translated by Borde and Mallovany-Chevallier. New York:
Knopf.
Cahill, A. J. 2011. Overcoming objectiﬁcation: A carnal ethics . New York: Routledge.
Dotson, K. 2011. Tracking epistemic violence, tracking proactices of silencing. Hypatia 26 (2):
236–57.
Fricker, M. 2007. Epistemic injustice: Power and the ethics of knowing . Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Frye, M. 1983. In and out of harm’s way: Arrogance and love in The Politics of Reality . Freedom,
CA: Crossing Press.
Gilson, E. 2011. Vulnerability, ignorance, and oppression. Hypatia 26 (2): 308–32.
Grasswick, H. 2004. Individuals-in-communities: The search for a feminist model of epistemic
subjects. Hypatia 19 (3): 85–120.
Hekman, S. 2010. The material of knowledge: Feminist disclosures . Bloomington, IN: Indiana
University Press.
Langton, R. 2010. Epistemic injustice: Power and the ethics of knowing. Hypatia 25 (2): 459–64.
Maitra, I. 2010. The nature of epistemic injustice. Philosophical Books 51 (4): 195–211.
Medina, J. 2011. The relevance of credibility excess in a proportional view of epistemic injustice:
Differential epistemic authority and the social imaginary. Social Epistemology 25 (1): 15–35.
Pohlhaus, G. 2012. Relational knowing and epistemic injustice: Toward a theory of willful herme-
neutical ignorance .Hypatia 27 (4): 715–35.
Townley, C. 2003. Trust and the curse of Cassandra (An exploration of trust). Philosophy and
the Contemporary World 10 (2): 105–11.114 G. Pohlhaus