Author -Approved Version. Forthcoming in : Mark McBride and Visa AJ Kurki (eds.),  
Without Trimmings : The Legal , Moral and Politi cal Philosophy o f Matthew Kramer . Oxf ord: 
Oxford Un iversity Press.   
 
DISTINGUISHING VALUE -NEUTRALITY F ROM  VALUE -INDEPENDENCE :  
TOWARD A NEW DISENTANGLING STRATEGY  FOR MORAL EPISTEMOLOGY  
 
Lubomira Radoilska  
Department of Philosophy, University of Kent  
Canterbury, Kent, CT2 7NF, UK  
L.V.Radoilska@kent.a c.uk  
 
Abstract:  This chapter  outlin es a new  disentangling strategy for moral epistemology. It builds  
on the fundamental distinction between value -neutrality and value -independence as two 
separate aspects of methodological austerity introduced by Matthew Kramer. This type of 
conceptual analysis is then applied to two major challe nges in moral epistemology : globalised 
scepticism and debate fragmentation. Both  challenges arise from collapsing the fact/value 
dichotom y. They  can be addressed by  comprehensive  disentangling that runs along  both 
dimensions – value neutrality vs. value non -neutrality and value ind ependence vs. value 
dependence. The success of this strategy rests on two factors. The first is broadening the scope 
of disentangling to include theoretical -explanatory values on a par with distinctly ethical 
values.  The second is differentiating between wider and narrower conceptualisations of what 
value neutrality requires with respect to contested matters. The objective is to  pre-empt unjust 
theorising, a distinctive form of epistemic injustice that derives from the exclusive 
methodological focus on eth ical evaluations at the expense of epistemic ones. When these 
methodological conditions are fulfilled, opponents should gain the confidence to treat each 
other as fellow inquirers engaged in the same project, that of reducing the scope of unhelpful 
disagre ements.

2 
 Keywords : conceptual analysis;  disagreement;  disentangling; fact/value  distinction; epistemic 
injustice; moral epistemology; unjust theorising.  
1. Introduction  
What are the prospects of conceptual analysis as core methodology for normative theory? 
Could it respond to proponents of the so -called non -ideal theory  highlighting such challenges 
as undue de -contextualisation of ethical thought and unfair differentials of power within 
knowledge production and recognition? In this paper, I  consider the nature and scope of 
conceptual analysis in Kramer (2018)  as promising  ground for a new, comprehensive 
disentangling strategy that can address these and related challenges in moral epistemology.  
The discussion will proceed as follows. In Section 2, I explore the distinction between value -
neutrality and value -independence as two separate aspects of methodological austerity 
introduced  by Kramer . The ambition is to show that this distinction is funda mental to 
understanding conceptual analysis in terms of dialogical inquiry a dvancing toward  greater 
agreement.  In Section 3, I make a case for expanding on this understanding of conceptual 
analysis toward a comprehensive disentangling strategy that would a pply to  theoretic al-
explanatory values on a par with distinctly ethical values . In the final Section 4, I focus on  two 
major challenges  in moral epistemology  that arise from collapsing the fact/value dichotomy , 
globalised scepticism and debate fragmentatio n. I show that both  challenges can be 
successfully addressed by  a thorough disentangling strategy that encompasses both  dimensions  
of conceptual analysis  – value neutrality vs. value non -neutrality and value independence vs. 
value dependence.  
2. A Methodology for the Search of Justice  
The distinction between value -independence and value -neutrality is introduced within the 
context of a wider methodological discussion aiming to establish the nature and scope of

3 
 conceptual analysis in contemporary po litical philosophy. P rincipal theories of distributive 
justice  are considered as a case in point. By comparing and contrasting the underlying 
approaches in the works of philosophers such as John Rawls, Ronald Dworkin and Joseph Raz, 
Matthew Kramer argues t hat conceptual analysis rarely fits the textbook picture of specification  
of necessary and sufficient conditions for the applicability of a concept  (2018, p. 368) . Properly 
understood,  it consists  instead  in a multi -level collaborative progression from a thin, high-level 
agreement to ever thicker  levels of consequent theorising  that emerge  as a result of 
philosophers taking divergent paths of moral reasoning  rather than applying, more or less aptly, 
the same formal procedure  (p. 37 6). The fact that conceptual analysis is multi -layered is 
significant  on Kramer’s view . For it allows us to employ  the distinction  between  the overall 
concept of justice and the various competing conceptions , to which it gives rise , without 
assuming that they all stand, as it were, on the same plane.  This bears on our ability to identify 
correctly the crux of the disagreement s between different theories of justice.  As Kramer points 
out with respect to Rawls’s theory of justice as fairness: ‘more than one level intervenes 
between that thin concept [of distributive justice] and … his two lexically ordered principles 
that are applicable to the major  legal -governmental institutions of any society’ (p. 370).  Thus, 
at a high er level , there is thin agreement across liberal as well as illiberal theories of justice 
grounded in the exclusion of arbitrary distinctions as unjust  that both sets of theories support. 
At a lower level, there is thicker agreement that obtains only across  liberal theories in the broad 
sense . This agreement is rooted in the understand ing of  all persons as free and  fundamentally  
equal  that these theories have in common . And at a still lower level, only f ully reasonable 
liberal theories would achieve an even thicker agree ment , covering  some basic rights and 
liberties that every citizen should have , over and above considerations of political morality. 
This substantive agr eement would nevertheless leave room for a vast array of important

4 
 disagreements demarcating versions of egalitarianism from one another but also from 
sufficientarian and prioritarian theories of justice (p. 371).  
As this concise presentation shows, navig ating different kinds of disagreements is an inherent 
part of conceptual analysis as  a mainstream approach to theorising about justice. This is 
because , at its best , this methodology does not take the form of a single -minded argument 
relentlessly unfolding  from first premises  but presupposes what we may term a diverse 
community of practice . This key feature becomes apparent in Kramer’s interpretation of 
conceptual analysis as an essentially dialogical exercise generating distinctive philosophical 
views on justice in relation to rivals. In the Rawlsian frame, th e collaborative core of the 
underlying dialectic is exemplified by the idea of wide reflective equilibrium where the 
balancing of high -level principles and pre -theoretical convictions is undertaken in  the light of 
competing theories, in addition to one’s own. I n the Dworkinian frame,  any meaningful 
argument  about  theories of  justice rests on a substantive pre-theoretical agreement on paradigm 
cases  among arguing  theorists.  
Against this background, the distinction between value -independence and value -neutrality 
comes to play a crucial role in separating out disagreements of different order that m ight be 
lumped , unhelpfully, together.  Kramer (p. 377) defines these two contrasting features as 
follows:  
If a project of theoretical elaboration is value -independent in the sense specified here, it is not 
grounded on any ethical values. That is, the justifications for its theses do not consist in 
invocations  of ethical values. Some values do of course underlie any such project, but they are 
theoretical -explanatory or logical/mathematical or aesthetic rather than ethical.  
Value -neutrality, in the sense specified here, is different. If certain theses are value -neutral, 
then we can gauge the fulfilment or non -fulfilment of those theses in any number of 
circumstances without having to undertake any ethical judgments. In other words, the states of

5 
 affairs recounted by those theses can be ascertained (as present or absent) without any ethical 
assessments.1 
The pair is further contrasted with two potential misnomers where neutrality is one of the 
reference terms: first, the neutrality of an abstract concept with respect to  the various  concrete 
cases instantiating it;  and second, value neutrality as a tenet of political liberalism contested by 
the proponents of liberal perfectionism.  As Kramer demonstrates, neither kind of neutrality 
would qualify as value -neutral  in the methodological sense he articulates  (pp. 377 -379).  For 
value -neutrality in this sense is a possible feature of philosophical discourse. It designates a 
distinct dimension of methodological austerity as opposed to methodological engagedness , that 
of purely factual descriptions of states of a ffairs as opposed to prescriptions commending the 
achievement of some states of affairs as just or appropriate in some other respect  (p.378). By 
contrast, v alue-independence , the other dimension of methodological austerity  prioritises 
analytic as opposed t o synthetic , or formal as opposed to substantive argumentation.  According 
to Kramer, while value -independence in the strict sense is inconsistent with a fruitful inquiry 
on the subject of distributive justice or any other core issue of political philosophy , value -
neutrality ha s an important role to play.   
As we shall see in the course of the present discussion, both the rejection of the former and the 
partial acceptance of the latter kind of methodolog ical austerity  have a common root, an 
underlying commitment to a  version of the fact -value distinction. For instance, in Kramer 
(2009, p. 6), Hume’s Law is formulated as follows: ‘There is no valid argument in which all of 
the premises are non -moral (and logically consi stent) and in which the conclusion is a 
substantive moral proposition’.  Returning to conceptual analysis as applied to distributive 
 
1 See Kurki (in this volume) for a related discussion on the distinction between value -independence and 
value -neutrality.

6 
 justice, the use of thin concepts would already commit theorists to some substantive moral 
views to the exclusion of others.  This is a direct upshot of Hume’s Law: extreme 
methodological austerity in terms of formal argumentation about justice, either leads to trivial 
conclusions or conceals unacknowledged value commitments. Rawls’s discussion of 
justification as an argumentati ve practice that goes beyond valid proof illustrates well this idea  
(1971, p. 508) :  
Being designed to reconcile by reason, justification proceeds from what all parties to the 
discussion hold in common. Ideally, to justify a conception of justice to someon e is to give him 
a proof of its principles from premises that we both accept, these principles having in turn 
consequences that match our considered judgements. Thus mere proof is not justification. A 
proof simply displays logical relations between proposi tions. But proofs become justification 
once the starting points have been mutually recognised, or the conclusions so comprehensive 
and compelling as to persuade us of the soundness of the conception expressed by their 
premises.  
So, b y rejecting value -independence as a possible feature of meaningful theorising about 
justice, we are better placed to acknowledge the significant background agreements which help 
focus relevant disagreements and enable the constructive exchange of competing  
interpretations.  Hence, the key role of a community of practice  we observed earlier: without 
the mutual recognition of participants as sharing some pre -existing common ground, the 
conceptual analysis of justice cannot  take off.  
The partial acceptance of methodological value -neutrality also derives from the Humean 
version of the fact -value distinction  that Kramer endorses. If pure descriptions of states of 
affairs cannot ground, on their own, any particular evaluative stance toward the states so 
described, then the occurrence of valued or disvalued state s of affairs can be ascertained  
without any reference to their alleged value or disvalue. As a case in point, Kramer discusses

7 
 the notion of measuring empirically the overall freedom individuals have in a society developed 
in Carter (1999). Such a measurement would not, in Kramer’s terminology, be value -
indep enden t. For, to put it crudely, it presupposes valuing freedom.  It would, however, be 
value -neutral since its extent can be ascertained without reference to any ethical considerations . 
Employing somewhat different terminology, Carter (1999, p. 289) articul ates a related  
distinction : 
The only basis we have for seeing comparisons of degrees of overall freedom as normatively 
significant lies in freedom’s non -specific value. And in order to make room for freedom’s non -
specific value, we must understand degree -of-freedom judgements as having a purely empirical 
basis. We should not see such judgments as ‘value neutral’; for they are, after all, judgements 
in terms of freedom’s non -specific value. But neither should we see them as referring to the 
value of specific  freedoms in terms of the things those freedoms allow us to do.       
On one possible reading , we can equate Kramer’s ‘value -independence’ with Carter’s ‘value 
neutrality’. This reading is further supported by the existence of another term , ‘value freeness’ , 
which considering  Carter  (2015) seems to match closely Kramer’s notion of value -neutrality. 
Yet, a further look at some of the earlier literature on how and why relevant facts  should  be 
established independently of value judgments in suc h areas of public policy as economics, 
might give us a pause for thought. For instance,  in an extensive discussion of Putnam’s 
Collapse of the Fact/Value Dichotomy  (2002), Long (2006 , pp. 129 -130) stresses a particular 
sense in whi ch some  economists from the so -called Austrian School have advocated value -free 
economic analysis : ‘So long as economists can explain the effects of a particular policy without 
presupposing any evaluation of that policy or its effects , the fact that other  evaluat ions must be 
presupposed need not perturb us.’  
This sense of value freeness is consistent with a fact/value distinction . However, it does not 
unambiguously fit the scope of what Kramer terms ‘value -neutrality’. Thus , on another

8 
 possible reading, there is a drift between  two competing ways in which conceptual analysis 
may go ‘value -neutral’ with respect to moral and political concept s, such as distributive justice . 
A narrow -scope  interpretation would see descriptions as value -neutral if they do not rely – 
either explicitly or implicitly – on taking a stance toward the specific value or values whose 
instantiation is ascertained . By contrast, a  wide -scope  interpretation would insist on 
descriptions that do not reference any moral values, not just the on es whose instantiation is at 
stake.   
The discussion of value -neutrality in Kramer (2018) clearly supports the latter, more 
demanding interpretation . Having said that,  it is important to bear in mind that value -neutrality 
with respect to empirical inquiry within the frame of a wider normative theory may not  always  
be as thorough in disentangling facts from values . In such cases, the limited value -neutrality 
achieved  could still fulfil an important methodological purpose, that of avoiding question -
begging evaluations . As the next section will aim to show, distinguishing between wide - and 
narrow -scope value -neutrality is in fact  crucial . For it enables  methodological auste rity to fulfil 
the role  of a distinctive kind of disentangling strategy , in the context of acknowledged value -
dependence .2  
 
2 ‘Disentangling’ is about  the link between ethical evaluations and related descriptions of states of 
affairs. Philosophers committed to the fact/value dichotomy  tend to interpret this procedure as complete 
only when the evaluative judgements under consideration have been fully separated out from the 
descriptive components that they have  been – unhelpfully – entangled with. By contrast, authors who 
contest the fact/value dichotomy  challenge the prospects of such a thorough disentangling. A major  
worry  of theirs  is that separating facts from values in this way leads to loss of meaning rather than 
greater clarity (McDowell 1998). The disent angling strategy that will be explored in the following

9 
 3. Revisiting the Fact/ Value Distinction  
In the discussion to follow, ‘disentanglement’ , viz.  ‘disentangling’ will be understood in the 
weak (and more interesting) sense  explored  in Blackburn (2013). Unlike disentanglement in 
the strong sense where the evaluative dimension of a concept can be easily detached from its 
descriptive dimension without any loss of meaning, disentanglement in the weak sense does 
not imply or aim at a similar endpoint where the ‘facts’ are laid bare, with  no trace of 
evaluation . According to Blackburn, undue focus on disentanglement in the strong sense has 
obscured and undermined the key role dise ntanglement in the weak sense has to play in the 
analysis of the so -called thick concepts.3 This focus  imposes a false dilemma upon theorists 
working in  such areas as normative ethics and political philosophy where most of the 
discussion is bound to employ thick  concepts . The dilemma is as follows: either endorse 
disentanglement in the strong sense or , conversely, pronounce thick concepts as ultimately 
unanaly sable . The former would treat the evaluative dimension of such concepts as dispensable 
 
section is distinctive in that it offers a promising middle ground  – conceptual analysis in terms of a  
fact/value distinction  with no commitment to either the fact/value dichotomy or its collapse.  
3 Evaluative concepts are divided into two categories: thick and thin. The distinction highlights the 
different roles that descriptive components might play in the use of such concepts. For instance, ‘good’, 
‘bad’, ‘right’ and ‘wrong’ have minimal descriptive  content. Being descriptively thin, they come as 
close as possible to pure evaluations. By contrast, such terms as ‘diligent’, ‘nice’ and ‘unfriendly’ rely 
on thicker descriptive layers, in addition to some evaluat ive core . The resulting thick evaluations 
represent a person or an action as being good or bad in a particular way. The distinction between thick 
and thin ethical concepts was introduced in Williams (1985). See Kirchin (2017) for an extensive 
discussion on interpreting thick concepts as more speci fic evaluations rather than separable fact/value 
composites.

10 
 if not altogether parasitic on their descriptive dimension. The latter  would insolate from critique 
objectionable attitudes that the use of thick  concepts may propagate.  On reflection, n either 
option is methodologically sound. The first blatantly disregards central features of ordinary 
moral language , where the extension of concepts, such as ‘steadfast’, ‘determined’ and ‘pig -
headed’ is part ly determined by the different attitudes undertaken toward  by and large 
overlapping representational content . The second option , by contrast, overstates the 
interdependence between attitudes and representation in a way that makes reasoned moral 
change unintelligible . If the ev aluative and the factual dimensions of a thick concept cannot be 
disentangled at all without the loss of meaning, coming to appreciate as determined actions that 
one would previously qualify as pig -headed would amount to a ‘leap of faith’ or a wholesale 
conversion to an alternative standpoint. Yet, both everyday conversations about ethical issues 
and ethical theorising presuppose the idea that we can learn a lot from alternative thick 
conceptualisations by gradually thinning them out to expose  the kinds of unspoken 
commitments that come with the use of this or that thick concept.  As Blackburn (2013, p. 123) 
puts it:  
The everyday metaphor of a loaded description makes salient the idea that a load is something 
that is put upon something else, and that can equa lly be taken off. Things can be said in 
derogatory ways, but rephrased to avoid the derogation… But the issue is whether we should 
see the unitary, thick concept as fundamental, or the idea of a loaded way of describing things, 
where the load plays a role in determining which things are so described, but where the load 
can also in principle be shed.  
So understood,  disentang ling takes place whenever we get clearer and more reflective about 
our own moral stance. In some cases, this would involve revising, perhaps even abandoning 
practices we have previously followed without giving them a second thought. On such 
occasions, our distancing from a particular set of moral judgments and underlying attitudes

11 
 would often come as a result of new ly found  appreciation for the less palatable sides of the 
loaded, entangled concepts we might  be using unreflectively. Blackburn (2013, pp. 124 -125) 
discusses the use of ‘cu te’ to compl iment women as an example. While the apparent intention 
when describing a woman as ‘cute’ is to draw attention to a positive attribute of hers, the 
linguistic practice rests on some background presuppositions which portray women  as 
decorative  and subservient dependants  at their best . A person might partake in this practice 
imagining it just a nice thing to say without ever considering what these presuppositions mean . 
When their offensiveness  gets articulated , as a piece of everyday disentangling,  they might  be 
less inclined to use ‘cute’ with reference to women or see it as a compl iment at all.  
Kramer’s thesis, according to which conceptual analysis in political philosophy is inextricably 
value -dependent, int roduces the theoretical counterpart to everyday disentangling in the sense 
specified earlier. When looking into substantive disagreements between different theories of 
justice, value -dependent conceptual analysis enables us to locate correctly the degree o f 
thinness or thickness, at which these disagreements emerge. This is a first step  toward  the right 
kind of argumentative strateg y that would speak to the relevant community of practice: 
theorists  who have specific background assumptions in common they all  may call upon. And,  
while theoretical disentangling, like its everyday analogue, is not expected to resolve every 
case of substantive disagreement among reasoners who engage in the process in good faith, it 
would always advance a more nuanced and reflective understanding of both one’s own and 
competing interpretations amongst such participants.    
Importantly, n either the everyday, nor the theoretical version of weak disentanglement comes 
with the untenable metaphy sical commitments entailed  by a strict  fact/value dichotomy.4 
 
4 Such commitments are only entailed by strong disentanglement as it posits the complete separability 
of evaluative and descriptive components within a thick concept. The thesis that ethical values cannot

12 
 What’s more, in each version, disentanglement is  clearly consistent with a range of positions 
about the metaphysics of morals. This may lead us to believe that weak disentanglement is, 
quite si mply,  a sound , even perhaps uncontroversial, methodolog y that comes wit h no  
substantive commitments  about the nature of values . Yet, on closer inspection, the extent of 
this methodology’s engagedness, to follow Kramer’s terminology, becomes clear. For the 
successful application of value -dependent conceptual analysis presuppose s that disagreements 
about values are, overall, more difficult to settle than  disagreements about facts.  Since some of 
our beliefs a nd other attitudes are much more controversial than others, we can trade upon the 
largely uncontroversial ones to try to reach greater agreement on those that are more 
controversial. The discussion of weak disentangl ement  in Blackburn (2013, p. 135) is exp licit 
on this point:     
All that I hold is that in context, and for the purpose of enabling discussion and critique to go 
forward at any particular junction, the right methodological route is to distinguish as well as we 
may. We advance one step of fact at  a time, distilling the residue of disagreements of value as 
far as we can, until if we are lucky (but only if) any that remain prove slight or tractable.  
Value -dependent conceptual analysis exhibits a similar structure . Although the distinction  
between formal and substantive components it aims to achieve  within and across conceptions 
of distributive justice is not supposed to mirror a dichotomy between facts and values  (cf. 
Kramer 2009, pp. 236 -9), the process is expected to be straig htforward with respect to the order 
in which layer after layer of conceptual thickness can be peeled off. Yet, as Kramer’s  own 
interpretation  of the wrongful conviction of Tom Robinson  in To Kill A Mockingbird  indicates , 
 
be part of the ‘fabric of the world’ because of thei r peculiar metaphysical properties (Mackie 1977 ) is 
an example. See also Streumer ( 2017 ) for a recent argument in support of the underlying error theory, 
according to which a closer look at the (impossible) metaphysics of values would lead us to see all 
ethical judgments as necessarily erroneous.

13 
 there can be significant methodolog ical disagreement in assessing how thick a specific concept 
is – even between closely related theories  of justice,  both of which qualify as liberal and fully 
reasonable  in the Rawlsian sense. Thus, i f we take, in agreement with Dworkin (2011), the 
conviction and punishment  of a person known to be innocent of any crime to be  a paradigm 
case of injustice, we should also think that  the jurors in Tom Robinson ’s trial have no  ‘grasp 
of the general concept of justice’ (2018, p. 377). For they knowingly co nvict a person who is 
innocent of the crime, of which he has been accused. By contrast , if we followed Rawls as 
Kramer suggests, we should instead grant the se jurors  grasp of the general  concept of justice 
and appreciate that it can  be, as it is on this oc casion, combined with a ‘hideously illiberal 
understanding of what counts as an arbitrary distinction’ (ibid.), exclud ing the difference in race 
between the accuser and the accused , on which their verdict is based .  
Could this disagreement indicate that our methodological route has finally reached a point of 
intractable disagreement of ethical value, that of justice? Considering  how close the two 
theories under consideration are in their understanding of justice, a mo re plausible suggestion 
seems to be that the methodological austerity  should be extended to  a further application . This 
application  would target the entanglement of two kinds of values, ethical and theoretic al-
explanatory . Theoretic al-explanatory values, whether explicitly endorsed or not, have direct 
implications for the ethics of inquiry  since they  help determine what counts as  a ‘sound’ 
methodological route and , as a result,  which reasoners are to be treated as full participants in 
the community of practice. There is a  growing literature on the notion of epistemic peer s and 
its significance for differentiating intractable disagreements that ought to be taken seriously 
from those  that can explained away  or safely ignored  (e.g. Christe nsen and Lackey 2013 ). In 
the next section, I will say more about this . For the purposes of the present discussion, suffice 
to say that different theoretic al-explanatory values underpin  different methodological choice s 
which in turn have different substantive implications . Some of them  would amount to what I

14 
 propose to call ‘unjust theorising’. Examples include marginalis ing epistemic  peers  or ignoring  
alternative conceptualisations  as irrelevant or incompetent . By widening  the scope of 
disentangling  to include explicitly theoretic al-explanatory  values  on a par with ethical values, 
we would give ourselves a better chance to keep in check potentially unjust theorising. This  
commitment  is of particular importance when  we theoris e about justice  since such theorising  
has greater potential to  replicat e, obfuscate and legitimise  existing unjust institutions  than 
theorising on other subjects .5  
To see how this might work, let us  briefly  consider an example f rom Dworkin (1986), the 
interpretation of the equal protection clause  of the US Constitution  in connection to racial 
discrimination. When this clause was adopted  under the Fourteenth Amendment , it was  deemed 
as compatible with the upkeep of racially segreg ated public  school s. As Dworkin (1986, p. 
360) highlights:  
In fact the Fourteenth Amendment was proposed by lawmakers who thought they were not 
outlawing racially segregated education. The floor manager of the civil rights bill that preceded  
the amendment  told the House that ‘civil rights do not mean that all children shall attend the 
same school’, and the same Congress continued to segregate the schools of the District  of 
Columbia after the Fourteenth Amendment had entered the Constitution.   
These schools  remained s egregated  for some further 90 years, until segregation was ruled 
unconstitutional as inconsistent with the very same  equal protection clause .  
 
5 This is because the stakes we have in the outcomes of such theorising are higher than in projects that 
look like a ‘disinterested search for the truth’. At the very least, the conclusions we reach about justice  
are expected to be action -guiding. At times, the actions required might be extremely demanding. The 
discussion of rationalisation in the following section will aim to shed further light on this.

15 
 One possible explanation of why constitutional  law scholars and judges  took so long to 
appreciate such glaring  inconsistency  as the above  is to insist that it is not of a  logical or 
theoretic al-explanatory  order. Instead, it reflects welcome changes in  ethical consensus within 
wider society.  Like value  non-neutrality  in political philosophy, legal interpretation rests on 
specific ethical commitments. When they change, the interpretation changes too.  
Here is an alternative I would like to put forward. It expands  on the idea that to fulfil its intended 
purpose disentangling should target specifically  theoretic al-explanatory  values , in addition to  
ethical values.  This presupposition is consistent with recent work on epistemic injustice , e.g. 
Fricker (2007), Medina (2013), Pohlhaus , Jr. (2017 ). A central claim  that emerges  from various 
contributions  is that  individuals and groups are often wronged  as inquirers  and communicators 
in virtue of  epistemic methods  and habits conceived  as independent from any value  
commitments  by the mainstream.  Moreover, such  epistemic injustices are typically  extremely 
difficult to  identify because of their  entanglement with epistemic norms  seen as constitutive of  
otherwise worthwhile practices, such as democratic  legislation or analytic philosophy . Medina 
(2013, 2017) suggests two complementary terms to designate the insidious mechanisms 
through which epistemic injustices tend to pers ist undetected : meta-ignorance and meta -
insensitivity . The first refers t o the unshakable sense that there is ‘nothing to watch out for  
here’ coming in the very  ‘blind spots ’ that familiar unjust institutions cast over one’s theorising. 
The second precludes a community of practice from giving the benefit of doubt to novel 
approac hes. In so doing, it mimics  bona fide concern s over unorthodox methods.  Importantly, 
both mechanisms – meta -ignorance and meta -insensitivity – could support instances of unjust 
theorising under the guise of sound methodolog y.  
Let us now r eturn to  the case under consideration : how to explain the lawmakers’  initial thought  
that the equal protection clause they championed is consistent with the racially segregated 
education they were accustomed to ? In light of the preceding discussion, a  more plausib le

16 
 explanation would point  – in addition to the false belief that racial segregation is harmless – to 
insufficient  scrutiny into the theoretic al-explanatory commitments  that might be at stake when 
consider ing such  issues as relevance, salience  and comparab ility. At first blush, these issues 
could  seem unrelated to concerns about justice or equality,  as the idea of two separate 
categories of values  – theoretic -explanatory on the one side, ethical on the other  – might  imply. 
Such understanding, however,  could  inadvertently  lead to  unjust theorising .6 
Keeping an eye on theoretic al-explanatory values is of equal significance when we look at the 
other di mension of methodological austerity , that of partial value -neutrality. As shown in the 
previous section, partial value -neutrality may differ in scope. When it is narrow, the relevant 
factual descriptions are meant to exclude  only evaluations based on  the e thical values whose 
instantiation is currently ascertained . When, by contrast, it is wide, the relevant factual 
descriptions are expected t o exclude all evaluations based on ethical values.  Clearly, there will 
be some room for unjust theorising as a result of this very difference in scope . When narrow -
scope value -neutrality is treated as though wide  in scope, disentangling might end too soon , 
 
6 The line of reasoning here is as follows. Defining the sco pe of principles and requirements of justice 
like the equal protection clause is the result of theoretical -explanatory choices. These choices should be 
scrutinised and disentangled applying a similar procedure to that we saw at work in the case of thick 
ethical concepts. This is because the content of such choices tends to appear as independent from ethical 
values. At the same time, however, it is in fact more likely to be entangled with expectations moulded 
by familiar institutions in virtue of their famil iarity and independently of how well they are justified. 
These expectations may not strike the reasoners involved as distinctly ethical. They could instead be 
convinced that the theoretical -explanatory choices they make are only constrained by sound discip linary 
standards and, as a consequence, already value -independent in the required sense. In such cases, the 
disentangling strategy outlined earlier should also apply to the links between theoretical -explanatory 
values and ethical values, in addition to tho se between ethical evaluations and factual descriptions.

17 
 keeping unexamined value  commitments out of the sp otlight. Some of these commitments 
might be as unappealing as compl imenting grown -ups for being cute.  
However, a more insidious form of halfway disentangling  is encouraged by the notion tha t 
proper factual descriptions presuppose  what Jane Heal calls a ‘disinterested search for truth’  
(1987 ). According to Heal, the use of such metaphors as ‘the constitutive aim of belief is truth’ 
tend to be confused and confusing. For they could prompt inquirers  to think of truth as having 
its ow n intrinsic value, in abstraction of the inquiries, practices and ways of life that ma ke 
finding out the truth about specific matters significant to particular groups and individuals . Yet, 
were the search for truth fundamentally disinterested in this way, coming to believe as many 
truths as possible, no matter how trivial, random or uninformative  should be considered as 
epistemic achievement. This, however , does not even remotely look like a successful inquiry. 
So, a possible  upshot  of these common met aphors is often not the promotion of truly 
disinterested  studies but lesser  awareness of the interests that a particular search for truths 
would help realise or, conversely,  obstruct.  
Importantly, the correlation that Heal identifies  can be acknowledged  without at the same time 
rejecting  that truth is the constitutive norm of beliefs. As I recently argued (Radoilska 2017), 
the metaphors conveying such a conception  of truth  do not always make clear how this 
constitutive norm is to be s atisfied; however, this oversight can be remedied by a close contrast -
and-compare strategy bringing together the norms of belief and the norms of action. As a result, 
it becomes possible to address the concerns raised by Heal, which are neither  orthogonal,  nor 
secondary to assessing the inquiry on its own, theoretic al-explanatory terms.  For t hey help 
track the background assumptions about such matters as relevance, scope and method that are 
constitutive of the epistemic practice to which any particular inquiry belongs.   
In a similar vein , by including theoretic al-explanatory considerations when assessing the extent 
to which an investigation  conducted  under the auspices of an ethical or political theory is value -

18 
 neutral, we can limit unjust theorising. In this respect, it is safe to assume that any such 
investigation will be of narrow -scope neutrality with respect to theoretic al-explanatory values 
even if its neutrality with respect to  distinctly  ethical values is wide  in scope. It is beyond the 
limits of the present discussion to assess  the prospects of a stronger claim, that theoretic al-
explanatory values are best understood as a semi -independent subclass of ethical values. The 
conclusions reached  here are independent of this unduly strong c laim: whether theoretic al-
explanatory and ethical values are different in kind or not, normative theorising as a distinctive 
cluster of epistemic practices exhibits  close interdependence  between the two. The potential 
for inadvertently unjust theorising derives from this interdependence. Hence, the need to 
employ a comprehensive disentangling strategy in the sense articulated here. Such a strategy 
would target theoretical -explanatory commitments on a par with ethical considerations along 
the co mplementary dimensions of presumed value independence and partial value neutrality.  
 
4. Implications for moral epistemology  
I would like now to expand on the role that the comprehensive  disentangling strategy inspired 
by Kramer (2018) can play in  moral episte mology. In particular, I will aim to show how this 
strategy can help address a c ouple  of issues that have emerged in the aftermath of growing 
disenchantment with the fact/value dichotomy.  
The first has to do with blanket responses to widespread disagreeme nts in moral theory. While 
neither the existence nor the awareness of such disagreements are new, some ways of 
collapsing the fact/value dichotomy prompt generalised scepticism that  ultimately  undermines  
both value inquir ies and the establishment of facts. In a nutshell, t he thought goes as follows. 
The most compelling reason for rejecting the fact/value dichotomy is epistemic  rather than 
metaphysical: judgements of value are just as contestable as  statements of facts. As a r esult,

19 
 when we disagree about particular values, we should endorse a procedure  similar  to what we 
would deploy when we find ourselves disagreeing about states of affairs  (cf. McGrath 2008) . 
In such standard cases, the discovery of intractable disagreement with our epistemic peers 
should  reduc e confidence in our initial  view s leading to  the suspension of any belief about 
matters  contested in this way. Coming to appreciate the  full extent of disagreement s among 
respectable moral theories, many of them centuries -old, should have a similar effect . Yet, with 
respect to first -order morality, this effect would amount to corruption ( cf. Setiya 2010). For it 
encourages lack of commitment and provides individuals  with the means  to spin ad hoc 
justifications for whatever they feel like doing, just by swapping moral theor ies around . This 
looks like a counterpart to what  – according to the intersecting empirical and philosophical 
literatures on rationalisation  – is readily happening on the side of factual beliefs . Such beliefs 
are often , if not overwhelmingly,  formed by adapting available evidence to fit subjective 
expectat ions. Once formed, rationalising  beliefs prove  particularly  resilient to emerging pieces 
of counterevidence which  get discounted as irrelevant, unreliable o r inconclusive. Crucially, 
some of the underlying mechanisms operate outside of conscious awareness,  e.g. by priming 
or diverting attention. As Schwitzgebel and Ellis (2017, p. 17 0) clarify :  
Rationalisation occurs when a person favours a particular conclusion as a result of some factor 
(such as self -interest) that is of little justificatory epistemic relevance. The thinker then seeks 
an adequate justification for that conclusion but the very factor responsible for her favouring it 
now biases how the research for justification unfolds. As a result of an epistemically illegitimate 
investigation , the person identifies and endorses a justification that makes no mention of the 
distorting factor that has helped guide her search.  
One possible outcome of rationalisation is the further entrenchment of contrasting positions. 
Like failing commitment with  respect to values, this kind of self-assurance  would also hinder  
progress toward greater agreement. While in the former case, disagreement is taken as

20 
 compelling evidence that no position is better than the others, in the latter case, disagreement 
is unde rplayed as peripheral to the assessment of evidence. Schwitzgebel and Ellis  (2017, 
p.171) highlight this feature of rationalisation: it not only ‘obstructs the critical evaluation of 
one’s own reasoning’ ; in so doing, it  also ‘ impedes the productive exchan ge of reasons and 
ideas among well -meaning interlocutors’ .  
The disentangling strategy  under consideration is particularly well -suited to counter the 
globalised scepticism  that underlies such responses . As the earlier discussion showed, its two 
strands  operate in tandem to help identify correctly what we disagree about  and how deep that 
disagreement is . At times, we are able to step back a level to a thinner, shared understanding 
and then advance  together  to reach a thicker, still shared understa nding that may , or not , match  
any of the initial views on the table. At others, disagreement will not be as fully overcome. Yet, 
even then, disentangling  serve s a constitutive role , building a diverse community of epistemic 
peers. In fact, following from t he argument for explicit inclusion of theoretic al-explanatory 
values on a par with ethical and political ones in the context of both analytic dimensions , value  
independence vs. value dependence and  value  neutrality  vs. value non -neutrality , this 
constitutive role may just as often involve bringing deeper disagreements to the surface, as a 
first step to ending unjust theorising. Importantly, the dialogical aspect of  disentangling is as 
vital for value -neutral investi gations, whether wide or narrow in scope , as for the conceptual 
analysis  of thick evaluations . As outlined in our concise reconstruction of reasoning toward  
generalised  scepticism,  seemingly  intractable disagreements of fact are a major motivating 
factor. By creating a community of practice that does not presuppose agreement but search as 
its common ground, the underlying disentangling strategy can effectively l imit the scope for 
unchecked rationalisations . 
The second issue in moral epistemology that this strategy can help us address  is debate 
fragmentatio n. Like generalised scepticism, debate fragmentation respond s to collapsing the

21 
 fact/value dichotomy in a particular way. This time, the starting point is t he realisation that 
first-order moral disagreements are often treated as acceptable , seemingly  in contrast to 
disagreements of fact. Deeply held convictions on the impermissibility of a particular conduct 
are rarely cast aside merely in virtue of learning that others have no qualms about it. At a 
theoretical level, there is related unease with respect to the moral knowledge acquired by 
testimony. Many would qualify it as ‘second -hand’  (Jones 1999 ) if knowledge at all . At first 
blush, the kind of asymmetry asserted here  might look like a replay of the fact/value dichotomy . 
However, it does not have to be so. Returning to the literature on epistemic injustice, some of 
the most egregious cases identified are about  the comprehensive obliteration of pa rticular 
standpoints . Medina (2017) proposes the term ‘h ermeneutical death ’ to capture the extreme 
nature of the epistemic harms involved when the experiences  of oppressed groups  and the 
social reality  they point to are kept unintelligible. The force of th e charge derives precisely 
from collapsing  fact/value dichotomy .7 This charge  also presupposes firm commitment to the 
idea that truth is  of fundamental epistemic value . Otherwise, t he harms under consideration 
cannot be acknowledged as  distinctly epistemic rather  than social or political. For they not only 
point to unfair inequalities across intersecting  dimensions of individual and collective  agency . 
Crucially, they converge toward a comprehensive epistemology of ignorance  whereby earn est 
inquirers are systematically obstructed in their search for the truth and end up believing – 
unsuspectingly – falsehoods  about significant areas of their own lives.  
 
7 The thought goes as follows: Marginalised groups are disvalued. This social fact explains why the 
theoretical tools needed to understand their experiences ‘from within’ are not widely accessible, i f 
developed at all. At the same time, however, the lack of appropriate theoretical tools feeds back into 
the underlying attitudes that keep marginalised experiences unrecognised or poorly understood , 
including by the people who live them .

22 
 According to Medina, circumstances where the threat of such hermeneutical death becomes  
apparent , call for the epistemic equivalent of insurrection: withdrawal from projects instigated 
by the mainstream, including refusal to speak out when one’s testimony is bound to be 
misheard or co-opted. As part of this process, underprivileged knowers should aim  to come 
together and build their own a lternative epistemic communi ties, in isolation from the 
mainstream.  
While epistemic insurrection is a compelling approach to the extreme cases Medina discuss es, 
such as  the suppression of indigenous languages, it could also be counterproductive if 
extrapolated beyond the means of last resort  it is supposed to be. For, once the idea of 
alternative epistemic communities labouring in isolation from one another se ttles in, epistemic 
achievements that challenge the status quo would become easier to ignore, fragmenting the 
notion of epistemic peer s to identify  only those whose standpoint one already shares. A 
disentangling strategy that pays particular attention to signs of unjust theorising can offer  a 
promising  framework for epistemic peers in the making.  In so doing, it w ould place  the rational 
hope of collaborative inquiry on the horizon of epistemic insu rrection  as a distinctly epistemic 
engagement . 
 
5. Conclusion  
Reflecting on the nature and scope of conceptual analysis in Kramer (2018), I outlined the 
contours of a new, comprehensive disentangling strategy for moral epistemology. This strategy 
builds on the fundamental distinction between value -neutrality and valu e-independence as two 
separate aspects  of methodological austerity introduced by Kramer.  The significance of this 
project for moral epistemology becomes apparent when we consider two major challenges that 
arise from collapsing the fact/value dichotomy, glo balised scepticism and debate

23 
 fragmentation. I show ed that these  challenges can be successfully addressed by a two -pronged 
disentangling strategy that encompasses both dimensions – value neutrality vs. value non -
neutrality and value independence vs. value dependence. The success of this strategy rests on 
two factors. The first is broadening the scope of disentangling to include theoretic al-
explanatory values on a par with distinctly ethical values .  The second is  differentiating 
between wider and narrower c onceptualisations of what value neutrality requires  with respect 
to contested matters. Both aim to pre -empt unjust theorising, a distinctive form of epistemic 
injustice that derives from the exclusive methodological focus on ethical evaluations at the 
expe nse of epistemic ones. When these methodological conditions are fulfilled, opponents 
should gain the confidence to treat each other  as fellow inquirers engaged in the same project, 
that of reducing the scope of unhelpful disagreements.  
 
 Acknowledgements  
I would like to thank Matthew Kramer and the Editors of this Collection , Visa Kurki and Mark 
McBride for their helpful comments on  earlier drafts. I would also like to acknowledge the 
constructive feedback I received from audiences at the Universities of Cambridge, Kent and 
Pavia. The research on this chapter was supported by a British Academy Newton Award, Ref.:  
NAFR1180082 .    
 
References  
Blackburn, S. (2013) Disentangling Disentangling. In S. Kirchin (ed.) Thick Concepts . Oxford: 
Oxford University Press ; 122 -135. 
Carter, I. (1999)  A Measure of Freedom . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

24 
 Carter, I. (2015) Value -freeness and Value -neutrality in the Analysis of Political Concepts. 
Oxford Studies in Political Philosophy  1: 280 -306. 
Christensen , D and J . Lackey  (eds.) (2013 ) The Epistemology of Disagreement: New Essays . 
Oxford: O xford University Press . 
Dworkin, R. (1986) Law’s Empire . London: Fontana Press.  
Dworkin, R. (2011) Justice for Hedgehogs . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press . 
Fricker, M. (2007) Epistemic Injustice: Power and the Ethics of Knowing . Oxford: Oxford 
University Press . 
Heal, J. (1987) . The Disinterested Search for Truth . Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society  88: 
97-108. 
Jones, K. (1999). Second -Hand Moral Knowledge. The Journal of Philosophy  96(2) : 55-78. 
Kirchin, S. (2017). Thick Evaluations.  Oxford: Oxford University Press  
Kramer, M. (2009) . Moral Realism as a Moral Doctrine . Oxford: Wiley -Blackwell . 
Kramer, M. (2018) . Conceptual Analysis and Distributive Justice. In S. Olsaretti (ed.) The 
Oxford Handbook of Distributive Justice . Oxford: O xford University Pr ess; 368 -386.  
Kurki, V. (2021). Are Legal Positivism and the Interest Theory of Rights Compatible?  In 
McBride , M.  and V. Kurki  (eds.), Without Trimmings: The Legal, Moral, and Political 
Philosophy of Matthew Kramer . Oxford: Oxford University Press  
Long , R.T. (2006). Review of Putnam, H. The Collapse of the Fact/Value Dichotomy  and Other 
Essays.  Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2002. Reason Papers  28: 125 –131. 
Mackie, J. (1977).  Ethics: Inventing Right and Wrong . London: Penguin

25 
 McDowell, J . (1998 ). Non-Cognitivism and Rule -Following ’, in J. McDowell, Mind, Value, 
and Reality . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press ; 198–219. 
McGrath , S. (2008 ). Moral Disagreement and Moral Expertise. In Russ Shafer -Landau (ed.), 
Oxford Studies in  Metaethics : Volume 4 , Oxford: O xford University Press ; 87-108. 
Medina, J. (2013) . The Epistemology of Resistance: Gender and Racial Oppression, Epistemic 
Injustice and Resistant Imaginations . New York : Oxford University Press. 
Medina, J. (2017 ). Epistemic Injustice and Epistemologies of Ignorance, in L. Alcoff, P.  Taylor 
and L. Anderson (eds), The Routledge Companion to the Philosophy of Race ; 247-260. 
Pohlhaus , G. (2017) . Varieties of Epistemic Injustice . In Kidd, I.J., Pohlhaus , G. and  J. Medina 
(eds.), The Routledge Handbook of Epistemic Injustice , New York, Routledge ; 13-26.  
Radoilska, L. (2017). Aiming at the Truth and Aiming at Success. Philosophical Explorations  
20:111 -126. 
Rawls, J. (1971) . A Theory of Justice . Cambridge, MA: H arvard University Press. 
Schwitzgebel, E. and Ellis, J. (2017 ) Rationalization in Moral and Philosophical Thought. In: 
Bonnefon, J.F. and B. Trémolière (eds.). Moral Inferences . Routledge, New York ; 170–190. 
Setiya , K. (2010) . Does Moral Theory Corrupt Youth?  Philosophical Topics  38 (1):  205-222. 
Streumer, B. (2017).  Unbelievable Errors: An Error Theory about All Normative Judgements . 
Oxford: O xford University Press   
Williams, B. ( 1985 ). Ethics and the Limits of Philosophy . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press