## The Politics of Life Itself

## Nikolas Rose

Life  is  our  life's  work.  (Mission  statement  of  the  pharmaceutical  company Pfizer Inc.)

T novel ways. The object, target and stake of this new 'vital' politics are HE BIOLOGICAL existence of human beings has become political in human life itself. How might we analyse it? 1 I would like to start from a well known remark by Michel Foucault, in the first volume of The History of Sexuality : 'For millennia man remained what he was for Aristotle: a living being with the additional capacity for political existence; modern man is an animal whose politics calls his existence as a living being into question' (Foucault,  1979:  188).  Foucault's  thesis,  as  is  well  known,  was  that,  in Western societies at least, we lived in a 'biopolitical' age. Since the 18th century,  political  power  has  no  longer  been  exercised  through  the  stark choice of allowing life or giving death. Political authorities, in alliance with many others, have taken on the task of the management of life in the name of the well-being of the population as a vital order and of each of its living subjects. Politics now addresses the vital processes of human existence: the size  and  quality  of  the  population;  reproduction  and  human  sexuality; conjugal,  parental  and  familial  relations;  health  and  disease;  birth  and death.  Biopolitics  was  inextricably  bound  up  with  the  rise  of  the  life sciences, the human sciences, clinical medicine. It has given birth to techniques,  technologies,  experts  and  apparatuses  for  the  care  and  administration  of  the  life  of  each  and  all,  from  town  planning  to  health  services. And it has given a kind of 'vitalist' character to the existence of individuals as political subjects.

What, then, of biopolitics today? In this article, I suggest that a new configuration of control has taken shape, and that contemporary biopolitics is risk  politics .  I  argue  that  as  the  truth  regimes  of  the  life  sciences  have mutated,  contemporary  biopolitics  has  become molecular  politics .  And  I

/H18546 Theory, Culture &amp; Society 2001 (SAGE, London, Thousand Oaks and New Delhi), Vol. 18(6): 1-30

think  that  developments  in  biomedicine  have  become  deeply  intertwined with prevailing technologies of the self, and that contemporary biopolitics is ethopolitics . 2

## Biopolitics as Risk Politics

In the light of the history of biological racism and eugenics in the 19th and 20th centuries, it is not surprising that many sociologists have expressed concerns  about  the  contemporary  resurgence  of  biological  and  genetic accounts of human capacities and incapacities. 3 They have argued that, like previous  appeals  to  biological  nature,  such  developments  will  tend  to generate a politics that individualizes human worth, essentializes variations in  human  capacities, reduces social  phenomena  to  the  aggregate  of  individual actions, and discriminates against, constrains or excludes those found biologically abnormal or defective. Thus they have warned of the dangers of  a  new  determinism  -  'geneticism'  -  based  on  a  false  but  seductive mystique of the power of the genes, and entailing all sorts of discrimination on genetic grounds (Dreyfuss and Nelkin, 1992; Lippman, 1992; Nelkin, 1992; Nelkin and Lindee, 1995; Nelkin and Tancredi, 1994). Some have suggested that we face the real prospect of the rebirth of scientific racism grounded  in  the  apparent  objectivity  of  DNA  sequences,  and  of  a  new eugenics fuelled not merely by the commercial interests of the biotech companies, but also by parental desires for a perfect child in an age of manipulated  consumerism  and  reproductive  choice  (Duster,  1990;  Hubbard  and Wald, 1999; Rifkin, 1998). From such a perspective, the rhetoric that celebrates  the  potential  of  biomedicine  and  biotechnology  to  improve  the health, welfare and quality of life of individuals obscures the threat that new biological practices of control will coerce, restrict and even eliminate those whose biological propensities are believed - by doctors, parents or perhaps even by political authorities - to be defective.

Some locate the wish to control the biological make-up of the population at the very heart of modernity. Thus for both Giorgio Agamben and Zygmunt Bauman the thanatopolitics of population purification is immanent within  the  very  project  of  biopolitics:  to  manage  the  health  of  the  'body politic' inescapably requires the control and elimination of 'foreign bodies' (Agamben,  1998;  Bauman,  1989).  The  National  Socialism  of  the  German Third Reich certainly exemplifies this link between the administration of life and the administration  of  death.  For  example,  in  a  book  of  1936  entitled Rassenhygiene  als  Wissenschaft  und  Staatsaufgabe ,  Ottmar  von  V erschuer asserts that politics should mean 'giving form to the life of the people' (von Verschuer, 1936: 8, quoted from Agamben, 1998: 148). Life itself, the vital reality of a people, must become the overriding responsibility and criterion that should guide the exercise of political authority. This requires a nationally organized and politically directed programme to improve the quality of the national stock and eliminate taints or weaknesses that might threaten it. Its tactics range from propaganda and education stressing the burden on the race imposed by those with defective constitutions, to eugenic legislation on

marriage, the assessment of reproductive worth by experts working on behalf of the state, the prevention of those who are members of defective or inferior sub-populations  from  reproducing  through  sterilization  or  extermination. Once each life has a value which may be calculated, and some lives have less  value  than  others,  such  a  politics  has  the  obligation  to  exercise  this judgement in the name of the race or the nation. All the eugenic projects of selective reproduction, sterilization and incarceration follow. Indeed, Agamben asserts that 'the camp' is the 'biopolitical paradigm of the modern': when the collective body of the people becomes the principal resource for politics, the purging of defective individuals becomes an essential part of the care of life (Agamben, 1998).

As Lene Koch has pointed out, references to eugenics in many contemporary  evaluations  of  biomedicine  have  a  characteristic  rhetorical function. 4 Some invoke eugenics to distinguish the present from the past: thus contemporary molecular geneticists usually argue that their discipline, in common with the rest of medicine, has decisively rejected eugenics in favour of individualized, voluntary, informed, ethical, preventive medicine organized around the pursuit of health. Others invoke eugenics to link the present with the past, suggesting that despite its differences, contemporary biomedicine,  in  combination  with  genetics,  still  judges  human  life  and worth, in so far as it intervenes upon the chances of life in order to eliminate differences coded as defects. But Agamben and Bauman are undoubtedly correct in suggesting that, over the course of the 20th century, there was no such clear distinction between preventive medicine and eugenics, between  the  pursuit  of  health  and  the  elimination  of  unfitness,  between consent and compulsion.

At the start of the 20th century, two great state-sponsored biopolitical strategies were taking shape across the nation states of Europe and North America and in many of their colonies. The first sought to maximize the fitness of the population by adding an individualized attention to the habits of subjects to the earlier hygienic concern with securing the external conditions of health through town planning, sewage systems and the like. Taking its cue from the moralizing interventions into the habits of the poor that had proliferated in the second half of the 19th century, this 'neo-hygienist' programme sought to instil habits conducive to physical and moral health into each individual via the machinery of the domesticated home and the school, linked with such disciplinary and tutelary measures as medical inspection of schoolchildren, health visitors, clinics and so forth (Donzelot, 1979; Rose, 1985). Health here formed a kind of transactional zone between political concerns for the fitness of the nation and personal techniques for the care of self.

The  second  great  biopolitical  strategy  also  sought  to  maximize  the fitness of the population, but it privileged one site - that of reproduction. Eugenics sought to improve the body politic and to relieve it of the economic and social burdens of disease and degeneracy in the future by acting upon the reproductive decisions and capacities of individuals in the present (of

the many general accounts of eugenics, perhaps the best is Kevles, 1985). Eugenic programmes used a combination of incentives and compulsion to modulate the wish or ability of individuals in certain categories to procreate  -  those  judged  to  have  hereditary  disease,  to  be  deranged,  feebleminded  or  physically  defective,  those  who  were  deemed  habitually  or incorrigibly immoral or anti-social, especially those guilty of sexual crimes and  alcoholics.  'Positive'  eugenic  measures  ranged  from  exhortation  to family  allowances.  'Negative'  eugenic  measures  ranged  from  abortion, through segregation, more or less involuntary sterilization, to 'euthanasia'.

There  were  many  disputes  between  those  allied  with  the  eugenic movement and those who argued for preventive medicine and public health education. But the operational relations between these strategies were more complex: eugenic themes were present in much politics of public health, and  public  health  and  preventive  medicine  seemed  to  many  to  be  compatible with eugenic thought. Infused with a more or less virulent racism, eugenic policies of forced or coerced sterilization of those considered threats to the quality of the population - notably inhabitants of mental hospitals, the 'feeble-minded' and those deemed incorrigibly immoral or anti-social spread across the United States and Europe and reached their bloody apotheosis  in  Germany. 5 In  the  1920s  and  1930s,  such  sterilization  laws  were passed  in  many  states  in  the  United  States,  in  Switzerland,  Denmark, Finland,  Germany,  Norway,  Estonia,  Iceland,  Mexico  (V era  Cruz),  Cuba, Czechoslovakia,  Yugoslavia,  Lithuania,  Latvia,  Hungary  and  Turkey.  But coercion  was  only  one  element  in  these  strategies,  which  also  sought  to modify public attitudes and individual judgements by education and counselling. Even under Nazi eugenics, at least as far as mental pathologies were concerned, sterilization and euthanasia were not merely a noxious imposition from above. In the context of the eugenic domination of the medical and scientific literature, many German doctors took their own decisions on eugenic grounds; in the context of a widespread campaign of propaganda and public education, parents often requested eugenic measures for their own children (Burleigh, 1994).

Thus  it  is  not  surprising  that  sterilization  on  eugenic  grounds  continued into the post-war period in a number of democratic nations. 6 Many scientists  and  policy-makers  saw  nationally  planned  and  state-directed eugenic practices as quite compatible with rationalities of welfare. Sweden is the exemplar. 7 Here, from 1935 up until 1975, a kind of pastoral eugenics was practised, within the context of a developing paternalistic welfare state. It was modelled on the responsibilities of a good shepherd - who must, of course, be prepared to take sometimes harsh decisions in order to reduce the burden that weak or sickly sheep would otherwise place upon the flock as a whole (cf. Foucault, 2001). Eugenic arguments, informed by a wish to improve  the  quality,  fitness  and  health  of  the  national  population,  also underpinned pro-natalist policies such as family allowances and prenuptial examinations in France, and the key actors saw no contradiction between eugenic  and  hygienic  strategies  to  combat  'social  evils'  (Carol,  1995;

Drouard, 1999). And, at least up until the 1950s in Britain and the United States, eugenic considerations infused reproductive advice to prospective parents in the new profession of genetic counselling: such advice was considered  especially  important  for  those  subjects  with  a  family  history  of inherited defects or disease who lacked the moral capacity to appreciate the implications and hence control their reproduction. 8

State-organized  or  state-supported  tactics  for  modification  of  reproductive decisions and capacities in the name of the health of the population thus  played  a  part  in  the  medical  and  biological  politics  of  many  liberal democratic  societies  across  the  20th  century  in  the  name  of  preventive medicine and public health. However great the moral and political distance between the euthanasia, compulsory sterilization and genetic counselling, we  cannot  simply  counterpose  positive  to  negative  policies,  voluntary  to compulsory measures, coercion and persuasion. How, then, might one begin to mark out the specificity of our contemporary biopolitics? The biopolitics of  the  first  half  of  the  20th  century,  both  in  its  neo-hygienist  and  in  its eugenic form, involved more than the idea that, other things being equal, healthy  individuals  were  more  desirable  than  those  who  were  unhealthy. Health was understood as fitness, and the problem was framed in terms of the political importance attached to the fitness of the national population considered en masse , as it competed with other national populations. Population  fitness  was  liable  to  threats  from  within  and  without,  and  national governments had the obligation to guard against these threats and to take measures to enhance that fitness through policies that were formulated by, and enacted through, the apparatus of the state. But, unlike Agamben and Bauman, I think that contemporary biopolitics differs in crucial respects. As many have pointed out, the political rationalities of our present are no longer inspired by the dream of the taking in charge of the lives of each in the  name  of  the  destiny  of  all  (see  Rose,  1999).  The  ideal  of  an  omnicompetent social state that would shape, coordinate and manage the affairs of all sectors of society has fallen into disrepute. The idea of 'society' as a single, if heterogeneous, domain with a national culture, a national population,  a  national  destiny,  co-extensive  with  a  national  territory  and  the powers of a national political government has entered a crisis. The idea of a 'national culture' has given way to that of 'cultures', national identity to a complex array of identity politics, 'community' to communities. In this new configuration, the political meaning and salience of health and disease have changed.

Of course, programmes of preventive medicine, of health promotion and health  education  still  take,  as  their  object,  'the  nation's  health'.  Today, however, the rationale for political interest in the health of the population is no longer framed in terms of the consequences of unfitness of the population as an organic whole for the struggle between nations. Instead it is posed in economic terms - the costs of ill-health in terms of days lost from work or rising insurance contributions - or moral terms - the imperative to reduce inequalities in health. While international comparisons are undoubtedly still

significant, their contemporary political function is no longer that of marking the  potential  vulnerability  of  a  polity  in  geo-political  rivalry;  rather,  they serve as public indices of the extent to which nations have instituted successful policies for the governance of health. National health indicators, here, do not measure the fitness of a population as a whole; they function as aggregates of the health status of individual citizens and families. Further, in fostering health, the ideal relation of state to people is no longer that aspired to in the 'social' state. The contemporary state does not 'nationalize' the corporeality of its subjects into a body politic on which it works en masse ,  in relation to the body politics of other states competing in similar terms. The state is no longer expected to resolve society's needs for health. The vitality of the species - the nation, the population, the race - is rarely the rationale and  legitimation  for  compulsory  interventions  into  the  individual  lives  of these who are only its constituent elements. In this domain as in so many others, the images now are of the enabling state, the facilitating state, the state as animator. On the one hand, the state retains the responsibility that it acquired in the 18th or 19th century - the precise timing varying across national contexts - to secure the general conditions for health: regulating the sale  of  foodstuffs,  organizing  pure  water  and  sewage  disposal,  sometimes mandating the addition of health-promoting elements into the diet - vitamins, fluoride  in  water  and  the  like.  On  the  other  hand,  within  such  a  healthpromoting habitat, the state tries to free itself of some of the responsibilities that it acquired across the 20th century for securing individuals against the consequences of illness and accident. Thus we have seen an intensification and generalization of the health-promotion strategies developed in the 20th century, coupled with the rise of a private health insurance industry, enhancing  the  obligations  that  individuals  and  families  have  for  monitoring  and managing their own health. Every citizen must now become an active partner in the drive for health, accepting their responsibility for securing their own well-being. Organizations and communities are also urged to take an active role in securing the health and well-being of their employees and members. This new 'will to  heath'  is  increasingly  capitalized  by  enterprises  ranging from the pharmaceutical companies to food retailers. And a whole range of pressure groups, campaigning organizations, self-help groups have come to occupy  the  space  of  desires,  anxieties,  disappointments  and  ailments between the will to health and the experience of its absence. Within this complex network of forces and images, the health-related  aspirations  and conduct of individuals is governed 'at a distance', by shaping the ways they understand and enact their own freedom.

Perhaps Agamben and Bauman are right in suggesting that the link between individual and collective in the first half of the 20th century - both neo-hygienic and eugenic - took a characteristically 'modern' form. If so, I would  argue  that  within  the  political  rationalities  that  I  have  termed 'advanced liberal' the contemporary relation between the biological life of the individual and the well-being of the collective is posed somewhat differently (Rose, 1996). It is no longer a question of seeking to classify, identify,

and  eliminate  or  constrain  those  individuals  bearing  a  defective  constitution, or to promote the reproduction of those whose biological characteristics are most desirable, in the name of the overall fitness of the population, nation or race. Rather, it consists in a variety of strategies that try to identify, treat,  manage  or  administer  those  individuals,  groups  or  localities  where risk is seen to be high. The binary distinctions of normal and pathological, which were central to earlier biopolitical analyses, are now organized within these strategies for the government of risk. Such strategies are organized at a number of levels. There are actuarial or epidemiological strategies that seek  to  reduce  aggregate  levels  of  risk  across  a  population.  There  are strategies for the management of high-risk groups. And, increasingly, there are  strategies  based  on  identification  of,  and  preventive  intervention  for, risky individuals.

Risk here denotes a family of ways of thinking and acting, involving calculations about probable futures in the present followed by interventions into the present in order to control that potential future. 9 Mortality and morbidity were key sites for the development of conceptions of the future as calculable, predictable, and as dependent upon identifiable factors some of which were manageable (on the rise of risk thinking, see Hacking, 1990). The politics of health in the 19th century was underpinned by the collection and tabulation of numerical information on populations, and its analysis in terms of frequencies, probabilities. This was the rationale for hygienic strategies that tried to identify, manage and reduce aggregate levels of morbidity and mortality by modifying the factors within a geographical area, a habitat or a portion of the life course that were statistically associated with increased  levels  of  morbidity  or  mortality.  Thus,  in  England,  Edwin Chadwick used statistical and probabilistic reasoning in his arguments for the reform of sewage systems, and William Farr compiled evidence on the geographical  distribution  of  morbidity  and  mortality  to  inculpate  water supplies in the spread of cholera (Osborne, 1996). In the first half of the 20th century, such ideas about the regularity and predictability of illness, accidents and other misfortunes within a population were central to the birth of the very idea of society, and to the emergence, in different countries, of social insurance strategies for the spreading of the risks entailed in the very activity of living across an insured national population (Ewald, 1986, 1991). Over the second half of the 20th century, biopolitical concerns with the minimization of risks to health - control of environmental pollution, reduction of accidents, maintenance of bodily health, nurturing of children - became intrinsic  not  just  to  the  organization  of  health  and  social  services,  but  to expert decisions about town planning, building design, educational practice, the management of organizations, the marketing of food, the design of automobiles and much more. That is to say, for over 150 years, risk thinking has been central to biopolitics.

Demands for collective measures of biopolitical risk management, far from reducing, are proliferating and globalizing. 10 And strategies aimed at the reduction of the probability of untoward events across a population -

targeting risky practices and locales rather than risky or at risk individuals - are spreading to the government of many other kinds of unwanted events - notably crime control (cf. Feeley and Simon, 1992, 1994). However, again starting in the 19th century, a second set of strategies has also operated in terms of a type of risk thinking. These attempted to find factors that would enable the identification of high-risk groups and hence permit authorities to intervene upon those falling within such groups in a preventive or prophylactic manner. The use of risk profiling to demarcate risk pools has a very  long  history,  going  back  to  the  very  beginnings  of  the  insurance industry. Risk profiling, rather than acting 'actuarially' or insurantially upon the population at large, uses probabilistic and epidemiological knowledge to  identify  factors  associated  with  higher  risks  of  particular  forms  of  illhealth, reproductive problems or other forms of pathology, and then allocates individuals to risk pools using an algorithm made up of these factors. In the field of health, as risk profiling developed from the mid-20th century, it was used to develop risk profiles, scales and indices, which were used to identify those who fell within groups with a significantly higher than average risk, and intervene preventively upon them.

Most readers will be personally familiar with such procedures for the allocation of individuals to risk groups, on a genealogical basis, in terms of a family history of illness or pathology, and/or on a factorial basis, in terms of combinations of factors statistically linked to a condition. Men presenting to their doctors with high blood pressure are risk profiled in terms of age,  weight,  family  history,  smoking  and  so  forth,  are  allocated  to  a  risk group using a scale based on epidemiological and clinical research, and, if at high risk, may be advised to make changes to behaviour, diet or lifestyle, or pre-emptively placed on a drug regime intended to reduce the risk of the occurrence  of  such  disorders.  Pregnant  women  are  risk  profiled  by  their doctor  or  midwife,  and,  if  allocated  to  a  high  risk  group  for  miscarriage, premature birth or associated difficulties, are subject to enhanced surveillance by midwives and gynaecologists (Weir, 1996). The earliest reproductive advice based on genetics also operated in terms of the identification of those who were members of high-risk groups on the basis of epidemiological factors, family history and probabilities. So did the eugenic programmes of  sterilization  of  'the  feeble  minded',  psychiatric  patients  and  sexual offenders  in  the  early  20th  century  that  I  have  already  discussed.  In addition, from the early 20th century, in many countries, a number of individuals and organizations began to give reproductive advice, focusing on prospective marital partners or would-be parents who had a family history of certain types of disease or disability thought to be 'hereditary'. They were given  advice  concerning  the  risks  and  probabilities  of  their  children carrying the condition and advised not to marry, or not to have children, offered a termination of pregnancy, even in jurisdictions where abortion was illegal on other grounds. Genetic advising in the first half of the 20th century was an explicitly eugenic tool (cf. Kevles, 1985). In the years after the end of  the  Second  World  War,  when  a  large  number  of  heredity  clinics  were

established in many countries, their major goal was to prevent birth defects, and  help  couples  make  'eugenic'  rather  than  'dysgenic'  decisions'  (Fine, 1993:  103).  And  in  the  closing  decades  of  the  20th  century,  antenatal screening, for example, testing samples of maternal serum for raised levels of  proteins  associated  with  certain  genetic  abnormalities,  became  widespread for pregnant women whose age or family history placed them in highrisk groups, coupled with the option of termination (Rapp, 1999).

A few doctors and geneticists still argue that any responsible citizen who believes that they carry genetic defects should try to reduce the risk of transmission  to  future  generations  (Glass,  1971;  Robertson,  1983);  such statements lead some critics to diagnose an implicit eugenics in the very idea of genetic counselling. 11 But I think it is necessary to be more specific about  the  make-up  of  such  contemporary  logics  of  control. 12 Decisionmaking in the biomedical context takes place within a set of power relations that  we  could  term  'pastoral'.  I  have  referred  to  Swedish  eugenics  as pastoral, in a sense close to that developed by Foucault - a form of collectivizing and individualizing power concerned with the welfare of the 'flock' as a whole. But this contemporary pastoral power is not organized or administered  by  'the  state'  -  even  if  we  use  this  term  to  encompass  the  whole complex  of  legislative  provision,  state-funded  research  organizations  and national committees of enquiry into the medical and ethical aspects of the new biomedicine. It takes place in a plural and contested field traversed by the codes pronounced by ethics committees and professional associations, by the empirical findings generated by researchers, the attitudes and criteria used by employers and insurers, the tests developed and promoted by psychologists and biotech companies, the advice offered by self-help organizations,  and  even,  one  might  add,  the  critical  perspectives  contributed  by religious  organizations  and  sociological  critics.  Crucially,  this  pastoral power does not concern itself with the flock as a whole. For at least three decades,  professionals  involved  in  this  work  have  explicitly  rejected  the view that they are, or should be, seeking to limit the reproductive capacities of those at risk of passing an inherited condition or disability to their offspring,  let  alone  the  suggestion  that  they  are,  or  should  be,  concerned with the contribution of individual biological characteristics to future population quality, or even the future cost to the nation of caring for children with disabilities. 13 But this pastoralism does not simply entail a priest-like shepherd knowing and mastering the soul of the individual troubled sheep. Perhaps one might best describe this form of pastoral power as relational . It works through the relation between the affects and ethics of the guider the genetic counsellors and allied experts of reproduction who operate as gatekeepers to tests and medical procedures - and the affects and ethics of the  guided - the actual or potential parents who are making their reproductive decisions, and upon their networks of responsibility and obligation.

These  new  pastors  of  the  soma  espouse  the  ethical  principles  of informed  consent, autonomy,  voluntary  action and  choice, and  nondirectiveness. 14 But  in  the  practices  of  this  pastoral  power,  such  ethical

principles  must  be  translated  into  a  range  of  micro-technologies  for  the management of communication and information. These blur the boundaries of coercion and consent. They transform the subjectivities of those who are to give consent or refuse it, through discursive techniques that teach new ways of rendering aspects of oneself into thought and language, new ways of  making  oneself  and  one's  actions  amenable  to  judgement.  And  they reshape the telos of these encounters in specific ways, for example in terms of  psychological  notions  of  mental  health,  or  in  terms  of  the  recent,  but currently ubiquitous idea of 'quality of life' - each now defined within, and measured by, any number of rating scales. Nonetheless, this pastoral power differs from Christian pastorship, where the vectors of power flowed one way, requiring the submission of the sheep to the will of the shepherd, and the internalization of that absolute will in the form of self-examination and selfmastery. These counselling encounters entail intense bi-directional affective  entanglements  between  all  the  parties  to  the  encounter,  and  indeed generate multiple 'virtual' entanglements with parties not present - distant relatives, absent siblings, potential offspring. In these entanglements, the ethical relations of all the subjects to themselves and to one another are at stake - including the experts themselves. The consultation acts as an intensifier of ethicality. It mobilizes affects of shame and guilt, and of the respective  claims,  scope  and  limits  of  freedoms  for  the  self  and  obligations  to others. It activates the conflicts within the counsellors between the ethics of care and the ethics of guidance. It requires the counsellors to fold into themselves, in a way that is by no means trivial or transient, some of those anxious and fateful undecidabilities that possess those whom they counsel.

It is true that - whatever the explicit agenda of non-directive genetic counselling - evidence suggests that those who were counselled about their membership of risk groups before the availability of the kinds of predictive genetic testing I discuss below, were less likely to have children (Carter et al., 1971). But the perils of the contemporary biopolitics of group risk are not a repetition of the past. Rather than a wholesale politics of population management,  these  are  more  mundane  yet  no  less  hazardous.  There  are technical  problems,  for  example  the  validity  and  appropriateness  of  the factors used to calculate the risk profiles through which individuals are allocated  to  risk  groups,  their  generalizability  to  others  given  national  and cultural variations, the effects of changes since the time when the scales were constructed and so forth. There are the problems of false positives and false negatives that are built into the very project of applying probabilistic reasoning to determine the treatment of individuals - these have become infamous in decision-making practices concerning compulsory treatment or detention of 'risky'  psychiatric  patients,  and  those  arising  from  advice  to women with a family history of breast cancer who may be contemplating prophylactic  mastectomy.  There  are  the  problems  that  flow  from  the  fact that, once known to fall within a risk group, the individual may be treated - by others and by themselves - as if they were, now or in the future, certain to  be  affected  in  the  severest  fashion.  These  problems  have  been  much

discussed  in  relation  to  discrimination  in  insurance  and  employment (Gostin, 1991; Hubbard and Wald, 1999; Nelkin and Tancredi, 1994). They also arise when risk assessments are linked to preventive interventions. We can see this where individuals allocated to a high-risk group for cancer or heart disease, despite being healthy, must nonetheless conduct their lives under the shadow of medical authority if they are to be 'responsible'. We can  see  it  in  the  area  of  behavioural  risk,  in  the  projects  for  preventive screening and intervention into the lives of young people in the inner cities at risk of violent, aggressive or offending behaviour, which tend to justify preventive intervention into the lives of 'the usual suspects', that may itself be the first step in the moral career of spoiled identity (Rose, 2000b). In addition, there are the ethical problems that arise in the relation between experts and their clients when trust in numbers replaces other forms of trust - that is to say, when decisions as to action seem to arise automatically from judgements 'black boxed' within an 'objective' calculating device - whose authors  are  not  available  for  debate  and  contestation  (cf.  Porter,  1996;  I discuss  some  of  these  in  relation  to  psychiatry  in  Rose,  1999).  And,  as innumerable accounts of 'the risk society' have pointed out, risk registers and  databases  have  the  potential  for  an  expansion  and  refinement  of strategies of control based upon surveillance (Lyon, 1994).

It  is  not  surprising,  then,  that  there  is  much  professional  optimism about the impact of recent advances in genomics, which seem to have the potential to shift the focus of regulatory strategies from group risk to individual susceptibility . Diagnoses of susceptibility attempt to move beyond the allocation of individuals to a risk group on the basis of factors and probabilities, to a precise identification of those particular individuals who are vulnerable  to  specific  conditions  or  behavioural  problems. 15 Thus,  while epidemiological evidence may show that individuals in certain groups carry an  elevated  risk  for  specific  conditions  -  as  for  example  in  sickle  cell anaemia - the aim is not simply to act upon that group en  masse :  group membership is merely the first step towards identifying and treating susceptible individuals. Amniocentesis was first used to detect major abnormalities in the number of chromosomes or their shape in the foetus as in trisomies such as Down's syndrome or abnormalities in the number of X and Y chromosomes. But samples of amniotic fluid, and now chorionic villus sampling, can be used to detect abnormalities in the DNA itself, or the presence of the specific sequences or markers that are associated with either an increased probability of developing a disorder, or in some cases (for example Huntington's disease) the certainty. Genetic tests are available for a growing number of diseases thought to arise from 'single genes': Huntington's,  fragile  X,  sickle  cell,  cystic  fibrosis  and  phenylketonuria.  And, increasingly,  tests  are  being  developed  which  look  for  the  presence  of specific  base  sequences  -  markers  or  polymorphisms  or  SNPs  (single nucleotide  polymorphisms)  -  that  significantly  increase  the  likelihood  of developing a particular condition: Alzheimer's disease, some forms of breast cancer, certain types of heart disease. Since it is now routine for doctors as

well  as  geneticists  to  consider  that  any  individual's  vulnerability  to  any disease has a genetic component, consisting mostly of multiple genes and their  interactions  amongst  themselves  and  with  other  environmental  and biographical factors, the gaze of susceptibility is potentially unlimited.

In its new form of susceptibility, biomedical risk thinking has become individualizing and clinical. It penetrates behind and beneath even those who live their lives 'in the silence of the organs' (to adapt Canguilhem's use of Leriche - Canguilhem, 1978: 46) to discover within them the signs, seeds, portents,  predispositions  of  pathology  to  come.  While  in  the  moment  of eugenics it was the population that was 'at risk' from the risks posed by the reproduction of specific groups or sub-populations, what is created here is what Ian Hacking (1992, 1995) might term a new and 'interactive' 'human kind': the individual biologically - increasing genetically - risky or at risk. 16 Now it seems that 'smart' programmes of pre-emptive intervention can be devised that target only those individuals predisposed to a particular condition. This thinking underpins the types of genetic counselling that have becomes routine since the 1970s: the screening of pregnant women in 'highrisk'  groups;  the  widespread use of amniocentesis to detect foetuses with genetic abnormalities; the offer of therapeutic abortion for foetuses who test positive; and the increasing resort of 'high-risk' parents to IVF coupled with pre-implantation diagnosis in such situations.

But  the  promise  of  certainty  is  illusory.  In  almost  all  conditions, including those that are implacable such as Huntington's, genetic diagnosis of  individual  susceptibilities  is  still,  inescapably,  probabilistic.  In  many cases it is simply that the risk of developing a disease is increased by the presence  of  certain  alleles,  sequences  or  markers.  Even  when  a  gene sequence is identified that makes it certain that an individual will develop a disease, there is no certainty as to when it will manifest itself, or with what severity. Thus these new practices for the identification of susceptibilities open  a  space  of  uncertainty.  This  is  the  expanding  realm  of  the  asymptomatically  or  presymptomatically  ill  -  those  individuals  carrying  the markers  or  polymorphisms  of  susceptibility  who  are  neither  phenomenologically or experientially 'sick' or 'abnormal'. While the calculation of risk often seems to promise a technical way of resolving ethical questions, these new kinds of susceptibility offer no clear-cut algorithm for the decisions of doctors  or  their  actual  or  potential  patients.  In  this  space,  biopolitics becomes ethopolitics.

## Biopolitics as Molecular Politics

Eugenics was grounded in the truth discourse of the biology of the first four decades of the 20th century, not just in Germany, but also in Britain, France, the Nordic countries and the United States. But that truth has been transformed. In the aftermath of the Second World War, much intellectual and political  work  went  into  disconnecting  the  links  between  concerns  about genetic health of individuals and concerns about the quality of the population en masse .  Genetics was to transform itself into a liberal discipline.

Geneticists reflected upon their own past, and reshaped the problem space of genetics in terms of the search for the roots of disease. The norm of individual health replaced that of the quality of the population. Genetics itself would cease to think in terms of broad social categories. It would try to penetrate  beneath  the  misleading  appearances of pathology and normality to the underlying determinants, the genes and their modes of functioning at a molecular level (Paul, 1998a, 1998b).

This new genetics was bound up with a mutation in the very image that we have of life. The body that 20th-century medicine inherited from the 19th century was visualized via a clinical gaze, as it appeared in the hospital, on the dissection table and was inscribed in the anatomical atlas. The body was a vital living system, or a system of systems. The skin enclosed a 'natural' volume of functionally interconnected organs, tissues, functions, controls, feedbacks, reflexes, rhythms, circulations and so forth. This unified clinical body was located within a social body made up of extra-corporeal systems - of environment, of culture - also conceptualized in terms of large scale-flows  -  of  air,  water,  sewage,  germs,  contagion,  familial  influences, moral climates and the like. Eugenic strategies took their character from this  way  of  linking  the  individual  and  the  social  body.  The  genetic  body differs on all counts from this eugenic body. Most notably, it is conceived on a different scale. In the 1930s, biology came to visualize life phenomena at the submicroscopic region - between 10 -6 and 10 -7 cm (Kay, 1993: 5). Life, that is to say, was molecularized (see the articles collected in de Chaderevian and Kamminga, 1998). This molecularization was not merely a matter of the framing of explanations at the molecular level. Nor was it simply a matter of the use of artefacts fabricated at the molecular level. It was a reorganization of the gaze of the life sciences, their institutions, procedures, instruments, spaces of operation and forms of capitalization.

By the 1960s, as Georges Canguilhem put it, 'The science of life no longer  resembles  a  portrait  of  life,  as  it  could  when  it  consisted  in  the description  and  classification  of  species;  and  it  no  longer  resembles architecture  or  mechanics,  as  it  would  when  it  was  simply  anatomy  and macroscopic physiology' (1994: 317). In changing the scale on which the characteristic  phenomena  of  life  are  studied,  contemporary  biology  had adopted a new language:

It has dropped the vocabulary and concepts of classical mechanics, physics and chemistry, all more or less directly based on geometric models, in favour of the vocabulary of linguistics and communications theory. Messages, information,  programmes,  codes,  instructions,  decoding:  these  are  the  new concepts of the life sciences. (Canguilhem, 1994: 316)

The history  is  actually  more  complicated:  other  possibilities,  in  terms  of topography or function, had to be defeated for this informatic paradigm to become dominant and to take the form of a DNA-based code for protein synthesis (Fox Keller, 2000). But nonetheless, in the genomic discourse that

took shape over the closing decades of the 20th century, life was imagined as  sub-cellular  processes  and  events,  controlled  by  a  genome  which  is neither diagram nor blueprint but a digital code written on the molecular structure of the chromosome (Kay, 2000). This is 'the language of life' that contains 'the digital instructions' that make us what we are. Historians of this period like to quote the dream of Nobel Prize winner Walter Gilbert: 'one will be able to pull a CD out of one's pocket and say: 'Here is a human being:  it's  me!'' (Gilbert,  1992:  96;  cf.  Kay,  1995).  And,  as  the  Human Genome Project progressed, it seemed that the 3 billion base pairs were organized into 100,000 genes - a 1 gigabyte 'parts list' that would just about fit onto one standard compact disc.

The first map of the Human Genome, when published on 11 February 2001,  dealt  a  severe,  perhaps  fatal  blow  to  this  image.  Rather  than  the 100,000 or so genes that had been confidently predicted, there seem to be only around 31,000 sequences coding for chains of amino acids - which compares with 6,000 for a yeast cell, 13,000 for a fruit fly and 20,000 for a nematode worm. This did not seem to be a parts list to make a human even a modern aeroplane contains more than 200,000 unique parts. There did not seem to be enough genes to 'code' for each 'part' - to account for the  complexity of human anatomy and physiology, let alone the neuronal basis of the vast behavioural repertoire of humans, consciousness, learning and memory. The brute reductionism of much of the genomics of the closing decades  of  the  20th  century  already  seems  old-fashioned,  as  molecular genetics  re-groups  around  functional  genomics  and  proteomics.  The  very idea of 'the gene' is complexifying and fragmenting. We are in the world of 'post-genomics', where the key processes are those of gene expression and their regulation, where the same genetic sequence can be cut, spliced and transcribed in different ways, depending on the cellular environment, which itself is shaped by a multitude of extra-cellular factors.

Nonetheless, the molecularization of biology has been an irreversible epistemological event. It has also been a significant technical event, for the new molecular models of life are as much technical as representational. Not that this itself is new: the symbiosis of knowing and transforming has long been woven into the very fabric of biology. In the biology of the second half of the 20th century, knowledge of life and the living body became intrinsically  linked  to  interventions  that  transformed  those  living  bodies  (cf. Rabinow, 1998: 252; Rheinberger, 1995: 226). The elaboration of molecular models in the biology that has taken shape over the last three decades has similarly  depended  upon  the  technical  re-engineering  of  life  at  this molecular scale. All those projects to transcribe 'the book of life', to decode 'the code of codes', to work out its 'normal' and its pathological lines, words, chapters, have been linked to endeavours that intervene upon life at this molecular level - not after the event but in the very process of discovery itself - as, for example, in the techniques of gene cutting and splicing, the polymerase chain reaction for creating multiple copies of precise segments of DNA  outside  living  systems,  the  customized  fabrication  of DNA

sequences to order, the manufacture of organisms with or without specific gene  sequences.  In  this  process,  theoretical  concepts  and  experimental hypotheses rapidly mutated into entities that were provided 'off the shelf' by commercial companies. 18

Thus  it  required  no  real  shift  of  perspective  to  move  that  re-engineering out of the laboratory into the factory. Indeed the laboratory and the factory are already intrinsically interlinked - the pharmaceutical industry has  been  central  to  research  on  neurochemistry,  the  biotech  industry  to research on cloning, genetech firms to the sequencing of the human genome. It is not just that such companies seek to 'apply' or 'market' scientific discoveries,  they  shape  the  very  direction,  organization,  problem  space  and solution effects of the biology itself. For life at the molecular level is only knowable through complex and expensive apparatus: electron microscopes, ultracentrifuges,  electrophoresis,  spectroscopy,  x-ray  diffraction,  isotopes and scintillation counters and their links with the information-processing capacities of computers, and now, with the information dissemination capacities of the Internet. Hence, the politics of the life sciences - the politics of life itself - has been shaped by those who controlled the human, technical and financial resources necessary to fund such endeavours. In the post-war period,  funds  for  the  strategic  development  of  the  life  sciences  were provided by the newly established public research councils, together with private  foundations  such  as  Rockefeller  with  their  own  agendas.  In  the closing decades of the 20th century, these sources of funding were increasingly displaced by the capitalization of life science, by the pharmaceutical industry and, later, by biotech enterprises. Neither the production of truth nor even the production of health is now sufficient to move 'the venture capitalists, patent offices, and science writers on whom [the life sciences] are increasingly dependent': they must be legitimated by the logics of product development and market share (Rabinow, 1996c: 137; see also Rabinow, 1996a). Biopolitics becomes bioeconomics, driven by the search for what Catherine Waldby has termed 'biovalue': the production of a surplus out of vitality itself (W aldby, 2000: 19). But disputes over biopiracy, the patenting of genes and the trade in human tissue, show how molecular commodification is itself confounding our ideas of human life and the protections to be afforded to it (Pottage, 1998; Strathern, 1999). Are DNA fragments replicated, engineered and manipulated in vitro by recombinant techniques 'life' - let alone 'human life'? Can doctors patent and profit from immortal cell lines  that  they  have  isolated  from  John  Moore's  cancerous  spleen  (Hyde, 1997; Rabinow, 1996)? The classical distinction made in moral philosophy between that which is not human - ownable, tradeable, commodifiable and that which is human - not legitimate material for such commodification - no longer seems so stable.

Previously  it  seemed  that  life  inhered  in  the  inescapable  natural workings of the vital processes themselves. All medicine was able to hope for was to arrest the abnormality, to re-establish the natural vital norm and the normativity of the body that sustained it. But these norms no longer seem

so inescapable, these normativities appear open to alteration. Once one has witnessed the effects of psychiatric drugs in reconfiguring the thresholds, norms, volatilities of the affects, of cognition, of the will, it no longer seems possible to imagine a self not open to modification in this way (Fraser, 2001; Kramer,  1994).  Once  one  has  seen  the  norms  of  female  reproduction reshaped by assisted conception, the nature and limits of procreation, and the space of hopes and fears around it, are irrevocably changed (Edwards, 2000;  Franklin,  1997).  Once  one  has  seen  the  norms  of  female  ageing reshaped  by  hormone  replacement  therapy,  or  the  norms  of  ageing  male sexuality reshaped by Viagra, the 'normal' process of growing old seems only one possibility in a field of choice, at least for those in the wealthy West.

Of course, narcotics, stimulants and other drugs, licit and illicit, down the ages have transformed persons and their capacities by linking up their bodies with chemical actors. The body of the diabetic has been prosthetic since  the  invention  of  insulin  treatment:  calculated  chemical  artificiality here has sought to replace the missing or damaged normativity of the body's own vital processes. And, of course, the female body has long been more open to artificialization than the male. But an event is a matter of associations, linking up a number of disparate little changes such that a threshold is crossed. That which was previously exceptional, remarkable, becomes routinely thinkable, perhaps even expected. Now all life processes seem to consist in intelligible chains of events that can be 'reverse engineered' and then reconstructed in the lab, and modified so that they unfold in different ways. Consider, for example, four of the five most prescribed drugs in the United  States  in  1999:  Premarin  for  the  treatment  of  symptoms  of  the menopause - hormone replacement therapy; Synthyroid for the treatment of thyroid deficiency - a condition characterized by general lethargy and lack of activity; Lipitor, for the treatment of hyperlipdemia - high levels of blood lipids thought to predispose to heart attack; and Prilosec for the treatment of peptic disorders and ulcers. 19 The 'antidepressants' were close behind: Prozac was 10th, but its close cousin Zoloft was 11th and Paxil was 15th. Viagra only came in at 47th, but this was 1999. Existence is being lived according to new coordinates, a new game of life is now being played. For example, the very distinctions between mental illness and mental health are being transformed by the new molecular images of the mind generated by biological psychiatry, and the drugs that are specifically fabricated to target and modulate molecular events in the neurones and synapses: no wonder the diagnosis of depression is spiralling upwards, and our affective relations with the world are being reshaped, as all manner of malaise is recoded as depression (on depression, see Healy, 1997, for an enthusiast for the new psychiatry, see Andreasen, 2001; for the critics, see Newnes et al., 2001; cf. Luhrmann, 2001). Life now appears to be open to shaping and reshaping at the molecular level: by precisely calculated interventions that prevent something happening, alter the way something happens, make something new  happen  in  the  cellular  processes  themselves.  As  the  distinction between treatment and enhancement, between the natural and the prosthetic

blurs, the management and maximization of life itself have become the life's work,  not  only  of  each  individual,  but  of  their  doctors,  together  with  the scientists, entrepreneurs and corporations who make the reworking of life the object of their knowledge, inventions and products (on enhancement, see Parens et al., 1998). Natural life can no longer serve as the ground or norm against which a politics of life may be judged. Dilemmas about what we are, what we are capable of, what we may hope for, now have a molecular form. Biopolitics now addresses human existence at the molecular level: it is  waged  about  molecules,  amongst  molecules,  and  where  the  molecules themselves are at stake.

## Biopolitics as Ethopolitics

The  original  biopolitical  thesis  implied  a  separation  between  those  who calculated and exercised power and those who were its subjects, whose biological existence was to be shaped for the benefit of each and all. This does seem to  characterize  policies  seeking  to  modify  the  breeding  patterns  of individuals in the name of the population; the bloody techniques of negative eugenics;  medical  experimentation  on  prisoners  and  psychiatric  inmates; euthanasia  of  those  whose  lives  are  not  worth  living;  even  such  benign strategies  as  medical  inspection  of  schoolchildren.  Here  one  might  agree with Agamben that the sovereign has extended his powers over the living bodies of his subjects by entering an alliance with 'the jurist . . . the doctor, the scientist, the expert and the priest' (1998: 21). W e should not forget that 1939 - the year that Hitler wrote his secret memo permitting certain doctors to grant a 'mercy death' to patients whose lives were deemed not worth living - was also the year that his government designated as the year of 'the duty to be healthy' (Proctor, 1988: 177).

But the huge extension of the political apparatus of health in liberal democratic polities in the 19th and 20th centuries would have been inconceivable if the newly shaped values of hygiene and health had not become entangled with the aspirations of 'the people' themselves - especially the poor,  the  disadvantaged,  the  working  classes  (cf.  Baker,  1994).  In  this period, that is to say, biopolitics was democratized, and relays were formed between political and personal aspirations for health. In the neo-hygienist strategies of the first half of the 20th century, the duty to be well was to be built into the practices of education and routines of domesticity, and hence, it  was hoped, into the obligations of mothers and children. In the second half of the 20th century, a new alliance formed between political aspirations for a healthy population and personal aspirations to be well: health was to be ensured by instrumentalizing anxiety and shaping the hopes and fears of individuals and families for their own biological destiny. The very idea of health was re-figured - the will to health would not merely seek the avoidance of sickness or premature death, but would encode an optimization of one's  corporeality  to  embrace  a  kind  of  overall  'well-being'  -  beauty, success, happiness, sexuality and much more. It was this enlarged will to health  that  was  amplified  and  instrumentalized  by  new  strategies  of

advertising and marketing in the rapidly developing consumer market for health - non-prescription medicines, health insurance, private health care, healthy food, vitamins and dietary supplements and the whole range of complementary, alternative and 'self-health' practices. By the start of the 21st century, hopes, fears, decisions and life-routines shaped in terms of the risks and possibilities in corporeal and biological existence had come to supplant almost all others as organizing principles of a life of prudence, responsibility and choice.

Selfhood has become intrinsically somatic - ethical practices increasingly  take  the  body  as  a  key  site  for  work  on  the  self.  From  official  discourses of health promotion through narratives of the experience of disease and  suffering  in  the  mass  media,  to  popular  discourses  on  dieting  and exercise,  we  see  an  increasing  stress  on  personal  reconstruction  through acting on the body in the name of a fitness that is simultaneously corporeal and psychological. Exercise, diet, vitamins, tattoos, body piercing, drugs, cosmetic surgery, gender reassignment, organ transplantation - for 'experimental individuals' (Lury, 1998) the corporeal existence and vitality of the self have become the privileged site of experiments with subjectivity. I have termed  this  'somatic  individuality'  (Novas  and  Rose,  2000).  The  new genomic and molecular vocabularies of ourselves - like earlier biomedical languages of intelligence, or depression, or 'hormones' - are being incorporated within these relations of the somatic self to itself. They render novel aspects of human vitality visible, reshaping 'experience', not only making sense of it in new ways, but actually reorganizing it a new way and according to new values about who we are, what we must do and what we can hope for.

Biopolitics, here, merges with what I have termed 'ethopolitics': the politics of life itself and how it should be lived (Rose, 1999). By ethopolitics I mean to characterize ways in which the ethos of human existence the sentiments, moral nature or guiding beliefs of persons, groups, or institutions - have come to provide the 'medium' within which the self-government  of the autonomous  individual can be connected  up  with the imperatives of good government. In ethopolitics, life itself, as it is lived in its everyday manifestations, is the object of adjudication. If discipline individualizes  and  normalizes,  and  biopower  collectivizes  and  socializes, ethopolitics concerns itself with the self-techniques by which human beings should judge themselves and act upon themselves to make themselves better than they are. While ethopolitical concerns range from those of lifestyle to those of community, they coalesce around a kind of vitalism: disputes over the value to be accorded to life itself: 'quality of life', 'the right to life' or 'the right to choose', euthanasia, gene therapy, human cloning and the like.

In  this  highly  contested  domain,  somatic  individuals  themselves  are key actors. Biological identity practices do not, as some critics have suggested, lead to passivity in the face of biological fate. Quite the reverse. In advanced liberal democracies, biological identity becomes bound up with more general norms of enterprising, self-actualizing, responsible personhood

(Novas and Rose, 2000). As knowledges and beliefs about one's biological and genetic complement become integrated into the complex choices that prudent individuals are obliged to make in their life strategies, biological identity  generates  biological  responsibility  (see  Rapp,  1999  for  a  superb study of the enactment of such responsibility in amniocentesis). While many critics see the new biomedicine as individualizing, we can already see new forms  of  collectivization  emerging.  Choices  about  marriage,  procreation, financial planning, inheritance, career and much more are made in a web of entanglements involving actual and potential kin, employers, partners and children. And 'at risk' individuals are joining into groups and organizations, not  merely  demanding  public  provision  and  rights,  but  making  their  own claims on the deployment of biomedical technologies and the direction of biomedical research - as, for example, in the case of families of those with muscular dystrophy, Huntington's disease or breast cancer (cf. Rabeharisoa and Callon, 1998). Paul Rabinow (1996b) has termed this 'biosociality'. Individuals who identify themselves and their community through their biology challenge the vectors that lead from biological imperfection or abnormality to  stigmatization  and  exclusion.  They  use  their  individual  and  collective lives, the evidence of their own existence and their vital humanity, as antagonistic forces to any attempt to re-assemble strategies of negative eugenics within a new exclusionary biopolitics. They demand civil and human rights for those whose lives, previously, were deemed less worthy of life. They call for recognition, respect, resources, research, control over medical and technical  expertise.  As  somatic  individuals  engage  with  vital  politics,  a  new ethics of life itself is taking shape.

Within  this  new  ethics,  the  human  vital  order  has  become  so thoroughly imbued with artifice that even the natural has to be produced by a labour on the self - natural food, natural childbirth and the like. Even choosing not to intervene in living processes becomes a kind of intervention. This  requires  us  to  question  the  distinction,  proposed  most  clearly  by Georges Canguilhem, between vital norms and social norms. Canguilhem (1978) argued that vital norms arose from and manifested the normativity of  life  itself,  of  the  organism  as  a  living  being,  of  its  adaptability  to  its environment. Social norms, on the other hand, manifested only adaptation to a particular artificial order of society and its requirements for normativity, docility, productivity, harmony and the like. Some suggest that the new politics  of  life  has  once  more  mistaken  social  norms  for  vital  ones,  for example that the molecular politics of psychiatry, with its claims to be able to manipulate and transform personality and emotion, has incorporated the social into the vital, and has taken key features of vitality itself - for example sadness - as errors open to correction in the name of a social, not a vital, norm of health. But, at least as far as human life is concerned, the social and the vital have never been so distinct. Our very ideas of what it is to be a  normal  human  being  have  been  made  possible  by  historically  specific institutional  and  technical  developments,  not  least  by  biopolitics  itself. Thus,  new  norms  of  human  capacities  and  longevity  were  born  in  the

sanitization and hygienization of urban existence in the 19th century; new norms of recovery and cure were born in the clinical hospitals; new ways of posing the relations between fate, life and health were born in the development of epidemiological knowledges of the distributions of disease and their social correlations. Our contemporary vital norms are no less, but no more, shaped by their conditions of formation than those of previous generations. On  the  one  hand,  our  very  personhood  is  increasingly  being  defined  by others, and by ourselves, in terms of our contemporary understandings of the  possibilities  and  limits  of  our  corporeality.  On  the  other  hand,  our somatic  individuality  has  become  opened  up  to  choice,  prudence  and responsibility,  to  experimentation,  to  contestation  -  and  so  to  a  'vital politics'.

## Life Itself

Michel Foucault pointed out long ago that, from at least the time of the birth of clinical medicine, 'medical thought [has been] fully engaged in the philosophical  status  of  man'  (Foucault,  1972:  198).  Medical  thought  has  also been fully engaged in the ethical question of how we should live - of what kinds of creatures we are, of the kinds of obligations that we have to ourselves  and  to  others,  of  the  techniques  which  we  can  and  should  use  to improve ourselves, and the kinds of persons we should strive to be. I do not think that, today, the most far-reaching ethical innovations concerning our relations to ourselves are being made in the deliberations of the bioethicists and  moral  philosophers  -  they  are  being  made  within  medical  and  biomedical thought and technique itself. Indeed, the individualized humanism of  bioethicists  and  medical  philosophers  emerged  alongside  the  19thcentury individualization of the living body within clinical medicine. But this  humanism  now  encounters  human  life  whose  very  meaning  is  being altered  by  biology,  biomedicine  and  biotechnology.  'The  philosophical status'  -  indeed  the  very  ontology  -  of  human  beings  is  being  reshaped through the decisions of entrepreneurs as to where to invest their capital and which lines of biomedical research and development to pursue. It is being shaped by geneticists taking all those small decisions about which family lineages to investigate, which markers to choose, which genes to hunt by which methods. It is being refined by clinicians working in alliance with their own patients to test out and explore the new potentials of gene therapy or reproductive technology. And it is being developed and contested by all those individuals and groups who are themselves active participants in the new ethics of normalcy - whether as subjects at risk of illness or early death, consumers governing ourselves though diets, selves reshaping ourselves by sculpting  our  bodies,  potential  parents  deliberating  over  screening  and genetic  counselling,  gay  couples  using  artificial  reproduction  to  have children.

I have argued that life, today, is not imagined as an unalterable fixed endowment, biology as destiny, where the reproduction of individuals with a defective constitution is to be administered by experts in the interests of

the future of the population. No longer are judgements organized in terms of a clear binary of normality and pathology. Of course, there are many practices  where  identification  of  high  risk  plus  biological  incorrigibility  can switch the affected individual - or potential individual - onto the circuits of  exclusion:  whether  that  be  via  therapeutic  abortion  for  a  severely damaged foetus or preventive detention - or the death penalty in some states in the United States - for those thought to have a biological propensity to violence or sexual predation. But the dream - of doctors, geneticists, biotech companies and many 'afflicted individuals' and their families - is of that pre-symptomatic  diagnosis  followed  by  technical  intervention  at  the  biological level to repair or even improve the sub-optimal organism. For the political vocation of the life sciences today is tied to the belief that in most, maybe all cases, if not now then in the future, the biological risky or at risk individual, once identified and assessed, may be treated or transformed by medical intervention at the molecular level. In the process, the familiar distinction between illness and health has become problematic and contested. As claims are made to identify the genetic bases of 'normal' variability in aspects of vitality - from sexuality to longevity - the line of differentiation between interventions targeting susceptibility to illness or frailty on the once hand,  and  interventions  aimed  at  the  enhancement  of  capacities  on  the other, is beginning to blur.

I  have  suggested  in  this  article  that,  in  and  through  such  developments,  human  beings  in  contemporary  Western  culture  are  increasingly coming  to  understand  themselves  in  somatic  terms  -  corporeality  has become one of the most important sites for ethical judgements and techniques. Two modes of such a 'biological ethics' are particularly striking. On the one hand, human rights now have a biological dimension and, partly in consequence,  have  gained  a  new  kind  of  'species  universality'.  Legal, political and social rights were first linked to the capacities and obligations of  individuals  who  were  elements  of  a  political  association.  But  now,  it seems, each human being has such rights, simply by virtue of their existence as beings of this human kind. Individuals seem to have acquired a kind of biological citizenship - a universal human right to the protection, at least, of each human person's bare life and the dignity of their living vital body. In the geopolitics of famine, drought, war and ethnic cleansing, in the vociferous anti-capitalist and anti-globalization movements, and in the local politics of health, it is now possible for human beings to demand the protection of the lives of themselves and others in no other name than that of their biological existence and the rights and claims it confers.

Such arguments suggest that biological ethics ascribes each human life  equal  worth.  But  our  practices  and  techniques  show  us  that,  on  the contrary,  the  biological  lives  of  individual  human  beings  are  recurrently subject to judgements of worth. We do not have to look to the controversies over euthanasia or the rights to life of severely damaged neonates to see this - each session of genetic counselling, each act of amniocentesis, each prescription of an anti-depressant is predicated on the possibility, at least, of

such  a  judgement  about  the  relative  and  comparative  'quality  of  life'  of differently composed human beings and of different ways of being human. As  biomedical  technique  has  extended  choice  to  the  very  fabric  of  vital existence, we are faced with the inescapable task of deliberating about the worth of different human lives - with controversies over such decisions, with conflicts over who should make such decisions and who cannot, and hence with a novel kind of politics of life itself. In this article, I have argued that this politics is not one in which authorities claim - or are given - the power to make such judgements in the name of the quality of the population or the health of the gene pool. On the one hand, in the new forms of pastoral power that are taking shape in and around our genetics and our biology, these questions about the value of life itself infuse the everyday judgements, vocabularies, techniques and actions of all those professionals of vitality: doctors, genetic counsellors, research scientists and drug companies among them, and entangle them all in ethics and ethopolitics. And, on the other hand, the politics of life itself poses these questions to each of us - in our own lives, in those of our families, and in the new associations that link us to others with whom we share aspects of our biological identity.

Of course, we should not overestimate the novelty of what is happening  here.  But  nonetheless,  to  a  greater  extent  and  in  different  ways  than before, we have become the kinds of people who think of our present and our future in terms of the quality of our individual biological lives and those with whom we identify. The melancholy refrain of those who condemn the arrogance of biomedicine for meddling in such areas, who convict all references to the biological of reductionism, individualism and determinism, or who predict a new eugenics are of little help to us in understanding the issues at stake here. For once our very biological life itself has entered the domain of decision and choice, these questions of judgement have become inescapable. We have entered the age of vital politics, of biological ethics and genetic responsibility.

## Notes

- 1. This article was initially prepared for a seminar on Displacement of Politics held at Santa Margherita, Genoa, 24-6 June 1999 organized by Sakari Hanninen and Allesandro dal Lago, and a much earlier version was published in Italian translation in 2000 in Aut Aut 298: 35-62. Versions have also been given at the University  of  Bath,  the  University  of  Stockholm,  Goldsmiths  College,  University  of London, University of East London and at the conference on The Ethos of Welfare, University of Helsinki, September 2000. I would like to thank participants for their comments  and  criticisms.  Special  thanks  to  Carlos  Novas  for  many  discussions about these issues, and for lending me ideas and sources. In preparing the final version I have also benefited from reading Sarah Franklin's draft paper 'Life Itself' (Franklin, n.d.). My argument throughout is indebted to the work of Paul Rabinow.
- 2. I  do  not  address  the  contemporary geopolitical dimension of biopolitics here, but hope to do so in a subsequent article.
- 3. The  collection  edited  by  Marteau  and  Richards  (1996)  contains  a  good  and reasoned overview of the policy issues as they stood in the UK in the early 1990s.

- 4. In a conference paper as yet unpublished - see Koch (2000). For examples of this  rhetoric  at  work,  see  Holtzman  (1998),  W ertz  (1998)  and  many  of  the  other papers in this special issue of Science in Context .
- 5. For  Germany  see  Proctor  (1988)  and  Burleigh  (1994).  For  France  see  Carol (1995). For the United States, see Dowbiggin (1997), Larson (1995), Kevles (1985), Khl (1994) and Robitscher (1973).
- 6. The Human Betterment Foundation reported that 50,707 Americans had been sterilized by 1 January 1950, and that the pace of sterilization had increased since 1944 after a lull during the early war years: see Dickinson and Gamble (1950). For details of the post-war eugenic programmes in the Nordic countries, see Broberg and Roll-Hansen (1996).
- 7. Under a nationally organized programme carried out by liberal and humanistic doctors, a total of 62,000 people - many who were merely thought to be anti-social or sexually promiscuous - were prevented from reproducing by sterilization, much of which was involuntary or coerced. While the initial targets had been informed by concerns about racial purity, the programme continued into the post-war years. Its targets were largely women who were thought to be anti-social, sexually active and without good judgement, and it was publicly rationalized on the basis that the size of families of those with a history of anti-social behaviour must be controlled. The research on this programme, by Maija Runcis, was publicized by articles in the  leading  Swedish  newspaper Dagens  Nyheter in  August  1997  and  widely reported in the English language newspapers; see Guardian (6 March 1999). For an  account  of  eugenics  in  the  Nordic  countries  see  Broberg  and  Roll-Hansen (1996).
- 8. Sheldon Reed is usually credited with the invention of the term 'genetic counseling' in 1947, and discusses the changing relations with eugenic thought in Reed (1974). There is no recent single, general history of genetic counselling, but see Kenen (1984) and Fine (1993).
- 9. For two recent collections which elaborate on this way of approaching the issue of  risk,  see  O'Malley  (2000)  and  Baker  and  Simon  (2001).  I  develop  my  own approach in more detail in relation to psychiatry in Rose (1998) and in relation to crime control in Rose (2000a).
- 10. However, as Ewald has argued, there are significant differences between the principles of risk spreading and indifference to fault that characterized prevention and compensation in 20th-century social insurance and health policies, and the kinds of contemporary risk thinking that underpin the 'precautionary principle' where a demand for the total elimination of risk goes along with attempts to make someone bear responsibility for any untoward event, and where the almost incalculable uncertainty of the consequences of every new development is nonetheless linked to demands for assurances of total safety (Ewald, 2001).
- 11. Others have argued that eugenic considerations also underpin the quasi-voluntary practice of sterilization of women on welfare in some cities in the United States (Horsburgh, 1996).
- 12. Over the closing decades of the 20th century, such forms of group-based risk management  spread  to  other  fields  -  notably  those  concerning  pathologies  of conduct: families suspected of committing child abuse (Castel, 1991; Parton, 1991); the risk profiling of those convicted of certain types of sexual or violent offences (Pratt, 2000), and of psychiatric patients (Rose, 1998). In each case, a combination of demographic, biographical, lifestyle and other factors is used to identify those

thought to be 'high risk' who are then placed on risk registers, subject to surveillance and reporting by a whole range of authorities, and may be subject to other restrictive measures - have their children taken into care or be subject to preventive detention.

- 13. A recent debate, actually about predictive genetic testing, illustrates this well. In 1987 Margery W . Shaw, a professor of health law at the University of Texas, suggested that a predictive genetic test for Huntington's meant that it was 'now possible to  begin  to  eradicate  the  Huntington  gene  from  our  species'  within  the  next  two generations and suggested 'it is necessary that those who possibly or certainly carry the  gene  take  positive  steps  to  prevent  its  transmission'  (Shaw,  1987:  243).  Her argument brought immediate and heated rejections from those involved in developing pre-clinical testing programmes:

While  all  would  welcome  a  reduction  in  the  gene  frequency  for  HD  this eugenic argument is both impractical and certainly not a primary goal for the preclinical testing programmes in Canada and the United Kingdom . . . [the] major goal of preclinical detection of HD is the improvement of the quality of life for persons at risk. (Hayden et al., 1987: 762)

I owe these references to Carlos Novas, who is researching the history of genetic testing and counselling for Huntington's.

- 14. I am leaving to one side the areas of crime control and psychiatry where these famous ethical principles have only limited purchase.
- 15. There  are  some  analogies  here  with  general  developments  in  the  insurance industry. As Richard Ericson and his colleagues have pointed out, there is a widespread contemporary tendency within the private insurance industry to attempt an 'unpooling of risks' and to seek a finer and finer risk segmentation (Ericson et al., 2000).
- 16. In this context, many critics have been concerned about the implications of the development of behavioural genetics - for example the claims that anti-social or violent conduct has a strong genetic basis. I have discussed these claims elsewhere, and I reach the same conclusions as most contributions to two recent collections  on  the  subject:  not  only  are  the  claims  of  enthusiasts  for  behavioural genetics vastly overstated and unlikely to find support in the genetics and biology itself, but even were they to find such support, they would be unlikely to undermine the increasing emphasis in the criminal courts, at least in English-speaking jurisdictions, on the ultimate moral responsibility and culpability of the violent or anti-social offender (Rose, 2000b; see also Botkin et al., 1999 and Wasserman and Wachbroit, 2001).
- 17. Ludmerer (1972: 34) points out that every member of the first editorial board of Genetics in 1916 participated in or supported the eugenics movement at some point in its early history.
- 18. The  example  most  familiar  to  social  scientists  is  the  'Oncomouse TM '  made famous by Donna Haraway (Haraway, 1997).
- 19. http://www.rxlist.com/top200.htm.

## References

Agamben, Giorgio (1998) Homo Sacer: Sovereign Power and Bare Life ,  trans.  D. Heller-Roazen. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

Andreasen, Nancy (2001) Brave New Brain: Conquering Mental Illness in the Era of the Genome. New York: Oxford University Press.

Baker, Keith M. (1994) 'A Foucauldian French Revolution', pp. 187-205 in Jan Goldstein (ed.) Foucault and the Writing of History. Oxford: Blackwell.

Baker, Tom and Jonathan Simon (eds) (2001) Embracing Risk .  Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Bauman, Zygmunt (1989) Modernity and the Holocaust . Cambridge: Polity.

Botkin,  Jeffrey,  William  McMahon  and  Leslie  Pickering  Francis  (eds)  (1999) Genetics and Criminality: The Potential Misuse of Scientific Information in Court. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.

Broberg,  Gunnar  and  Roll-Hansen,  Nils  (eds)  (1996) Eugenics  and  the  Welfare State: Sterilisation Policy in Denmark, Sweden, Norway and Finland . East Lansing: Michigan State University Press.

Burleigh, Michael  (1994) Death  and  Deliverance:  'Euthanasia' in Germany 1900-1945 . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Canguilhem,  Georges  (1978) On  the  Normal  and  the  Pathological .  Dordrecht, Holland: Reidel. (Orig. 1943.)

Canguilhem, Georges (1994) A Vital Rationalist , ed. F. Delaporte. New York: Zone. Carol, Anne (1995) Histoire de l'eugnisme en France: Les mdecins et la procration

XIX-XX sicle . Paris: Seuil.

Carter,  C.O.,  J.A.  Fraser  Roberts,  K.A.  Evans  and  A.R.  Buck  (1971)  'Genetic Clinic: A Follow-Up', Lancet 1 (6 Feb.): 281-5.

Castel, Robert (1991) 'From Dangerousness to Risk', pp. 281-98 in G. Burchell, C.  Gordon  and  P.  Miller  (eds) The  Foucault  Effect:  Studies  in  Governmentality . Hemel Hempstead: Harvester Wheatsheaf.

De Chaderevian,  S.  and  H.  Kamminga  (eds)  (1998) Molecularizing  Biology  and Medicine: New Practices and Alliances, 1910s-1970s. Amsterdam: Harwood.

Dickinson, Robert and Clarence Gamble (1950) Human Sterilization . n.p.

Donzelot, Jacques (1979) The Policing of Families . London: Hutchinson.

Dowbiggin, Ian R. (1997) Keeping America Sane: Psychiatry and Eugenics in the United States and Canada, 1880-1940 . Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.

Dreyfuss,  Rochelle  Cooper  and  Dorothy  Nelkin  (1992)  'The  Genetics  of  Jurisprudence', Vanderbildt Law Review 45(2): 313-48.

Drouard, Alain (1999) 'Eugenics and Bioethics in Today's France', pp. 20-30 in Tartu  University  History  Museum Annual  Report  1998 .  Tartu,  Estonia:  History Museum of Tartu University.

Duster, Troy (1990) Backdoor to Eugenics . London: Routledge.

Edwards, Jeanette (2000) Born and Bred: Idioms of Kinship and New Reproductive Technologies in England. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Ericson,  Richard  and  Kevin  Haggerty  (1998) Policing  the  Risk  Society .  Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Ericson,  Richard,  Dean  Barry  and  Aaron  Doyle  (2000)  'The  Moral  Hazards  of

Neoliberalism: Lessons from The Private Insurance Industry', Economy and Society 29(4): 532-58.

Ewald, Franois (1986) L'tat providence . Paris: Grasset.

Ewald, Franois (1991) 'Insurance and Risk', pp. 197-210 in Graham Burchell, Colin Gordon and Peter Miller (eds) The Foucault Effect . Hemel Hempstead: Harvester.

Ewald, Franois (2001) 'The Return of Descartes' Malicious Demon: An Outline of a Philosophy of Precaution', pp. 273-301 in Tom Baker and Jonathan Simon (eds) Embracing Risk . Chicago, IL: Chicago University Press.

Feeley,  Malcolm  and  Jonathan  Simon  (1992)  'The  New  Penology:  Notes  on  the

Emerging Strategy of Corrections and Its Implications', Criminology 30(4): 449-74.

Feeley, Malcolm and Jonathan Simon (1994) 'Actuarial Justice: Power/Knowledge in Contemporary Criminal Justice', pp. 173-201 in D. Nelkin (ed.) The Futures of Criminology . London: Sage.

Fine, Beth A. (1993) 'The Evolution of Nondirectiveness in Genetic Counseling and Implications  of  the  Human  Genome  Project',  pp.  101-17  in  Dionne  M.  Bartels, Bonnie S. LeRoy and Arthur L. Caplan (eds) Prescribing Our Future: Ethical Challenges in Genetic Counseling . New York: Aldine de Gruyter.

Foucault, Michel (1972) Birth of the Clinic: An Archaeology of the Clinical Gaze . London: Tavistock.

Foucault,  Michel  (1979) The  History  of  Sexuality,  Volume  1:  An  Introduction . London: Allen Lane.

Foucault, Michel (2001) ' ' Omnes et Singulatim ':  Towards a Critique of Political Reason', pp. 298-325 in Power: The Essential Works, Volume 3 . London: Allen Lane.

Fox Keller, Evelyn (2000) The Century of the Gene . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Franklin, Sarah (1997) Embodied Progress: A Cultural Account of Assisted Conception . London: Routledge.

Franklin, Sarah (n.d.) 'Life Itself: Global Nature and the Genetic Imaginary' (draft). Department of Sociology and the Centre for Science Studies, Lancaster University, at http://www.comp.lancaster.ac.uk/sociology/soc048sf.html.

Fraser, Mariam (2001) 'The Nature of Prozac', History of the Human Sciences 14 (3): 56-84.

Gilbert, Walter (1992) 'A Vision of the Grail', pp. 83-97 in Daniel Kevles and Leroy Hood (eds) The Code of Codes . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Glass, Bentley (1971) 'Science: Endless Horizons or Golden Age?', Science 171: 23-9.

Gostin, Larry (1991) 'Genetic Discrimination: The Use of Genetically Based Diagnostic Tests by Employers and Insurers', American Journal of Law and Medicine 17(1-2): 109-44.

Hacking,  Ian  (1983) Representing  and  Intervening .  Cambridge:  Cambridge  University Press.

Hacking,  Ian  (1990) The  Taming  of  Chance .  Cambridge:  Cambridge  University Press.

Hacking, Ian (1992) 'World-Making by Kind-Making: Child Abuse for Example', pp.  180-238 in M. Douglas and D. Hull (eds) How Classification  Works:  Nelson Goodman among the Social Sciences . Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.

Hacking,  Ian  (1995)  'The  Looping  Effects  of  Human  Kinds',  pp.  351-94  in  D. Sperber, D. Premack  and  A.J.  Premack  (eds) Causal  Cognition: A MultiDisciplinary Approach . Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Haraway,  Donna  (1997)  'FemaleMan  _Meets_OncoMouse TM ',  pp.  49-119  in Modest_Witness @Second_Millennium . New York: Routledge.

Hayden, M.R., M. Bloch, S. Fox and D. Crauford (1987) 'Ethical Issues in Preclinical  Testing  in  Huntington  Disease:  Response  to  Margery  Shaw's  Invited Editorial Comment (Letter)', American Journal of Medical Genetics 28(3): 761-3.

Healy, David (1997) The Anti-Depressant Era . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Henman,  Paul  (2000)  'Discerning  and  Governing  the  'Risky'' ,  Paper  given  to Ethos of Welfare conference, University of Helsinki, September.

Holtzman, Neil (1998) 'Eugenics and Genetic Testing', Science in Context 11(3/4): 397-417.

Horsburgh,  Beverley  (1996)  'Schrodinger's  Cat,  Eugenics  and  the  Compulsory Sterilization of Welfare Mothers', Cardozo Law Review 17: 531-82.

Hubbard,  Ruth  and  Elijah  Wald  (1999) Exploding  the  Gene  Myth .  Boston,  MA: Beacon.

Hyde, Alan (1997) 'The Body as Property', pp. 48-80 in Bodies of Law . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Kay, Lily (1995) The Molecular Vision of Life: Caltech, The Rockefeller Foundation and the Rise of the New Biology . New York: Oxford University Press.

Kay, Lily (2000) Who Wrote the Book of Life? Stanford,  CA:  Stanford  University Press.

Kenen, Regina H. (1984) 'Genetic Counseling: The Development of a New Interdisciplinary Occupational Field', Social Science and Medicine 18(7): 541-9.

Kevles, Daniel J. (1985) In the Name of Eugenics : Genetics and the Uses of Human Heredity. New York: Knopf.

Kevles, Daniel J. and Leroy Hood (eds) (1992) The Code of Codes: Scientific and Social Issues in the Human Genome Project .  Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Koch, Lene (2000) 'Eugenics and Genetics', Paper given to Ethos of Welfare conference, University of Helsinki, September.

Kramer, Peter (1994) Listening to Prozac . London: Fourth Estate.

Khl, Stefan (1994) The Nazi Connection: Eugenics, American Racism and German National Socialism . New York: Oxford University Press.

Larson,  Edward  J.  (1995) Sex,  Race  and  Science:  Eugenics  in  the  Deep  South . Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.

Lippman,  Abby  (1992)  'Led  (Astray)  by  Genetic  Maps:  The  Cartography  of  the Human Genome and Healthcare', Social Science and Medicine 35: 1469-76.

Ludmerer, Kenneth (1972) Genetics and American Society .  Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.

Luhrmann, Tanya W. (2001) Of Two Minds: The Growing Disorder in American Psychiatry . New York: Picador.

Lury, Celia (1998) Prosthetic Culture: Photography, Memory and Identity . London: Routledge.

Lyon, David (1994) The Electronic Eye: The Rise of Surveillance Society . Cambridge: Polity.

Marteau,  Theresa  and  Martin  Richards  (1996) The  Troubled  Helix:  Social  and Psychological Implications of the New Genetics . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Nelkin, Dorothy (1992) 'The Social Power of Genetic Information', pp. 177-90 in Daniel Kevles and Leroy Hood (eds) The Code of Codes . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Nelkin,  Dorothy  and  Susan  Lindee  (1995) The  DNA  Mystique:  The  Gene  as  a Cultural Icon . New York: Freeman.

Nelkin, Dorothy and Laurence Tancredi (1994) Dangerous Diagnostics: The Social Power  of  Genetic  Information (with  a  new  Preface).  Chicago,  IL:  University  of Chicago Press.

Newnes, Craig, Guy Holmes and Cailzie Dunn (2001) This is Madness Too .  Ross on Wye: PCCS Books.

Novas, Carlos and Nikolas Rose (2000) 'Genetic Risk and the Birth of the Somatic Individual', Economy and Society Special Issue on 'Configurations of Risk' 29(4): 484-513.

O'Malley, Pat (ed.) (2000) Configurations of Risk: A Special Issue of Economy and Society 29(4): 457-606.

Osborne, Thomas (1996) 'Security and Vitality: Drains, Liberalism and Power in the  Nineteenth  Century',  pp.  99-122  in  Andrew  Barry,  Thomas  Osborne  and Nikolas Rose (eds) Foucault and Political Reason . London: UCL Press.

Parens, Eric et al. (1998) Enhancing Human Traits: Ethical and Social Implications. Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press.

Parton, Nigel (1991) Governing the Family: Child Care, Child Protection and the State . London: Macmillan.

Paul, Diane (1998a) The Politics of Heredity: Essays on Eugenics, Biomedicine, and the Nature-Nurture Debate . New York: State University of New York Press.

Paul,  Diane  (1998b)  'Genetic  Services,  Economics  and  Eugenics', Science  in Context 11 (3/4): 481-91.

Porter, Theodore (1996) Trust in Numbers: The Pursuit of Objectivity in Science and Public Life . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Pottage,  Alain  (1998)  'The  Inscription  of  Life  in  Law:  Genes,  Patents  and  Biopolitics', pp. 148-73 in R. Brownsword, W .R. Cornish and M. Llewelyn (eds) Law and Human Genetics: Regulating a Revolution . Oxford: Hart.

Pratt,  John  (1995)  'Dangerousness,  Risk  and  Technologies  of  Power', Australian and New Zealand Journal of Criminology 28(1): 3-31.

Pratt, John (2000) 'Sex Crime and the New Punitiveness', Behavioural Sciences and the Law 18: 135-57.

Proctor, Robert (1988) Racial Hygiene: Medicine Under the Nazis . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Rabeharisoa, V . and M. Callon (1998) 'L'implication des malades dans les activits de recherche soutenues par l'Association Franaise contre les myopathies', Sciences Sociales et Sant 16(3): 41-65.

Rabinow,  Paul  (1994)  'The  Third  Culture', History  of  the  Human  Sciences 7(2): 53-64.

Rabinow, Paul (1996a) Making PCR: A Story of Biotechnology . Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Rabinow,  Paul  (1996b)  'Artificiality  and  Enlightenment:  From  Sociobiology  to Biosociality', pp. 91-111 in Essays on the Anthropology of Reason . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Rabinow, Paul (1996c) 'Severing the Ties: Fragmentation and Dignity in Late Modernity', pp. 129-52 in Essays on the Anthropology of Reason . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Rabinow,  Paul  (1998)  'Genetic  and  Molecular  Bodies',  pp.  135-50  in  Tetsuji Yamamoto (ed.) Philosophical Designs for a Socio-Cultural Transformation .  Paris: cole des Hautes tudes et Sciences Culturelles (with Rowman and Littlefield).

Rabinow, Paul (1999) French DNA: Trouble in Purgatory . Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Rapp, Rayna (1999) Testing Women, Testing the Fetus: The Social Impact of Amniocentesis in America . New York: Routledge.

Reed, Sheldon (1974) 'A Short History of Genetic Counseling', Social Biology 21(4): 332-9.

Reilly, Phillip R. (1991) The Surgical Solution: A History of Involuntary Sterilisation in the United States . Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.

Rheinberger, Hans-Jrg (1995) Towards a History of Epistemic Things: Synthesizing Proteins in the Test Tube . Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

Rifkin, Jeremy (1998) The Biotech Century . New York: Tarcher/Putnam.

Robertson, John A. (1983) 'Procreative Liberty and the Control of Conception, Pregnancy and Childbirth', Virginia Law Review 69: 405-64.

Robitscher, Jonas (ed.) (1973) Eugenic Sterilisation . Springfield, IL: Thomas.

Rose, Nikolas (1985)

The Psychological Complex

. London: Routledge.

Rose, Nikolas (1996) 'Governing 'Advanced' Liberal Democracies', pp. 37-64 in Andrew  Barry,  Thomas  Osborne  and  Nikolas  Rose  (eds) Foucault  and  Political Reason . London: UCL Press.

Rose, Nikolas (1998) 'Governing Risky Individuals: The Role of Psychiatry in New Regimes of Control', Psychiatry, Psychology and Law 3(2): 177-96.

Rose, Nikolas (1999) Powers of Freedom: Reframing Political Thought . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Rose, Nikolas (2000a) 'Government and Control', British Journal of Criminology Special Issue on Criminology and Social Theory edited by David Garland and Colin Sparks 40: 321-39.

Rose, Nikolas (2000b) 'The Biology of Culpability: Pathological Identity and Crime Control in a Biological Culture', Theoretical Criminology 4(1): 5-34.

Shaw, Margery W. (1987) 'Testing for the Huntington Gene: A Right to Know, a Right not to Know, or a Duty to Know?', American Journal of Medical Genetics 26(2): 243-6.

Strathern, Marilyn (1999) 'What is Intellectual Property After?', pp. 179-204 in Property, Substance and Effect . London: Athlone.

Waldby, Catherine (2000) The Visible Human Project . London: Routledge.

Wasserman,  David  and  Robert  Wachbroit  (eds)  (2001) Genetics  and  Criminal Behavior . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Watson, James D. (1990) 'The Human Genome Project - Past, Present and Future', Science 248 (6 April): 44-9.

Weir,  Lorna  (1996)  'Recent  Developments  in  the  Government  of  Pregnancy', Economy and Society 25(3): 373-92.

Wertz,  Dorothy  (1998)  'Eugenics  is  Alive  and  W ell:  A  Survey  of  Genetics  Professionals Around the World', Science in Context 11(3/4): 493-510.

Nikolas Rose is Professor of Sociology at Goldsmiths College, University of London. His most recent book is Powers of Freedom: Reframing Political Thought (Cambridge University Press, 1999). His current work is on the social,  ethical,  cultural  and  legal  implications  of  biological  psychiatry, molecular  genetics  and  the  neurosciences,  and  is  supported  by  the Wellcome Trust Biomedical Ethics research programme.