DOI: https: //doi.org/10.53350/pjmhs211551047  
REVIEW  ARTICLE  
 
 
   P J M H S  Vol. 15, NO. 5, MAY  2021    1047  Paradigm Shifting From Bio -Medical to Bio -Psycho -Social and Role 
of Medical Social Work  
 
IBADULLAH SAJID1, UZMA ASHIQ2, RAJA IMRAN SAJID3 
1Social Welfare Officer , Social Welfare & Bait -ul-Mall, Rawalpindi.  
2Lecturer , Department of Social Work , University of Sargodha, Sargodha.  
3Social Welfare Officer , Social Welfare & Bait -ul-Mall, Rawalpindi.  
Correspondence to Dr. Ibadullah Sajid , Email: ibad_sajid@yahoo.com  Cell No. 092 300 6020694  
 
ABSTRACT  
 
The health miseries emerged after the horrific incident of Second World War challenged the bio -medical model 
dominating the healthcare perceptions during the 19th century. The healthcare interventions in post war years 
have had to change toward a new idea, the social  perspective of health. In 1977, Engel  introduced a new 
approach “ bio-psycho -social” (BPS) which emphasized that merely bio -medical intervention by ignoring the 
psycho -social determinants cannot be helpful in achieving absolute recovery. Although this para digm shift in 
healthcare was widely acknowledged but the application of the approach is limited. In the context, the role of 
Medical Social Work, a profession focused on the reduction of the psycho -social and environmental determinants 
of health for absolute recovery, is considerable. This review study concludes that the interventions of Social work 
profession with its unique attributes such as breadth, holistic  care and believe in absolute rehabilitation, can make 
the health system more responsive.  
Keywords:  Healthcare, determinants, Medical Social Work, Social, Psychological  
 
INTRODUCTION  
 
The complex and multifold system of health has always 
been of keen interest to the researchers and policy makers 
to uncover and implement the innovative approaches to 
make the health indicators betters.  The perceptions and 
ideas regarding health remained ch anging gradually with 
the development  of knowledge and understanding about 
the profession.  History rev eals that by the end of 15th 
century, people had no concern with the science  but their 
life merely  depended  upon the religious or sacred places 
such as temples, mosques, church; and the human society 
was completely under control of religious thoughts and 
practice s. No source of knowl edge other than divine boo ks 
was acceptable . It was believed that nature exist ed as it 
because of God’s will  and tempering nature was a sin . The 
health subject was also taken within the same paradigm 
and disease was seen solely as curse of God. Good or bad  
health was believed as rew ard or punishment by the God 
for good or bad deeds . The only method for treatment or 
curing the illness was pleasing the God.1 Then in 16th and 
17th centuries, the European society experienced some 
evolutionary changes which afte rward influenced  rest of the 
world. A French philosopher, Rene Descartes  (1596 –
1650), famous as the founder of modern philosophy, has 
been credited for the development of innovati ve 
contemporary ideas in healthcare  specifically.2 This man  
was the pioneer  to put forward  the notion that the mind and  
body are not alike but two separate spheres. He proposed 
that the body could be considered as physical whi le the 
mind as spiritual world. The failure or malfunction in 
physical body is called  disease  and only a qualified person 
having technical knowledge can mend  it.1 This idea 
primarily led to the development of innovative medical 
supposition known as  biomedicine . 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
Received on 13 -12-2020  
Accepted on 23 -04-2021  Emergence of Bio -medical model in health:  The bio-
medical model confined the health merely to the non -
existence of any physical disorder in the body and the 
treatment was considered as a technical and scientific 
intervention to fix the body fault. Medication , as per this 
approach  was no more a healing art.  The model 
considered human body as a multifaceted organic system 
and when it involved any dysfunction, a competent health 
physician can fix that. This model disconnected  mind 
(psych)  from body (soma)  and the psycho -social and 
cultural conditions  of the diseased person  was entirely  
disregarded .3 During the 19th century, the Bio -medical 
approach was c ompletely overruling the health care field 
which changed all medical care perceptions 
fundamentally .1 By the end of 19th century, the 
development  and esteem of medicine  as a technical 
knowledge or science advanced  progressively . Science , 
through major discoveries and innovative inventions made 
people expectant that all their problems will now be 
resolved by the science.  Nonetheless , the horrific incident 
of Second World War  shattered all the dreams of the world. 
In particular, after the a ct of bombing on Hiroshima purely 
result of scientific d evelopment, believe  in science was 
flattered. They realized  that scientific advancement will lead 
the world to the ruinous destruction rather a prosperous 
future .1 Medicine science in the post war years, despite 
notching up considerable successes, began to dishearten 
the people. In consequence of  numerous  social cha nges 
during the  era, the bio -medical model, after seeing its 
climax  started  to be condemned . The model has been 
criticized and challenged  even by the medical 
professionals , for a long period.  As a result , conceptions of 
health, disease and health care interventions have had to 
change toward a new idea, the Social perspective of 
health1. 
Development of social perspective of health:  In 1948 , a 
well refined and compreh ensive health definition coined  by 
the World Health Organization  (WHO)  called the attention

Paradigm Shifting From Bio -Medical to Bio -Psycho -Social  
 
 
1048    P J M H S  Vol. 15, NO. 5, MAY  2021  towards  addressing  the psycho -social  roots of the health  
equally with the biological  so as to attain good health . 
Health was defined as “ A state of complete physical, 
mental and social well -being and not merely the absence of 
disease and infirmit”4 The definition , by combining  together 
the biological and psychosocial aspects  thus invited  a 
social approach in health care associated to broad human 
rights commitments. Subsequently, s ome joint ventures of 
health professionals and community workers started in 
several countries which later on were converted into the 
renowned community based heal th programs focused on 
community participation and empowerment in decision 
making and endeavor for rights for better psycho -social, 
political and cultural determinants so as to attain improved 
public health.5 
Hence, the prestige and reliability on innovati ve 
medical technologies and equipments was run down 
rapidly and dependence on technical health professionals 
was started to dwindle.  A new debate to deputize the local 
community workers who could help the people in mitigating 
socio -cultural and psychologic al aspects to settle the health 
issues was started. Health education and medical 
awareness regarding prevailing socio -cultural determents, 
adopting of recommended precautionary measures and 
curative strategies were focused largely.1 
Emergence of Bio-psycho -social model of health:  
An American  psychiatrist , George  Libman Engel, presented 
a new appr oach  known as bio -psycho -social  (BPS)  model 
of health in 1977 .6 Engel having the rich experience of 
dealing the psychiatric patients make out that the 
assumption to consider the mind and body separate with 
no reliance on each other was the fundamental problem .7 
He was of the view that bio -medical approach dominating 
over the health conceptions for a long period has finally 
become a medical dogma necessitating that all health 
issues either related to the body or mind, be 
conceptualized basically on physi cal, chemical and other 
biological methods. He also stated that no clear cut line 
between ailment and health has been drawn so far and 
only biological disorders are being considered and 
managed by ignoring the fact that psychological, social and 
environmen tal determinants also cause ailment and should 
be dealt.3 Engel further  emphasized that psycho -social, 
cultural as well as emotional factors also affect the health 
along with the biological determents. In his famous article 
"The Need for a New Medical Model: A Challenge for 
Biomedicine"  Engel eloquently stated that:  
"…To provide a basis for understanding the determinants 
of disease and arriving at a rational treatments and 
patterns of health care, a medical model must also take 
into account the patient,  the social context in which he lives 
and the complementary system devised by society to deal 
with the disruptive effects of illness, that is, the physician 
role and the health care system. This requires a bio -
psycho -social mode…”6 
The BPS model deems mind  and body as two 
separate systems working collectively. Health, by this 
model is a combination of biological, psychological, and 
social wellbeing not only the absence of biological disorder. 
Socio -cultural, psychological and economic conditions 
influence t he health and illness significantly. Illness 
undermines ones personal as well as family stability and healing potential. Only bio -medical intervention by ignoring 
the psycho -social counseling and support cannot be helpful 
in achieving absolute recovery. Th e model emphasized that 
multi -professional health interventions are required to deal 
with the multifold health phenomenon .8 The BPS approach 
is a perfect combination of science and humanism in health 
care practice. The approach , considering  all associated  
determinants of health and illness  supports the integration 
of biological, psychological and social determinants  in the 
diagnosing , prevention and developing coping strategies . It 
does not trimming the  worth  of biological factors  down , but 
extends a rathe r narrow approach9. 
Application of  bio-psycho-social approach in current 
medical practice:  An in -depth  review of prev ious literature 
exposed that  despite the widespread acknowledgement of 
the BPS model, its application in medical practice is still 
limited. One of the causes behind this may be the non -
formulation of a well designed function al mechanism to 
apply the model .10 Moser and Stagnaro -Green indicated  
that although majority of the physicians  admit the ne ed and 
efficacy of the BPS  model in dealing with the psycho -social 
determinants and believe that by a ddressing these factors 
can gain  extraordinary consequences  but many reported 
that it is quite hard to practice it due to vulnerability of 
physicians regarding effective training on the model and its 
application. They considered that addressing the bio -
psycho -social determinates are often complex rather 
simple to be practiced.11  Another study depicted that the  
physicians believe that psychosocial determinants affecting 
health can be very common and dominating over the illness 
and extensive knowledge  and quality training in 
psychosocial domain is required to address these issues12. 
Maha et al confirmed that BPS approach  has been  
ignored and disregarded by the medical practitioners . They 
enumerated multiple reasons in this regard.  First, t he 
physicians might assume that the appli cation of BPS 
approach may increase  their work burden. Secondly, t hey 
also might be unconvinced or have confusion in their minds 
regarding significance and e fficacy or they may be 
incapable to implement. Third, there is a mistaken belief  
among physicians that BPS model being a patient -centered 
approach is a costly and time -consuming approach13. 
According to the Kusnanto  et al, the BPS model is 
criticized that its effective application requires an in -depth  
assessment of the social, psychological, emotional, 
behavioral , cultural a nd environmental determinants 
influencing  the disease  which is a hard-hitting  task for a 
physician who is already overloaded with the c linical, 
managerial and other many official  responsibilities.14 Truglio 
et al also raised  query  on the application of the model and 
considered  that it is a prolonged, time -lapsing and 
expensive approach .15 It is also claimed  that the holistic 
nature of the  model makes it  luxury  and cosmetic which is 
not affordable for many healthcare systems of low and 
middle income  countries16. 
Role of Medical Social Work  in bio -psycho -social 
perspective:  Healing and curing the  ill person  is always 
complex as the needs of a patient  are often multifold rather 
simple. No profession or discipline has inclusive  control 
over wisdom rather  the close cooperation and interaction of 
related discipline is needed  to ensure the high quality care 
for the community .17 Health as a discipline  solely cannot be

Ibadullah Sajid , Uzma Ashiq , Raja Imran Sajid  
 
 
P J M H S  Vol. 15, NO. 5, MAY  2021   1049  effective in addressing the multidimensional requirements 
of the BPS approach. The multidisciplinary teams belong to 
the other related professions are required.  The Social Work 
as a profession has a  history of multid isciplinary  teamwork 
and a dedication to the significance of early intervention, 
prevention and health improvements.18 
With the shifting paradigm in health care from bio -
medicine to the BPS , the role of MSW  has become more 
significant. MSW with its holistic focus on psycho -social 
and physical wellbeing of the patients deals with the social 
components and other non medical factors of the disease.  
Social Work interventions exclusively focused on the 
reduction of the psycho -social and emotional determinants 
of the illness which are fundamental to the well being and 
health consequences.19 According to the "Australian 
Association of Social Workers"  (2014):  
“…Social Work profession focuses on the holistic care of 
the patient with the ability to consider the complexity 
involved by using bio -psycho -social and ecological 
perspective. It assesses how the psychological and social 
context of the individual may impact upon the individual’s 
health needs and ability to retur n to optimal health and 
wellbeing …”20 
The underlying theoretical perspective for the work 
started by the Ida Cannon, the pioneer Social Worker in 
healthcare setting appointed at the " Massachusetts 
General Hospital"  in the early 1900s, was also related  to 
address ing the socio -environmental, physical and 
emotional  determinants influencing  the health.21 In the 
context of the BPS approach, the role of Social Work in 
healthcare setting has become more central and 
supporting. Within this perce ption, Social Worker can make 
a better  asse ssment of the psycho -social, environmental as 
well as all other non -medical factors affecting the health to 
identify the needs, weaknes ses and strength of the patient  
to make him capable to be healthier for better social 
functi oning.20 Ketherine , in the light of BPS approach,  
proposed  a well effective health care team by including a 
physician, pharmacist, nutritionist, nurse and a social 
worker . The position of the social worker in the team, 
according to the Ketherine , is most si gnificant and central  
with the function to furnish an inclusive understanding of 
the adverse determinants influencing the health of the 
diseased person. Focusing on “person in environment”  
approach, the social worker can make a diagnosis  of the  
affects of the socio -cultural, economic and environmental 
factors affecting the psycho -social functioning of the ill 
person .22 Being  team member, a Medical Social Worker  
can assist the diseased person in managing anxiety, fear 
and stress. Social work er unlike  physician or other team 
members focuses on  holistic care in achieving the goal of 
absolute re habilitation and wellbeing of the patients.23 
Babalola et al are also of the view that a physician’s 
expertise is limited merely to address the biological 
disorders hence; a social worker will be the part of team to 
make out the psycho -social factors c ontributing to the 
disease .24 Professional Social Workers , in many healthcare 
systems  are playing crucial role in healthcare field by 
practicing distinctive “ Social Case Work ” and “ Social Group 
Work ” methods to identify and address the psycho -social 
and other non -medical determinants of health. They have a 
substantive contribution in planning and policy initiatives pertaining to the health care. They also deliver lectures in 
medical intuitions on  psycho -social determinants of 
health.25 
 
CONCLUSION/ SUMMARY  
 
The Shifting paradigm from bio -medical to bio -psycho -
social approach in healthcare setting corroborates the 
strong relationship between the health and social 
functioning. Unlike bio -medical model which confined the 
health merely to the non -existence of physical disorder in 
the body, the BPS approach believe that social and 
psychological determinants have also considerable impacts 
on health. Despite an op en acknowledgment of the need 
and efficacy of this new approach in the heal thcare, its 
application is still  quite limited. The approach has been 
considered  time consuming, expensive and far beyond the 
capability and aptitude of the health professionals who  are 
not well trained to address the psycho -social determinants. 
The physician’s expertise is limited merely to address the 
biological disorders and dealing with the psychosocial and 
other  non-medical determinants are  considered out of the  
domain of their practice. The holistic nature of BPS model 
necessitates multidisciplinary healthcare team to deal with 
the mult idimensional needs of a diseased  person. 
The Social Work as a profession with  history of 
multidisciplinary  team  work  focuses on the reduction of the 
psycho -social and environmental determinants , something  
fundamental to the well being and health consequences. 
The MSW discipline believes that psycho -social and 
environmental conditions tend to affect each other and 
requir ed to be identified and addressed effectively so as to 
comprehend the nature of illness in helping individual, 
families and communities in healthcare setting. Disease 
has been considered not only the biological disorder but a 
combination of psychological, social and environmental 
aspects which all are equally responsible for poor health 
conditions and necessary to be addressed for absolute 
recovery. This study concludes that t he interventions of 
Social work profession with its unique attributes such as 
breadth, holistic care and believe in absolute rehabilitation , 
can make the health system more responsive and 
trustworthy for the public.  
Disclaimer: The 1st author has presented this paper in the 
1st International Online Medical Sociology Annual 
Conference -2021 organized by the Bahauddin Zakariya 
University, Multan, Pakistan on January  5th, 2021.  
 
REFERENCES  
 
1. Russell  L. Sociolo gy for Health Professionals. Glasgow 
Caledonian University: SAGE Publications Ltd. 2013; 7  
2. Watson AR. René Descartes: French Mathematician and 
Philosopher. 2020 (Last updated); Encyclopedia Britannica. 
from https://www.britannica.com/biography/Rene -Descartes  
[Accessed on 19 -04-2020]  
3. Havelka M, Despot J, Luanin D. Biopsychosocial Model - The 
Integrated Approach to Health and Disease. 
Collegium  Antropologicum. 2009; 33: 1: 303 –310 
4. WHO. The WHO Constitution. New York: World Health 
Organization. 1948;1  
5. WHO Commission on Social Determinants of Health. Action 
on the social determinants of

Paradigm Shifting From Bio -Medical to Bio -Psycho -Social  
 
 
1050    P J M H S  Vol. 15, NO. 5, MAY  2021  6. Engel GL. The Need for a New Medical Model: A Challenge 
for Bio medicine. Science. 1977; 196: 4286:129 -136 
7. Lewis S. Conceptual Models of the Human Org anism: 
Towards a New Biomedical Understanding of the Individual, 
Biomedical Engineering, Trends, Research and 
Technologies. 2011; from 
http://www.intechopen.com/books/biomedical . 
8. Bio-psycho -social Model. Retrieved from http://en.wikipedia. 
org/wiki/Biopsychosocial_model . [Accessed on 18 -04-2020]  
9. Kusnanto H, Agustian D, Hilmanto D. Biopsychosocial mode l 
of illnesses in primary care: A hermeneutic literature review. J 
Family Med Prim Care 2018;7:3: 497 –500 
10. Carey TA, Mansell W, Tai SJ. A biopsychosocial model based 
on negative feedback and control. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 
2014 ;8:94:1  
11. Moser EM, Stagnaro -Green A. Teaching Behavior Change 
Concepts and Skills During the Third -Year Medicine 
Clerkship.  Academic Medicine.  2009;84:851 –58 
12. Jaini PA, Lee JS. A Review of 21st Century Utility of a 
Biopsychosocial  Model in United States Medical School 
Education. J Lifestyle Med. 2015;5:2:49:59  
13. Nadir M, Hamza M, MehmoodM. Assessing the extent of 
utilization of biopsychosocial model in doctor –patient 
interaction in public sector hospitals of a developing country. 
Indian Journal of Psychiatry.2018; 60:1:103 -108 
14. Kusnanto H, Agustian D, Hilmanto D. Biopsychosocial model 
of illnesses in primary care: A hermeneutic literature review. J 
Family Med Prim Care 2018;7:497 -500. 15. Truglio J, Graziano M, Vedanthan R, et al. Global H ealth and 
Primary care; Increasing Burden of Chronic Diseases and 
Need for Integrated Training. Mt Sinai J Med 2012;79:464 -74. 
16. Lane RD. Is it possible to bridge the Biopsychosocial and 
Biomedical models? Biopsychosoc Med 2014;8:3.  
17. Sajid I, Asad AZ. Percept ions of Medical Superintendent of 
Public Hospitals regarding factors affecting health in Punjab, 
Pakistan. J Liaquat Uni Med Health Sci. 2018;17:2:113 -6 
18. Official website of Canadian Association of Social Workers, 
http://www.casw -acts.ca/en/social -work -primary -health -care. 
19. Australian Association of Social Workers. Practice standards 
for Mental Health Social Workers. Canberra: AASW. 2008;7  
20. Austr alian Association of Social Workers. Queensland Branch 
Position Paper on the Role of Social Work in Healt h Care. 
Canberra: AASW. 2014; 15-18 
21. Cowles LAF. Social Work in the Health Field, A Care 
Perspective (2nd Ed.). New York: The Haworth Press, Inc. 
2003; 7  
22. Wayne JH. The Social Services: An Introduction. USA: F.E. 
Peacock Publishers, Inc. 1990;191  
23. Sajid I, Asad AZ. Nature and efficacy of services of Medical 
Social Services Projects (MSSPs) in healthcare field in 
Punjab, Pakistan. Rawal Medical Journal. 2017; 42:2:246 -49 
24. Babalola E, Noel P, White R. The biopsychosocial approach 
and global mental health: 0205289 Synergies and 
opportunities. Indian. J Soc Psychiatry. 2017;33:291 -6. 
25. Zastrow C. Introduction to Social Work and Social Welfare: 
Empowering people. (10th Ed.). Belmont: Brooks/Cole, 
Cengage Learning. 2010; 500 .