Multisensory Research 32 (2019) 197–213 brill.com/msr
Cross-Sensory Stimuli Modulate Reactions to Aversive
Sounds
Patrawat Samermit∗,Jeremy Saal and Nicolas Davidenko
Psychology Department, University of California, Santa Cruz, USA
Received 5 September 2018; accepted 21 February 2019
Abstract
We propose that cross-sensory stimuli presenting a positive attributable source of an aversive sound
can modulate negative reactions to the sound. In Experiment 1, participants rated original video
sources (OVS) of eight aversive sounds (e.g., nails scratching a chalkboard) as more aversive than
eight positive attributable video sources (PA VS) of those same sounds (e.g., someone playing a ﬂute)
when these videos were presented silently . In Experiment 2, new participants were presented with
those eight aversive sounds in three blocks. In Blocks 1 and 3, the sounds were presented alone; inBlock 2, four of the sounds were randomly presented concurrently with their corresponding OVS
videos, and the other four with their corresponding PA VS videos. Participants rated each sound, pre-
sented with or without video, on three scales: discomfort ,unpleasantness ,a n d bodily sensations .W e
found the concurrent presentation of videos robustly modulates participants’ reactions to the sounds:compared to the sounds alone (Block 1), concurrent presentation of PA VS videos signiﬁcantly re-duced negative reactions to the sounds, and the concurrent presentation of OVS videos signiﬁcantly
increased negative reactions, across all three scales. These effects, however, did not linger into Block
3 when the sounds were presented alone again. Our results provide novel evidence that negative re-actions to aversive sounds can be modulated through cross-sensory temporal syncing with a positiveattributable video source. Although this research was conducted with a neurotypical population, weargue that our ﬁndings have implications for the treatment of misophonia.
Keywords
Cross-modal attenuation, multisensory integration, audition, vision, emotion
1. Introduction
Imagine a person scratching his ﬁngernails on a blackboard in your lecture
hall. Most people would respond with a multitude of negative sensations in-
*To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: psamermi@ucsc.edu
©Koninklijke Brill NV , Leiden, 2019 DOI:10.1163/22134808-20191344

198 P . Samermit et al. / Multisensory Research 32 (2019) 197–213
cluding physiological responses such as cringing, shivering, and screaming,
and psychological responses such as generally feeling unpleasant and uncom-
fortable. Although there is a clinical condition known as misophonia, in whichthese reactions are marked, regular, and uncontrollable, often in reaction to
speciﬁc sounds that originate from the mouth (Jastreboff and Jastreboff, 2002),
these types of reactions are still prevalent in neurotypical populations, people
who have not been diagnosed with misophonia. However, are these reactions
the direct consequence of the auditory properties of these sounds, or could
they also be mediated by higher-level knowledge of their physical source?
Certain sounds may elicit strong negative reactions among the general pop-
ulation. For example, the sound of ﬁngernails scratching across a chalkboard,
the sound of metal scraping glass, or the sound of someone chewing or suck-
ing loudly may each produce negative emotional and physiological reactions
in different observers (Kumar et al ., 2008; Zald and Pardo, 2002). Reuter
et al . (2014) found that while aversive reactions to sounds often depended
on their physical properties, certain reactions were based on deep emotional
connections with the sound. Moreover, Thibodeau (2016) found that semanticfeatures of certain words, like ‘moist’ and its association with disgusting bod-
ily functions, was a more prominent source of people’s displeasure with the
word than its phonological properties. Thus, semantic knowledge about the
physical source of a sound may inﬂuence how we perceive the sound itself. For
example, participants rated the psychoacoustics of chalkboard squeaking as
worse when they knew the original source of the sound (chalkboard squeaks)
as compared when they were told the sound was pulled from a modern musicalcomposition (Reuter and Oehler, 2011).
Cox (2008) conducted a study to examine whether concurrently presenting
an image that is thematically related to the sound could affect how negatively
the sounds were perceived. Neurotypical participants heard horrible sounds
(e.g., nails on a chalkboard, or a screaming baby) and disgusting sounds re-
lating to human bodily functions (e.g., vomiting, eating, coughing, or spitting)
that were paired with either a thematically associated still image (e.g., scream-ing baby sound paired with screaming baby picture), an unassociated still
image (e.g., screaming baby sound paired with a picture of a lily ﬂower and
pad on a pond), or a green square as control. Results showed that the associ-
ated image made the participants perceive the horrible sounds as signiﬁcantly
more horrible than when the sound was presented with an unassociated or con-
trol image. However, the disgusting sounds were not perceived as signiﬁcantly
more or less disgusting based on the auditory–visual pairing. This ﬁnding sug-gests that some (but not all) negative reactions to sounds can be mediated by
presenting concurrent, thematically related associated visual cues.
Critically, thematically unrelated images in Cox (2008), while more pos-
itive in nature, did not drive the horrible sounds to be perceived as any less

P . Samermit et al. / Multisensory Research 32 (2019) 197–213 199
horrible than the control. Therefore, the author proposes that the effect is
driven by semantic congruence — the negative images are semantically as-
sociated with listeners’ expectations for the sound’s source, which removesambiguity around what sound they are actually hearing, while the positive im-
ages were semantically unrelated and had no effect. Cox (2008) has shown
that having horrible sounds paired with visual, semantically related imagescan increase neurotypicals’ negative responses to horrible sounds themselves,
but semantically unrelated, positive images do not decrease how horrible they
ﬁnd the sounds. This ﬁnding, which proposes a higher-level association be-tween the sound and source, and not one simply related to the valence of a
visual associate, lends itself to the question of association and attributability.
Based on this past body of research, we propose that neurotypicals’ aversive
responses to certain sounds are not driven purely by the auditory properties of
the sounds, but rather by a multisensory simulation of the sounds’ physicalsource. A large body of research supports the idea that sensory modalities are
not modular but rather information is integrated across sensory modalities as
it is processed (see Shimojo and Shams, 2001, for a review). For example, intheventriloquist effect , the perceived spatial source of a sound is inﬂuenced
by audio-visually synced movements, such that people perceive the sound as
coming from a dummy’s mouth rather than from the ventriloquist (Alais andBurr, 2004).
Studies on visual-auditory interactions have indicated that the temporal syn-
chronization of visual and auditory information creates a stronger integration
of the two sources. Sekuler et al. (1997) showed that ambiguous visual mo-
tion can be reinterpreted when synced with a correctly-timed sound. In thebounce–pass illusion, two identical disks move towards each other and cross,
with the motion interpreted as passing over each other and continuing in their
original directions. However, when a sound such as a click is synced at or nearthe point where these two disks cross each other, participants perceive the two
disks bouncing off each other and moving in an opposite direction than they
were moving before the moment they cross. Critically, the synchronization ofthe auditory click and the visual merging of the two disks signiﬁcantly pre-
dicts the perception of a bounce, indicating that integrated visual cues may be
understood as an attributable source of a sound and reinterpreted as such.
Similarly, in the McGurk effect, the same auditory phoneme, /ba/, is per-
ceived as /da/ when participants view the lips synchronously creating thephoneme /ga/ (McGurk and MacDonald, 1976). Additionally, a follow-up
study on the McGurk effect explored the role of temporal synchrony of the vi-
sual and auditory cues on the perceptions of phonemes (Munhall et al., 1996).
Results showed that an exact temporal synchrony between the visual and audi-
tory cues is not necessary for the effect to arise, but when the two cues were in

200 P . Samermit et al. / Multisensory Research 32 (2019) 197–213
perfect temporal synchrony, the McGurk effect was strongest. Temporal syn-
chronization, as in the McGurk effect, lends itself to stronger attribution of
sound coming from the visual source.
However, the role of an attributable and synchronized video source on the
perception of an aversive sound has yet to be investigated in a neurotypical
population. With Cox’s (2008) ﬁndings indicating a thematically related imagecan make a perceived sound worse for neurotypicals, it is worth investigating
what a dynamic video of an attributable source of the sound can do, where the
auditory and visual cues are temporally synced. In particular, does viewing apositive attributable source for an aversive sound help reduce neurotypicals’
negative visceral and emotional reactions to the sound?
The present experiments examine whether presenting sounds synced with
either the original video source (OVS) or a positive attributable video source
(PA VS) differentially affects observers’ responses to these sounds. Unlike Cox(2008), who only examined the semantic association between a thematically
related visual image and sound, our experiments utilize videos that are time-
synced to the sounds. The videos, then, function as an attributable sourcefor the sound, allowing for more cohesive visual–auditory integration and a
greater opportunity for change in the sound’s perceived qualities. The dy-
namic aspect of the video, which is temporally synced to the sound, makesthis attribution possible in a way that is similar to the McGurk effect, bounce–
pass illusion, or other auditory–visual illusions. Our study goes beyond high-
level semantic associations through a still image, and grounds the integration
temporally through videos. We hypothesize that concurrent presentation of a
PA VS video will attenuate negative responses to aversive sounds, whereas con-current presentation of the OVS video will increase the negative responses,
relative to hearing the sounds alone.
To test this, we conducted two experiments. In Experiment 1, participants
watched 16 silent videos (the eight OVS videos that produced the eight aver-
sive sounds, as well as eight PA VS videos that could plausibly produce the
same sounds; see Supplementary Videos) and provided three behavioral rat-ings following each short ∼5-s silent video: how uncomfortable the video
made them feel, how unpleasant it was, and the intensity of any felt bodily
sensations . In Experiment 2, a different group of participants completed three
blocks where they rated each of the eight aversive sounds on the same discom-
fort, unpleasantness, and bodily sensation scales, now asking how each sound
made them feel. Participants were asked to rate each sound alone in the block
1 (pre-video) and block 3 (post-video). In block 2 (concurrent video), half of
the sounds were presented with their associated OVS video, and the other halfwere presented with their associated PA VS video, showing an alternative, less
aversive potential source of the sound.

P . Samermit et al. / Multisensory Research 32 (2019) 197–213 201
We predicted that PA VS-paired aversive sounds would reduce ratings of
discomfort, unpleasantness, and intensity of felt bodily sensations compared
to sounds presented alone in block 1, whereas OVS-paired sounds would in-
crease these ratings. We also predicted that there might be a lingering effect
of the sound–video pairings, manifesting as lower ratings on the PA VS-paired
sounds compared to OVS-paired sounds even when presented with no video
in block 3.
2. Experiment 1: Reactions to Silent Videos
2.1. Participants
Twenty-three undergraduate students (16 female, 7 male; mean age =20 years
old) from the University of California, Santa Cruz psychology research pool
completed an online experiment in exchange for course credit. Participantswere required to sign a consent form that indicated they could stop the study
at any time should they feel uncomfortable. None of the participants reported
being diagnosed with misophonia or tinnitus.
2.2. MaterialsParticipants were presented with 16 silent videos (averaging 5 s each). Eight of
the videos were demonstrations of actions that produced aversive sounds that
induce negative emotional and visceral responses. The eight original video
sources (OVS) were: (1) A knife grating on glass, (2) a chalk screeching on a
chalkboard, (3) nails scratching a chalkboard, (4) a person rubbing a balloon to
make it squeak, (5) a dry marker on paper, (6) someone loudly chewing/suck-
ing on hard candy, (7) a fork scratching glass and (8) someone popping theirﬁngers loudly. We ﬁlmed some of these events ourselves (e.g., rubbing a bal-
loon, dry marker on paper, knife and fork scratching glass) and found other
events on YouTube.
We generated the other eight positive attributable video sources (PA VS) that
could provide a plausible alternative source for each of the aversive sounds.
For example, for the sound of someone scratching their nails on a chalkboard,the PA VS video showed a person tearing a sheet of paper in sync with the nails
being dragged on the board. To construct PA VS, we created or found videos
of events that could plausibly produce the eight aversive sounds but involvedless grating actions. These PA VS (respective to the eight OVS listed above)
included: (1) a bird chirping, (2) a man playing a wooden ﬂute, (3) paper being
torn in half, (4) a cricket visibly chirping with its wings moving back and forthquickly, (5) a bunny licking another bunny, (6) someone handling rocks, (7) a
child jumping on a bed, and (8) someone tapping a pencil on a table. The eight
OVS videos, eight PA VS videos, and eight sounds used in these experimentsare all available for download as Supplementary Videos.

202 P . Samermit et al. / Multisensory Research 32 (2019) 197–213
2.3. Measures
Three 7-point scales were used to assess the participants’ reaction to each
silent video: a discomfort scale, an unpleasantness scale, and a bodily sen-sation scale. The discomfort scale measured participants’ affective feeling
toward the video, ranging from 1 indicating comfortable to 7 indicating un-comfortable. The unpleasantness scale measured participants’ general per-
ception of the video, where 1 indicated pleasant, and 7 indicated unpleasant.Finally, the bodily sensation measured the intensity of any bodily experienceswhen listening to the video, with 1 being ‘None at all’ and 7 being ‘Very in-tense’. Participants were presented with these three scales, in the same order,after every video.
At the end of the study, participants were given a debrieﬁng question-
naire asking about their general experiences with positive and negative sounds,
autonomous sensory meridian response (ASMR), and whether they have ex-perienced symptoms of tinnitus or misophonia (no participants did).
2.4. Procedure
Participants were asked to sign a consent form prior to participating in the
study. They were then presented with instructions and watched the 16 silentvideos in random order, and were asked to provide ratings on the three scalesbased on their reaction to each video. At the end of the study, the participantscompleted the debrieﬁng questionnaire. The procedure took approximately tenminutes.
2.5. ResultsTo compare the differences between ratings for OVS and PA VS silent videos,
we conducted paired-samples t-tests between each of the three types of rat-
ings for OVS versus PA VS videos. Across all three scales, participants ratedthe OVS videos as signiﬁcantly more negative than the paired PA VS videos(Fig. 1). Mean discomfort ratings were signiﬁcantly higher for OVS videos(M: 4.45, SE: 0.17) than PA VS videos ( M: 3.30, SE: 0.18; t(22)=5.99,p<
0.00001); similarly, mean unpleasantness ratings were signiﬁcantly higher
for OVS videos (M: 4.59, SE: 0.15) than PA VS videos ( M: 3.36, SE: 0.14;
t(22)=8.20,p< 0.00001); ﬁnally, mean bodily sensation ratings were sig-
niﬁcantly higher for OVS videos ( M: 3.25, SE: 0.24) than PA VS videos ( M:
2.57, SE: 0.18; t(22)=3.92,p=0.0007).
To account for variability in the use of the scales across participants, we also
computed normalized responses across participants by subtracting the meanand dividing by the standard deviation of each participant’s responses in each
scale. Across all three normalized scales, participants rated OVS videos as
signiﬁcantly more negative than their respective PA VS videos. Mean normal-ized discomfort ratings were signiﬁcantly higher for OVS videos than PA VS

P . Samermit et al. / Multisensory Research 32 (2019) 197–213 203
Figure 1. Mean responses across 23 participants in Experiment 1 to silent videos across three
7-point scales: discomfort, unpleasantness, and bodily sensations. Higher values indicate morenegative responses. Original (OVS) videos are shown in red and positive (PA VS) videos areshown in blue. Error bars indicate standard error of the mean across participants.
videos ( t(22)=6.67,p<0.000001); similarly for mean normalized unpleas-
antness ratings ( t(22)=9.43,p< 0.00000001), and for mean normalized
bodily sensation ratings ( t(22)=4.04,p=0.0005). Thus, the results based
on the normalized scales are nearly identical to those based on the raw scales.
Finally, to determine whether the three scales are assessing independent in-
formation, we computed pairwise correlations among the three scales based
on each participant’s mean rating on each scale. We found that discomfortand unpleasantness were positively correlated across participants ( r=0.84,
p< 0.00001), but bodily sensation ratings were not correlated with either
discomfort ( r=0.24,p=0.26) or unpleasantness ( r=0.35,p=0.1). For
clarity, we report results for all three measures separately in subsequent anal-yses, but note that the discomfort and unpleasantness scales appear to beinterpreted similarly by participants.
2.6. Discussion
The results of Experiment 1 show that the silent OVS videos were perceived
as more negative and elicited more intense bodily sensations than the silentPA VS videos. This was evident across all three scales. Overall, these data
validate that our PA VS videos were less aversive than the OVS videos that pro-
duced each aversive sound. In Experiment 2, the eight aversive sounds werepresented alone or paired with an OVS or PA VS video to test whether the con-current presentation of an attributable source decreases (for PA VS videos) or
increases (for OVS videos) the negative visceral and emotional response.

204 P . Samermit et al. / Multisensory Research 32 (2019) 197–213
3. Experiment 2: Reactions to OVS- and PA VS-Paired Sounds
3.1. ParticipantsForty undergraduate students (32 female, 8 male; mean age =20 years old)
from the University of California, Santa Cruz psychology research pool par-
ticipated in exchange for course credit. Participants were required to sign a
consent form indicating they were informed that in the experiment they wouldhear possibly unpleasant noises that may cause feelings of anxiety and thatthey could leave at any point.
3.2. MaterialsWe used the eight aversive sounds corresponding to the eight OVS videos
described above: (1) A knife grating on glass, (2) chalk screeching on a chalk-
board, (3) nails on a chalkboard, (4) a person rubbing a balloon so it squeaks,(5) a dry marker on paper, (6) someone loudly chewing/sucking on hard candy,(7) a fork scratching glass and (8) someone popping their ﬁngers loudly. Fig-ure 2 shows spectrograms for each of the eight sounds, a still image of the
OVS video, and a still image of the PA VS video (see Supplementary Videos to
view and hear the eight OVS and eight PA VS videos).
3.3. MeasuresThe same measures were collected in Experiment 2 as in Experiment 1, with
one important difference: rather than rating the videos, participants were askedto rate the sounds that were presented with or without an accompanying video.
At the end of the study, participants were given a debrieﬁng questionnaire
asking about their general experiences with positive and negative sounds,autonomous sensory meridian response (ASMR), and whether they have ex-perienced symptoms of tinnitus or misophonia (no participants did).
3.4. ProcedureParticipants were asked to sign a consent form before beginning the exper-
iment. They were then read the instructions and presented with the three
practice trials in order to familiarize them with the pleasantness, comfort, andbodily sensation scales. Participants were asked to rate each sound alone inblock 1 (pre-video) and block 3 (post-video). In block 2 (concurrent video),half of the sounds were presented with their associated OVS video, and the
other half were presented with their associated PA VS video, showing an al-
ternative, less aversive potential source of the sound. The assignment of eachsound to an OVS or PA VS video in the second block, as well as the presen-tation order of sounds within each block, was randomized across participants.
Each participant was only exposed to one video per sound. Subjects were in-
structed to rate each sound they were presented with in each block, regardless

P . Samermit et al. / Multisensory Research 32 (2019) 197–213 205
Figure 2. Audio spectrograms, original video source (OVS), and positive attributable video
source (PA VS) videos for the eight sounds used in Experiment 1.

206 P . Samermit et al. / Multisensory Research 32 (2019) 197–213
of whether or not a video was presented concurrently. Finally, participants
completed a short questionnaire and were debriefed about the study.
3.5. ResultsTo compare the differences between responses to OVS-paired and PA VS-
paired sounds, we computed pairwise t-tests between responses in block 1
(sound only), block 2 (sound concurrent with video), and block 3 (sound only),separately for the three scales. Because participants rated only four sounds ineach condition on each scale, there was not enough within-participant variabil-ity in the responses to compute reliable normalized ratings, as in Experiment
1, so we report only results based on raw ratings on the 1–7 scale.
Across each of the three scales, we found that concurrent presentation of
OVS videos signiﬁcantly increased negative reactions to sounds (comparedto pre- and post-video baselines), whereas concurrent presentation of PA VSvideos signiﬁcantly reduced negative reactions to the sounds (see Figs 3, 4,and 5). First, average discomfort ratings to OVS-paired sounds were 5.42 (SE:
0.11) when presented with the video, signiﬁcantly higher than both the pre-
video baseline ( M: 4.97; SE: 0.12; t(39)=4.26,p=0.0001) and the post-
video baseline ( M: 5.05; SE: 0.12; t(39)=3.36,p=0.002; see Figure 3).
Conversely, average discomfort ratings to PA VS-paired sounds were 4.77 (SE:0.11) when presented with the video, signiﬁcantly lower than the pre-videobaseline ( M: 5.09; SE: 0.09; t(39)=3.93,p=0.0003) and marginally lower
than the post-video baseline ( M: 4.93, SE: 0.11; t(39)=1.83,p=0.08).
A similar pattern of results was observed for ratings of unpleasantness
(Fig. 4). Average unpleasantness ratings to OVS-paired sounds were 5.59 (SE:
Figure 3. Discomfort ratings to aversive sound before (left), during (middle), and following
(right) pairing with synced OVS (red) and PA VS (blue) videos. Each bar denotes the averagerating on the 7-point discomfort scale across 40 participants’ responses, and error bars indicatethe standard error of the mean across participants.

P . Samermit et al. / Multisensory Research 32 (2019) 197–213 207
Figure 4. Unpleasantness ratings to aversive sounds before (left), during (middle), and fol-
lowing (right) pairing with synced OVS (red) and PA VS (blue) videos. Each bar denotes theaverage rating on the 7-point unpleasantness scale across 40 participants’ responses, and error
bars indicate the standard error of the mean across participants.
Figure 5. Ratings of bodily sensations to aversive sounds before (left), during (middle), and
following (right) pairing with synced OVS (red) and PA VS (blue) videos. Each bar denotes theaverage rating on the 7-point bodily sensation scale across 40 participants’ responses, and errorbars indicate the standard error of the mean across participants.
0.11) when presented with the video, signiﬁcantly higher than both the pre-
video baseline ( M: 5.13; SE: 0.13; t(39)=4.73,p=0.00003) and the post-
video baseline ( M: 5.26; SE: 0.13; t(39)=4.12,p=0.0002). Conversely,
average unpleasantness ratings to PA VS-paired sounds were 5.04 (SE: 0.11)
when presented with the video, marginally lower than both the pre-video base-line (M: 5.21; SE: 0.11; t(39)=1.85,p=0.07) and the post-video baseline
(M: 5.18, SE: 0.13; t(39)=1.72,p=0.09).

208 P . Samermit et al. / Multisensory Research 32 (2019) 197–213
Finally, the ratings of the intensity of bodily sensations to the sounds were
also inﬂuenced by the concurrent presentation of OVS or PA VS videos (Fig. 5).
Average bodily sensation ratings to OVS-paired sounds were 4.18 (SE: 0.21)
when presented with the video, signiﬁcantly higher than both the pre-videobaseline ( M: 3.60; SE: 0.18; t(39)=3.96,p=0.0003) and the post-video
baseline ( M: 3.60; SE: 0.22; t(39)=3.58,p=0.0009). Conversely, average
bodily sensation ratings to PA VS-paired sounds were 3.26 (SE: 0.18) when
presented with the video, signiﬁcantly lower than the pre-video baseline ( M:
3.59; SE: 0.21; t(39)=2.42,p=0.02). Interestingly, the post-video ratings
of bodily sensations for PA VS-paired sounds remained low ( M: 3.33, SE: 0.19)
and were not signiﬁcantly different from the during-video ratings ( t(39)=
0.57,p> 0.5). In fact, the post-video ratings of PA VS-paired sounds were
marginally lower than the pre-video ratings ( t(39)=1.91,p=0.06), hinting
at a potential lingering effect of pairing positive attributable video sources with
aversive sounds on subsequent bodily sensations to the sounds alone.
3.6. Discussion
Overall, when aversive sounds were paired with their OVS videos, participants
rated the sounds as producing more discomfort, being more unpleasant, and
causing more intense bodily sensations than when they were presented alone.
Conversely, when the same sounds were paired with their PA VS videos, par-ticipants rated them as producing less discomfort, being less unpleasant, and
causing less intense bodily sensations than when they were presented alone.
These ﬁndings support our ﬁrst prediction that presenting synced attributable
source videos with aversive sounds can modulate negative visceral and emo-
tional responses. However, we did not ﬁnd consistent evidence supporting oursecond prediction that these effects would linger into the post-video block.
Only in one case (bodily sensation ratings on PA VS-paired sounds) did this
lingering effect approach signiﬁcance.
4. General Discussion
These experiments aimed to test whether an attributable visual source that was
temporally synced with an aversive sound, such as the original video sourcefor the sounds or a positive attributable video source (PA VS), could mediate
neurotypicals’ negative visceral and emotional reactions. Neurotypicals expe-
rience automatic negative emotional and visceral responses associated with
some sounds such as nails on a chalkboard (Kumar et al ., 2008; Zald and
Pardo, 2002). It has been shown that images that are visually associated withhorrible sounds reliably make people perceive the sounds themselves as more

P . Samermit et al. / Multisensory Research 32 (2019) 197–213 209
horrible than visually unassociated images or a control (Cox, 2008). Addition-
ally, cross-modal literature has illustrated that visual cues can be more power-
fully integrated with auditory cues if they are temporally synced (Munhall et
al., 1996; Sekuler et al., 1997).
Since cross-modal associations may play a role in the high-level perception
of sound, we hypothesized that upon the presentation of a temporally synced
positive attributable visual source, participants would have lower discom-
fort ratings, lower unpleasantness ratings, and less intense bodily sensations,
whereas viewing the original video source would increase discomfort and
unpleasantness ratings, and cause more intense bodily sensations comparedto pre-test ratings of the sound. After validating the PA VS videos were less
averise in Experiment 1, the ﬁndings of Experiment 2 support our hypothesis.
These results indicate that neurotypicals’ negative responses to everyday, aver-
sive sounds may be momentarily attenuated by syncing positive attributable
videos to the sounds. While the mechanism of these ﬁndings is still untested,
our results suggest there is some type of visual–auditory integration occurring
in the high-level perception of the sound. This may be due to a learned se-mantic association between the sound itself and its physical source, similar to
people’s perception of the word ‘moist’ (Thibodeau, 2016). This ﬁnding points
towards a more complicated multimodal integration than may be predicted if
visual and auditory cues were simply combined in an additive way.
In Experiment 2, we found that there was no statistically signiﬁcant dif-
ference between the bodily sensation ratings during the video and post-video.
Although the post-video and pre-video ratings were only marginally different,the data suggest that if participants were exposed repeatedly to pairings be-
tween the sounds and the PA VS videos, it could produce longer-term effects
when sounds are heard alone.
We acknowledge an important limitation of our study is that we did not ask
participants to rate the plausibility of the PA VS videos as being attributable
sources for the sounds. It could be the case that PA VS videos were perceived as
less attributable than OVS videos. If this is the case, the reduction in negativeratings to the PA VS-paired sounds may have been driven by another mecha-
nism, such as participants being distracted by apparent lack of attributability,
and this distraction reduced negative reactions. Assuming our PA VS videos at-
tenuated negative emotional and visceral responses due to their attributability,
a future control study could be run using positive videos that are not tempo-
rally synced or semantically related to the sound. If attributability does play a
role, then temporally unsynced PA VS and semantically unrelated PA VS wouldnot attenuate the negative responses compared to temporally synced and at-
tributable PA VS from Experiment 2.
One possible mechanism may be the construction of a mental simulation of
the sound’s attributable source from the visual cue. Speciﬁcally, higher-level

210 P . Samermit et al. / Multisensory Research 32 (2019) 197–213
associations from the positive visual cues may down-modulate the perception
of the original acoustic signals. Aversive sounds such as nails on a chalkboard,
the sound of metal scraping glass, or someone chewing and sucking on objectscause higher activation of the amygdala and auditory cortex compared to simi-
lar but non-aversive sounds (Mirz et al., 2000; Viinikainen, Kätsyri and Sams,
2012; Zald and Pardo, 2002). Kumar et al. (2012) found that the amygdala
encodes not only the acoustic features of a sound stimulus, but also its va-
lence, such as the sound’s perceived unpleasantness. The perceived valence of
a sound — its pleasantness or unpleasantness — provides feedback back to the
auditory cortex, down-regulating the listener’s perception of the sound itself.They conclude that the amygdala augments the representation of a sound’s va-
lence, making it so that a listener more readily and consciously registers the
perception of an emotionally salient stimuli.
Additionally, Irwin et al. (2011) determined that the neural responses to nat-
ural sounds, such as a urban soundscapes, in the amygdala, posterior insula,
and posterior auditory cortex are modulated by how pleasant or unpleasant the
sound is perceived. Their results support a model of sound processing wheretwo streams of information — one for acoustic signals, and one for processing
emotional content — interact with each other to inform the holistic percep-
tion of a sound. The synced visual information may provide additional clues
to the valence of the sound, creating a stronger ‘positive’ modulation of the
perception of the sound itself and causing the sound to be perceived as less
unpleasant overall.
While most of us experience some negative reactions to certain sounds (like
nails scratching a chalkboard), those with clinically signiﬁcant misophonia ex-
perience more extreme reactions that may make them feel disgust, anxiety,
anger, and even a desire to harm those producing the sounds (Edelstein et al.,
2013). Sometimes these reactions are paired with a visceral ‘ﬁght-or-ﬂight’
response that manifests as pressure in the chest and head, tightened muscles,
increased heart rate and body temperature, and even physical pain when indi-
viduals are exposed to trigger sounds (Edelstein et al., 2013; Schröder et al.,
2013). Misophonic responses are not necessarily related to physical properties
of a trigger sound, such as its loudness or timbre (Jastreboff and Jastreboff,
2014), but rather linked to higher-order features of the sound such as its mean-
ing, social context, and interpretation (Bruxner, 2016; Schröder et al., 2013).
It has been suggested that misophonia’s negative visceral and emotional re-
sponse to speciﬁc trigger sounds is similar but opposite to the autonomous
sensory meridian response (ASMR). ASMR is a phenomenon in which indi-viduals experience feelings of relaxation and well-being accompanied with a
tingling sensation across the scalp, back of the neck, and other areas when
they perceive speciﬁc audio-visual triggers (Barratt and Davis, 2015; Taylor,
2014). ASMR is not considered a clinical disorder, but can be experienced

P . Samermit et al. / Multisensory Research 32 (2019) 197–213 211
by the general population. Unlike people who experience misophonia, people
who experience ASMR actively seek out audio-visual triggers such as videos
of whispering into a microphone and the sound of squishing soft materials orgiving massages (Barratt and Davis, 2015). However, McErlean and Banissy
(2018) indicated that those who self-report experiencing ASMR also report
having more misophonic symptoms as compared to a control group. The au-
thors indicate that this ﬁnding is in agreement with Barratt and Davis (2015)’s
suggestion that misophonia and ASMR exist across a valenced spectrum of
sound sensitivity. Perhaps these similar, yet distinct, emotional and physio-
logical experiences are both related to cross-modal associations that up- anddown-regulate the perception of a sound’s valence. However, to examine this
relationship, future research needs to examine the mechanism for and linger-
ing durability of PA VS’s attenuation effect.
We do not know whether visual–auditory integration may mediate clini-
cal misophonics’ responses in the same way as in neurotypicals. Even if the
attributability of sounds does play a role, new visual sources may still not be
effective in misophonics if their associations to the aversive sounds are alreadyoverlearned across limbic and autonomic areas that control their perception of
sounds (Jastreboff and Jastreboff, 2014). However, research has shown that
misophonic responses have an onset in childhood and get worse over time
(Kumar et al., 2014; Rouw and Erfanian, 2018; Schröder et al., 2013), which
lends itself to the idea that cross-modal associations are susceptible to plastic-
ity across the cortex (Shimojo and Shams, 2001).
Our ﬁndings, paired with future research on the mechanism behind the
cross-modal attenuation, may serve as a basis for therapeutic relief from se-
vere misophonic responses. Currently, there are several proposed therapies for
treating misophonia, largely based on clinical experience and case reports.
Tinnitus retraining therapy involves adding noise to the environment using a
wearable sound generator, and many misophonics prefer to altogether leave or
avoid a situation where a trigger sound may exist (Edelstein et al., 2013; Jas-
treboff and Jastreboff, 2014). This form of therapy is seen as a sophisticatedversion of avoidance therapy, which can lead to reduced quality of life. Addi-
tionally, case studies have found that cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) has
positively affected misophonics’ negative reactions (Bernstein et al ., 2013;
Dozier, 2015). Schröder et al . (2017) conducted a mid-scale study ﬁnding
CBT methods, such as attentionally shifting focus away from the sound, coun-
terconditioning, stimulus manipulation, and relaxation exercises, effective in
nearly half the patients over eight bi-weekly sessions. Part of the reframingprocess of cognitive behavioral therapy was stimulus manipulation, where a
pleasant unconditioned stimulus (e.g., a positive video or image) would be
repeatedly presented with a conditioned stimulus (e.g., a video of someone
chewing). Unlike our design, these positive unconditioned stimuli are not

212 P . Samermit et al. / Multisensory Research 32 (2019) 197–213
attributable to the sound. The temporal syncing of the sound with positive
attributability may help increase the likelihood of success in this therapeutic
process.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge the contributions of John Collins in
the preparation of these studies, and of Nick Antrilli in the preparation of this
manuscript.
Supplementary Material
Supplementary material is available online at:
https://brill.ﬁgshare.com/s/154fe0137a60121c0bcf
References
Alais, D. and Burr, D. (2004). The ventriloquist effect results from near-optimal bimodal inte-
gration, Curr. Biol. 14, 257–262.
Barratt, E. L. and Davis, N. J. (2015). Autonomous sensory meridian response (ASMR): a ﬂow-
like mental state, PeerJ 3, e851. DOI:10.7717/peerj.851.
Bernstein, R. E., Angell, K. L. and Dehle, C. M. (2013). A brief course of cognitive behavioural
therapy for the treatment of misophonia: a case example, Cogn. Behav. Therap. 6, e10.
DOI:10.1017/S1754470X13000172.
Bruxner, G. (2016). ‘Mastication rage’: a review of misophonia — an under-recognised symp-
tom of psychiatric relevance?, Australas. Psychiat. 24, 195–197.
Cox, T. J. (2008). The effect of visual stimuli on the horribleness of awful sounds, Appl. Acoust.
69, 691–703.
Dozier, T. H. (2015). Counterconditioning treatment for misophonia, Clin. Case Stud. 14, 374–
387.
Edelstein, M., Brang, D., Rouw, R. and Ramachandran, V . S. (2013). Misophonia: physiological
investigations and case descriptions, Front. Hum. Neurosci. 7, 296. DOI:10.3389/fnhum.
2013.00296.
Irwin, A., Hall, D. A., Peters, A. and Plack, C. J. (2011). Listening to urban soundscapes:
physiological validity of perceptual dimensions, Psychophysiology 48, 258–268.
Jastreboff, M. M. and Jastreboff, P. J. (2002). Decreased sound tolerance and tinnitus retraining
therapy (TRT), A u s t .N .Z .J .A u d i o l . 24, 74–84.
Jastreboff, P. J. and Jastreboff, M. M. (2014). Treatments for decreased sound tolerance (hyper-
acusis and misophonia), Semin. Hear. 35, 105–120.
Kumar, S., Forster, H. M., Bailey, P. and Grifﬁths, T. D. (2008). Mapping unpleasantness of
sounds to their auditory representation, The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America
124, 3810–3817.
Kumar, S., von Kriegstein, K., Friston, K. and Grifﬁths, T. D. (2012). Features versus feelings:
dissociable representations of the acoustic features and valence of aversive sounds, J. Neu-
rosci. 32, 14184–14192.

P . Samermit et al. / Multisensory Research 32 (2019) 197–213 213
Kumar, S., Hancock, O., Cope, T., Sedley, W., Winston, J. and Grifﬁths, T. D. (2014). Misopho-
nia: a disorder of emotion processing of sounds, J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiat. 85, P023.
DOI:10.1136/jnnp-2014-308883.38.
McErlean, A. B. J. and Banissy, M. J. (2018). Increased misophonia in self-reported au-
tonomous sensory meridian response, PeerJ 6, e5351. DOI:10.7717/peerj.5351.
McGurk, H. and MacDonald, J. (1976). Hearing lips and seeing voices, Nature 264, 746–748.
Mirz, F., Gjedde, A., Sdkilde-Jrgensen, H. and Pedersen, C. B. (2000). Functional brain imaging
of tinnitus-like perception induced by aversive auditory stimuli, Neuroreport 11, 633–637.
Munhall, K. G., Gribble, P., Sacco, L. and Ward, M. (1996). Temporal constraints on the
McGurk effect, Percept. Psychophys. 58, 351–362.
Reuter, C. and Oehler, M. (2011). Psychoacoustics of chalkboard squeaking, J. Acoust. Soc.
Am.130, 2545.
Reuter, C., Oehler, M. and Mühlhans, J. (2014). Physiological and acoustical correlates of
unpleasant sounds, in: Proceedings of the Joint Conference ICMPC13-APSCOM5 . Yonsei
University, Seoul, Korea, p. 97.
Rouw, R. and Erfanian, M. (2018). A large-scale study of misophonia, J. Clin. Psychol. 74,
453–479.
Schröder, A., Vulink, N. and Denys, D. (2013). Misophonia: diagnostic criteria for a new psy-
chiatric disorder, PloS One 8(1), e54706. DOI:10.1371/journal.pone.0054706.
Schröder, A. E., Vulink, N. C., van Loon, A. J. and Denys, D. A. (2017). Cognitive behavioral
therapy is effective in misophonia: an open trial, J. Affect. Disord. 217, 289–294.
Sekuler, R., Sekuler, A. B. and Lau, R. (1997). Sound alters visual motion perception, Nature
384, 308.
Shimojo, S. and Shams, L. (2001). Sensory modalities are not separate modalities: plasticity
and interactions, Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 11, 505–509.
Taylor, V . (2014). Youtube videos trigger tingling ‘brain orgasms’ in ASMR practitioners. Avail-
able from http://www.nydailynews.com/.
Thibodeau, P. H. (2016). A moist crevice for word aversion: in semantics not sounds, PloS One
11, e0153686. DOI:10.1371/journal.pone.0153686.
Viinikainen, M., Kätsyri, J. and Sams, M. (2012). Representation of perceived sound valence in
the human brain, Hum. Brain Mapp. 33, 2295–2305.
Zald, D. H. and Pardo, J. V . (2002). The neural correlates of aversive auditory stimulation,
Neuroimage 16, 746–753.

Copyright
of
Multisensory
Research
is
the
property
of
Brill
Academic
Publishers
and
its
content
may
not
be
copied
or
emailed
to
multiple
sites
or
posted
to
a
listserv
without
the
copyright
holder's
express
written
permission.
However,
users
may
print,
download,
or
email
articles
for
individual
use.