Foranyissueswiththisdocument, pleasecontactyourlibrary.
____________________________________________________________________________________
Title:Hearingresearch.
ArticleTitle: Towardcognitive modelsofmisophonia
ArticleAuthor: Savard
Pages:109184-
OCLC-38900588; ISSN-03785955; LCN-2002238959;
Publisher: 2025-01-01
Source:LibKeyNomad
Copyright: CCG
____________________________________________________________________________________
NOTICE CONCERNING COPYRIGHT RESTRICTIONS:
Thecopyright lawoftheUnitedStates[Title17,UnitedStatesCode] governsthemakingofphotocopies
orotherreproductions ofcopyrighted materials.
Undercertainconditions specified inthelaw,librariesandarchivesareauthorized tofurnisha
photocopy orotherreproduction. Oneofthesespecificconditions isthatthephotocopy isnottobe
"usedforanypurposeotherthanprivatestudy,scholarship, orresearch." Ifausermakesarequestfor,or
lateruses,aphotocopy orreproduction forpurposes inexcessof"fairuse,"thatusermaybeliablefor
copyright infringement.
Thisinstitution reservestherighttorefusetoacceptacopyingorderif,initsjudgment, fulfillment of
thatorderwouldinvolveviolation ofcopyright law.

Journal Pre-proof
Toward cognitive models of misophonia
Marie-Anick Savard, Emily B.J. Coffey
PII: S0378-5955(25)00003-6
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heares.2025.109184
Reference: HEARES 109184
To appear in: Hearing Research
Received date : 25 November 2024
Revised date : 23 December 2024
Accepted date : 6 January 2025
Please cite this article as: M.-A. Savard and E.B.J. Coffey, Toward cognitive models of
misophonia. Hearing Research (2025), doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heares.2025.109184.
This is a PDF file of an article that has undergone enhancements after acceptance, such as the
addition of a cover page and metadata, and formatting for readability, but it is not yet the definitive
version of record. This version will undergo additional copyediting, typesetting and review before it
is published in its final form, but we are providing this version to give early visibility of the article.
Please note that, during the production process, errors may be discovered which could affect the
content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
©2025 Published by Elsevier B.V .

Journal Pre-proofJournal Pre-proof
Toward cognitive models of misophonia
Marie-Anick Savarda,b,c, Emily B.J. Coffeya,b,c
aDepartment of Psychology, Concordia University, Montreal, QC, Canada
bInternational Laboratory for Brain, Music and Sound Research (BRAMS), Montreal, QC, Canada
cCentre for Research on Brain, Language and Music (CRBLM), Montreal, QC, Canada
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords :
misophonia
cognitive science
cognitive neuroscience
sound sensitivity
modelsABSTRACT
Misophonia is a disorder in which specific common sounds such as another person breathing or
chewing,orthetickingofaclock,causeanatypicalnegativeemotionalresponse.Affectedindividuals
mayexperienceanger,irritability,annoyance,disgust,andanxiety,aswellasphysiologicalautonomic
responses, and may find everyday environments and contexts to be unbearable in which their ‘miso-
phonicstimuli’(oftencalled‘triggersounds’)arepresent.Misophoniaisgraduallybeingrecognized
as a genuine problem that causes significant distress and has negative consequences for individuals
and their families. It has only recently come under scientific scrutiny, as researchers and clinicians
are establishing its prevalence, distinguishing it from other disorders of sensory sensitivity such
as hyperacusis, establishing its neurobiological bases, and evaluating the effectiveness of potential
treatments.Whileideasaboundastothemechanismsinvolvedinmisophonia,fewhavecoalescedinto
models. The aim of the present work is to summarize and extend recent thinking on the mechanistic
basis of misophonia, with a focus on moving towards neurologically-informed cognitive models that
cana)accountforextantfindings,andb)generatetestablepredictions.Wehopethisworkwillfacilitate
future refinements in our understanding of misophonia, and ultimately inform treatments.
1. Introduction
Misophonia is a disorder of decreased sound toler-
ance (Swedo et al., 2022) involving hypersensitivity to
specific sounds (e.g., eating, sniffing, or clicking; Brout
et al., 2018; Jastreboff and Jastreboff, 2014; Schröder et al.,
2013). The sounds are typically referred to as ‘misophonic
sounds/stimuli’ (or ‘trigger sounds’), and generate a ‘miso-
phonic response’ characterized by a strong negative emo-
tionalstateandheightenedphysiologicalresponsivity(Brout
etal.,2018).Peoplewithmisophoniamayexperienceanger,
irritability, annoyance, disgust, and anxiety, as well as
physiological autonomic responses. As affected individuals
often find everyday environments and contexts in which
triggers are present to be unbearable, misophonia can cause
significant distress and has negative consequences for indi-
viduals and their families. It has only recently come under
scientific scrutiny, as researchers and clinicians are estab-
lishingitsprevalence, distinguishingitfromotherdisorders
of sensory sensitivity such as hyperacusis, establishing its
neurobiological bases, and evaluating the effectiveness of
potential treatments.
The emerging picture is that misophonia is a complex
neurophysiological condition (Brout et al., 2018; Cavanna
and Seri, 2015) with an auditory focus that is distinct from
related sensory sensitivity problems and causes significant
negativeconsequencesforasurprisinglylargeproportionof
the general population. While we have made considerable
progressindocumentingandcharacterizingmisophonia,the
theoretical framework surrounding misophonia’s neurobio-
logical and cognitive basis is not yet well-developed. In ef-
fect,thisfieldlacksmodels.Modelscanaccelerateprogress
∗Corresponding author
emily.coffey@concordia.ca (E.B.J. Coffey)
ORCID(s):across basic and clinical research by encouraging scientists
to make assumptions explicit, which facilitates their rigor-
ous examination and development into better, more useful
models (Blohm et al., 2020). The overall aim of the present
workistosummarizeandextendrecentthinkingconcerning
misophonia, with a focus on neurologically-informed cog-
nitive models that are parsimonious, can account for extant
findings,andgeneratetestablepredictionsthatwillfacilitate
further refinements in our understanding of misophonia.
Particularly as misophonia is a newly-defined issue
(Swedoetal.,2022)anditsphenomenologyiscomplex,our
models must be well-grounded in clinical observations and
individuals’experiences.Wefocusonmodelswhichaddress
‘what’ and ‘why’ questions concerning specific differences
in perception and cognition in people with misophonia as
compared with normative controls. For the most part, we
avoid including etiological factors, as there is little work
available to date that bears on development of misophonia
(but see Mednicoff et al., 2022 for an overview of that
which exists, and Palumbo et al., 2018 for a summary of
howassociativeandnon-associativelearningprinciplesmay
be relevant for the development, maintenance, and perhaps
treatment of misophonia). Additionally, creating models of
asinglestate,suchashavingadisorderinadulthood,seems
likealogicalprecursortomodelsofdynamicstates,suchas
theprocessofdevelopingadisorder.Wealsodonotattempt
to generate computational models, which use mathematical
approaches to simulate neurocognitive processes at various
levelsoforganizationfromsinglemembranechannelstodis-
tributed whole-brain networks. These types of models may
eventuallyprovetobeusefulifnotessentialinunderstanding
misophonia, but typically presuppose that their creators
have clearly isolated the phenomenon of interest (Blohm
et al., 2020); this condition is not yet met in misophonia
MA Savard, EBJ Coffey: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 1 of 17REVISED Manuscript (Clean version)
 Click here to view linked References

Journal Pre-proofJournal Pre-proof
Models of misophonia
research. Thus, we suggest that models should for the time
being be conceptual in nature, describing how differences
in particular cognitive functions may be implicated in con-
tributing to misophonic reactions. Finally, we propose that
modelsshouldbesituatedspatiallywithinthebrain.Taking
advantage of newly available neuroimaging findings will
allowustoconnectmisophoniawithawiderbodyofexisting
knowledge concerning brain structure and function.
In this work, we first briefly summarize what is known
about misophonia to date, with the goals of familiarizing
researchers who are unacquainted with the disorder with its
characteristics,andreferringreaderswhowishtohavemore
in-depthinformationtosomeoftherecentpublicationsthat
have comprehensively reviewed specific aspects of miso-
phonia. An overview of factors described in these sections
whicharepotentiallyrelevantfordevelopingneurocognitive
models of misophonia is found in Table 1. In subsequent
sections, we review current knowledge on the neural basis
of misophonia. We then describe two published models of
misophonia, discussing their explanatory power concerning
existing results and contrasting their respective predictions.
Finally, we reflect on how models of misophonia can be
improved and developed. We hope this work will facilitate
future refinements in our understanding of misophonia, and
ultimately inform treatments.
2. Overview of misophonia
2.1. Recent progress on misophonia
As recently as a decade ago, misophonia was a foreign
term even to most auditory researchers and clinicians, and
research on misophonia was nearly non-existent. In the
interim, a considerable amount of empirical work has taken
place, and over 30 reviews published between 2014 and
2024haveindexedtheprogressmadeinthisemergingfield.
While some of these reviews provide general overviews of
misophonia’s core characteristics and clinical presentations
(e.g., Bruxner, 2016; Cavanna and Seri, 2015; Siepsiak
and Dragan, 2019), others have taken a more specialized
approach, focusing on clinical implications and treatment
approaches(Broutetal.,2018;Erfanianetal.,2019b;Matt-
son et al., 2023), associated comorbidities (Rinaldi et al.,
2023; Williams et al., 2021), as well as neurobiological
mechanisms (Neacsiu et al., 2022) and underlying frame-
works (Berger et al., 2024; Palumbo et al., 2018). Reviews
havealsoexploredmisophoniaalongsideotherauditorydis-
orders,mostlyrelatedtotreatmentapproaches(Henryetal.,
2022;JastreboffandJastreboff,2014,2015)andassessment
tools (Kula et al., 2022). More recent systematic reviews
have identified trends in the literature, revealing patterns in
prevalence and variability in diagnostic approaches (Aryal
and Prabhu, 2023; Ferrer-Torres and Giménez-Llort, 2022;
Gowda and Prabhu, 2024). Notably, a committee of experts
has recently established a consensus definition of misopho-
nia,recognizingitasadisorderanddefiningitsmainfeatures
in terms of misophonic stimuli, responses, and associated
functional impairments (see Swedo et al., 2022).2.2. Prevalence & comorbidity
A fundamental question in misophonia research con-
cerns establishing who is affected by it. Multiple studies
across different populations and cultures (Jager et al., 2020;
Nayloretal.,2021;RouwandErfanian,2018;Siepsiaketal.,
2020b; Vitoratou et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2014; Zhou et al.,
2017) estimate that between 5% and 20% of people experi-
ence clinically significant symptoms of misophonia. These
estimates are derived using different diagnostic question-
nairesandtools,whichleadstosomevariabilityinreported
prevalence rates (see Gowda and Prabhu, 2024 for a review
of prevalence studies). In addition, some research suggests
a higher prevalence of misophonia in females, though the
samples on which these observations were based primarily
consisted of female university students, with 67–84% fe-
male;Brennanetal.,2024;Kılıçetal.,2021;Wuetal.,2014;
Zhou et al., 2017, and large-scale studies with more bal-
ancedsamplesshownosuchdifference(Savardetal.,2022;
Vitoratou et al., 2023). Several studies have also suggested
thatyoungerindividualsaremorelikelytoexperiencemiso-
phonia (Kılıç et al., 2021; Vitoratou et al., 2023), though
this observation could be influenced by the predominantly
younger samples in these studies, and potentially that older
peoplemighthavedevelopedcopingstrategiesandadjusted
theirlivessoastoreduceexposuretomisophonicsoundsand
thusreportlowerseverity.Acrosstheliterature,misophonia
is increasingly viewed as existing along a spectrum, where
a large portion of the population experiences subclinical
symptoms. Notable examples include Naylor et al. (2021)
who found mild, moderate and severe misophonia symp-
toms in 37%, 12%, 0.3% of the sample, respectively; Zhou
et al. (2017) who observed that 68% of people reported
experiencing such sub-clinical misophonia symptoms; and
Savard et al. (2022) who found that misophonia symptoms
are normally distributed, suggesting that mild symptoms
occur in many individuals who may not experience signif-
icant distress. These observations regarding the distribution
of misophonia overall support the notion that those who
experiencemoreseveresymptomsrepresentthetailendofa
broader spectrum of sound sensitivity (Savard et al., 2022).
Comorbidity is common among individuals with miso-
phonia, with various studies identifying associations with
differentmentalhealthconditions.Anxietydisordersarere-
ported, including generalized anxiety, posttraumatic stress-
disorder and obsessive-compulsive disorder (all between 1-
3%inJageretal.,2020butupto13%inRouwandErfanian,
2018); see Wu et al. (2014) and Cusack et al. (2018)
for investigations of the relationship between misophonia
and obsessive-compulsive symptoms as well as anxiety
symptoms and anxiety sensitivity. Additionally, obsessive-
compulsive personality disorder (OCPD; personality dis-
order characterized by perfectionism and rigid control;
American-Psychiatric-Association, 2013) is prevalent in
people with misophonia, with studies indicating that self-
reports of OCPD in misophonic samples range from 8
(Rouw and Erfanian, 2018) to 26% (Jager et al., 2020),
while studies using professional mental health assessments
MA Savard, EBJ Coffey: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 2 of 17

Journal Pre-proofJournal Pre-proof
Models of misophonia
show comorbidity rates with OCPD in up to 52% of people
Schröder et al. (2013). Comorbidity with autism spectrum
conditions (2% of misophonics in Jager et al., 2020; 4%
in Claiborn et al., 2020; see Williams et al., 2021 for a
review of misophonia in autism) and autistic traits (see
Rinaldi et al., 2023) has also been observed, as well as
withmooddisorders(Erfanianetal.,2019a;Schröderetal.,
2013; 10% of the sample in Jager et al., 2020). It is worth
considering how misophonia may contribute to some of the
comorbid diagnoses. For instance, an adolescent unable to
avoid misophonic triggers in a classroom might experience
heightened anxiety or inattention than they would have if
they did not experience misophonic reactions to classroom
sounds (or could control their acoustic environment).
Misophonia can also coexist with other auditory disor-
ders relating to sound hypersensivity (e.g., tinnitus, hyper-
acusis, noise sensitivity, and phonophobia; Jastreboff and
Jastreboff, 2014), though research indicates distinctions be-
tweenthedisorders(see(Henryetal.,2022)forareview).In
brief, hyperacusis is characterized by discomfort or pain in
responsetoloudsounds;noisesensitivityreferstoincreased
reactivity to sounds that may include general discomfort
due to a perceived noisy environment, regardless of its
loudness; and tinnitus involves distress from internally per-
ceived sounds (Cavanna and Seri, 2015); these conditions
contrastwiththemisophonicresponsebeingtiedtospecific,
idiosyncratic misophonic sounds in the environment that
are problematic even at low intensities (Henry et al., 2022),
andareindependentofthesound’sphysicalproperties(e.g.,
sound level, frequency, harshness, decibel level; Jastreboff
and Jastreboff, 2002).
While comorbidity is common, misophonia often exists
independently of other disorders (Schröder et al., 2013). In
a recent study in which 575 individuals with misophonia
completed clinical interviews, about 72% of the sample had
misophonia without a comorbid psychiatric disorder, and
59% had misophonia without a comorbid personality disor-
der. In addition, around 94% of the sample did not report
other hearing problems or disorders (Jager et al., 2020). Al-
though the mechanisms by which conditions overlap could
be very informative, differential diagnosis, characterizing
thesamplepopulationandforsomeinvestigations,isolating
themonodiagnosticorprimarymisophoniapopulation,will
likely prove critical to understand aspects of neurobiology
and cognition that are unique to misophonia.
These observations concerning prevalence and comor-
bidity have a few implications for developing models of
misophonia. 1) Misophonia seems to lie on a continuum in
thegeneralpopulation;wethereforemightexpecttheunder-
lying neuroanatomy and cognitive characteristics to vary in
a continuous rather than categorical fashion with respect to
healthy controls. 2) Although males with misophonia seem
tobehardertorecruitintostudies,thedisorderitselfdoesnot
appear to be strongly tied to sex-related genetic or neurobi-
ological differences. 3) The considerable comorbidity with
other disorders suggests that some of the empirical results
whichwemightincorporateintomodelscouldbeexplainedby their differential inclusion into misophonic and control
groups(foramoredetaileddiscussionofthesimilaritiesand
differencesbetweenmisophoniaandthesedisorders,seethe
reviewbyFerrer-TorresandGiménez-Llort,2022),suchthat
tools for quantifying and documenting misophonia, as well
as comorbid conditions, become critical components in the
study of misophonia.
2.3. Measuring misophonia
There are now numerous questionnaires available for
assessing misophonia, reflecting a growing understanding
of the disorder. Earlier measures include the Misophonia
Questionnaire (MQ; Wu et al., 2014) and the Amsterdam
MisophoniaScale(A-MISO-S;Schröderetal.,2013),which
have been used extensively in research. The psychomet-
ric properties, strengths, and limitations of some of these
early misophonia scales (including the MisoQuest; Siep-
siak et al., 2020a) were evaluated in Kula et al. (2022).
More psychometrically-validated scales have recently be-
comeavailablesuchastheSelectiveSoundSensitivitySyn-
drome Scale (S-Five; Vitoratou et al., 2021), the Duke
Misophonia Questionnaire (DMQ; Rosenthal et al., 2021),
the Duke-Vanderbilt Misophonia Screening Questionnaire
(DVMSQ; Williams et al., 2022), the Berlin Misophonia
QuestionnaireRevised(BMQ-R;Remmertetal.,2022),the
SussexMisophoniaScale(Rinaldietal.,2021;Simneretal.,
2024), and Misophonia Impact Questionnaire (MIQ; Aazh
et al., 2023). While results from these scales are generally
correlated(e.g.,seeRosenthaletal.,2021forcorrelationsof
theDMQwithotherscales),theyarenotentirelyequivalent.
For example, the S-Five is a quick measure used to capture
subfactorsofmisophoniaexperiences,theMQfocusesmore
ontriggerfrequencyandemotionalresponses,andtheDMQ
is a longer, more comprehensive measure which includes
many individual subscales to be used independently or to-
gether.Eachmeasuremayexhibitsomerelativebiasreflect-
ing the researchers’ focus and understanding of misophonia
(noting that most of the scales were developed prior to the
consensus definition; Swedo et al., 2022). For example, the
MisoQuestassessesonlyangerreactionsandoverlooksother
emotionscommoninmisophonicresponses,suchasdisgust,
while the A-MISO-S is based on earlier diagnostic criteria
and adapted from measures used in Obsessive-Compulsive
Disorderresearch,whichmaynotfullycapturetheemotional
andbehaviouralpatternsspecifictomisophonia.Thevariety
of scales available, the range of symptoms they target, and
thefactthattheymaynotagree(e.g.,inHansenetal.,2024)
can complicate cross-study comparisons and the interpreta-
tion of findings.
As regards separating primary misophonia from more
complex cases, it is necessary to have short, efficient mea-
suresofthemaincomorbidconditions.Unfortunately,there
is currently no consensus on the best battery of question-
naires to achieve this differentiation. Rinaldi et al. (2021)
point out that most misophonia assessments lack divergent
validity, making it difficult to separate misophonia from
otherdisordersthatalsoprimarilyinvolvehypersensitivtyto
MA Savard, EBJ Coffey: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 3 of 17

Journal Pre-proofJournal Pre-proof
Models of misophonia
soundandcanpresentsimilarly,notablyhyperacusis.Ques-
tionnaires used to assess hyperacusis do not differentiate it
from misophonia, and to date only Enzler et al. (2021)’s
online psychoacoustic test has been proposed as a short
and reliable tool for separating primary misophonia from
hyperacusis.Asitstands,misophoniascalesprimarilyassess
the severity of misophonia itself, without providing clear
differentiationfromotherpsychiatricordevelopmentalcon-
ditions that may overlap in symptoms. Alternatives include
a complete clinical interview (e.g., in Guetta et al., 2024;
Jager etal.,2020),orrelying onpotential studyparticipants
reportingonconcurrentdiagnoses.Notingthataswithmiso-
phonia, the characteristics of many disorders also exist on
continua,itmaybepreferableforsomeapplicationstomea-
sure subclinical tendencies rather than rely on categorical
distinctions.
As the field develops, the relative merits and biases
of misophonia scales, scale cut-off points for determining
differentlevelsofdisorder,andthebestmeansofdifferenti-
ating primary misophonia from more complex cases within
studyconstraintswilllikelybecomemorestandardized.For
instance, Möllmann et al. (2023) identified cutoffs for vari-
ous symptom measures that distinguish between functional
impairment and non-impairing sound sensitivity. For the
present purpose of model development, it is important to
be aware that inconsistencies in measuring misophonia and
separating experimental participants into groups exist, and
toconsiderhowscalesandstudydesignchoicesmighthave
affectedtheempiricalresultsthatmodelsattempttoaccount
for.
3. Potential insights into the mechanisms of
misophonia
3.1. Brief overview of misophonia phenomenology
Misophonia literature shows that triggers encompass a
widerangeofstimuli,primarilyauditory,includingorofacial
sounds, human-made noises, and sometimes visual stimuli.
Themostcommontriggersoundsareorofacialinnature(i.e.,
produced by the mouth, nose, throat), though individuals
report distress from a variety of other sounds that are not
either non-orofacial or not produced by humans, including
barkingdogs,clinkingglasses,clocksticking,feetshuffling,
doors slamming, and refrigerators humming (Enzler et al.,
2021;Ferreiraetal.,2013;Hadjipavlouetal.,2008;Hansen
et al., 2021, 2022; Jager et al., 2020; Jastreboff and Jastre-
boff, 2014; Johnson et al., 2013; Neal and Cavanna, 2013;
Vitoratou et al., 2021; Webber et al., 2014). Many people
with misophonia report that while misophonic reactions to
real-lifeexperiencesaremostproblematic,responsescanbe
triggered by sounds from television or videos (Rouw and
Erfanian, 2018).
The acoustic patterns of misophonic sounds and the
resultingemotionalresponsesvarysignificantlyamongindi-
viduals, suggesting that personal history, learning, and con-
text play crucial roles in shaping aversive reactions (Brout
et al., 2018; Jastreboff and Jastreboff, 2001; Palumbo et al.,2018).Evenimaginingatriggersoundcanprovokethesame
aversive reaction as hearing the actual sound (Ferrer-Torres
and Giménez-Llort, 2021), further suggesting that history
with the sound is more important than acoustic properties.
Furthermore, results from several studies show that people
can experience misophonic responses to visual stimuli that
areassociatedwithtriggeringsounds(Edelsteinetal.,2013;
Schröder et al., 2013; Webber and Storch, 2015; Wu et al.,
2014). Misophonia-like sensitivity to visual triggers has
been referred to as ‘misokinesia’ in the literature (a refer-
ence to visual triggers often stemming from the repetitive
movements of others). The current consensus definition of
misophonia does specify that misophonic triggers include
soundsassociatedwithoralfunctions,non-oral/nasalsounds
produced by people or objects, as well as visual triggers
(Swedoetal.,2022).However,itisnotyetclearhowmisoki-
nesia and misophonia are interrelated; a subset of people
with misophonia report both sensitivities, yet misokinesia
can apparently exist independently of any triggering audi-
tory stimuli (Jaswal et al., 2021). One possible account for
similaritiesbetweentheconditionsisthatbothareproduced
bystructuralhyperconnectivitytothemotorsystem(Kumar
et al., 2021). Supporting the idea of hyperconnectivity in
misophonia,researchershavealsonotedsimilaritiesbetween
misophonia and synesthesia, a perceptual phenomenon in
whichstimulationofonesensoryorcognitivepathwayleads
to involuntary experiences in a second sensory or cognitive
pathway that is thought to result from hyperconnectivity of
brainregions(includingauditorycortexandinsula)thatlead
tocross-activation(seeEdelsteinetal.,2013;McGeochand
Rouw, 2020; Palumbo et al., 2018).
Emotionalreactionstotriggersoundscommonlyinclude
anger, irritability, annoyance, disgust, and anxiety (Rouw
and Erfanian, 2018; Siepsiak and Dragan, 2019) and are
accompanied by increased autonomic nervous system ac-
tivity. Sympathetic nervous system arousal produces in-
creases in muscle tension, skin conductance, and heart rate
(Brout et al., 2018; Edelstein et al., 2013; Ferrer-Torres
and Giménez-Llort, 2021; Jastreboff and Jastreboff, 2014;
Siepsiak and Dragan, 2019). The intensity of misophonic
responses varies depending on the sound source, often be-
coming more pronounced when the trigger is produced by
family members or acquaintances (Edelstein et al., 2013;
Guettaetal.,2022;Taylor,2017).Themisophonicresponse
often includes hyperfixation on the triggering sound (Rouw
andErfanian,2018),asattentionbecomesintenselyfocused
on the stimulus, making it difficult to ignore or disengage
fromthesourceofdistress.Misophonicreactionscanleadto
feelingsofbeingoverwhelmedandescapebehavioursuchas
removing oneself from the environment where misophonic
sounds are heard (Brout et al., 2018; Edelstein et al., 2013;
Kumaretal.,2014).Peoplewithmisophoniamayalsoreport
adesiretoharmthoseproducingthesounds(Bernsteinetal.,
2013; Edelstein et al., 2013), which can manifest as verbal
or physical aggression toward people or objects (Bernstein
et al., 2013; Edelstein et al., 2013; Schröder et al., 2013;
Swedoetal.,2022).Theytypicallyrecognizetheirreactions
MA Savard, EBJ Coffey: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 4 of 17

Journal Pre-proofJournal Pre-proof
Models of misophonia
as unwanted, uncontrolled, sometimes excessive, and unac-
ceptable (Schröder et al., 2013; Schwartz et al., 2011), yet
still experience strong emotional responses and often feel
offendedbythoseemittingthemisophonicstimulus(Taylor,
2017).
Interestingly, people with misophonia typically do not
experience the same intense reactions to self-generated
sounds as they do to sounds produced by others or by
animals/machines (Swedo et al., 2022). In Edelstein et al.
(2013), 10 of 11 participants reported that self-produced
triggers do not evoke as strong of an aversive response as
soundsproducedbyothersources,andevennotedthateating
foodsinsynchronywithotherpeoplereducedtheirdistress.
Early case studies documented this tendency in people with
misophonia to mimic misophonic sounds or actions (e.g.,
Edelsteinetal.,2013;Hadjipavlouetal.,2008),andalarger,
more recent study revealed that nearly 47% of participants
engaged in mimicry, with its prevalence increasing with
misophonia severity (Ash et al., 2024). Many participants
described mimicry as deliberate and controllable, with 68%
reporting that it provided relief, potentially acting as a cop-
ing mechanism by ‘cancelling out’ intrusive stimuli. Many
individuals also report relief upon localizing the source
of a trigger sound (Rouw and Erfanian, 2018), suggesting
that being able to pinpoint the origin of a sound may offer
psychological relief, possibly by giving a sense of control
ortheabilitytoanticipatewhenthetriggeringstimuluswill
end.
People with misophonia often avoid contexts in which
triggers are likely to be encountered, including social gath-
erings,classrooms,andfamilymeals(Schröderetal.,2013),
as well as individuals who are known to produce miso-
phonic sounds (Rouw and Erfanian, 2018). Avoidance can
result in impairments in social interaction, and social iso-
lation, negatively affecting well-being, education, and in-
terpersonal relationships (Brout et al., 2018; Jager et al.,
2020; Neal and Cavanna, 2013; Rouw and Erfanian, 2018;
Swedo et al., 2022; Wu et al., 2014; Zhou et al., 2017).
The distress provoked by misophonia can also contribute
to behavioural health problems (Brout et al., 2018), emo-
tionalhyper-reactivity(JastreboffandJastreboff,2014),and
difficulties in regulating emotions (Cassiello-Robbins et al.,
2020; Guetta et al., 2022).
In general, misophonia can have serious consequences
for quality of life (Guetta et al., 2022; Siepsiak and Dragan,
2019). A large-scale study by Rouw and Erfanian (2018),
which explored the impact of misophonia on daily life,
offers some interesting additional observations. Thirty-six
percentofparticipantsreportedthatalcoholhelpedalleviate
their misophonia symptoms, with some indicating that they
used alcohol specifically for this purpose. In contrast, most
participants stated that caffeine did not seem to influence
their symptoms, and the majority did not use nicotine or
other substances. Among those who did report symptom
relieffromotherchemicals,marijuanaorcannabiswasmost
commonlymentioned.Manystudyparticipantsnotedwors-
enedsymptomswhenfatigued.Alarmingly,over20%ofthemisophonia sample reported suicidal thoughts (Rouw and
Erfanian,2018),underscoringthemostsevereconsequences
of misophonia and motivating the search for solutions.
From these observations of how misophonia is mani-
festedandexperiencedbypeoplewiththecondition,several
themesofrelevancetotheproductionofmisophoniamodels
emerge. In general, the heterogeneity of individuals’ miso-
phonicsoundsandtheiracousticpropertiesdoesnotsuggest
that a low-level, perceptual mechanism is to blame. That a
misophonia stimulus’ origin and meaning is relevant to the
strength of the reaction it produces further emphasizes the
role of higher-level cognitive processes (possibly involving
the cortical ventral processing stream; Rauschecker, 2018;
anideathatwillbefurtherdiscussedinSection5).However,
themirroring,mimicry,andblockingobservationssuggesta
strong motor and proprioceptive component (more likely to
becomputationstakingplacewithinthedorsalstream).The
fact that people with misophonia are generally aware that
theirreactionsareconsideredexcessiveandundesirable,yet
nonethelessreact,suggestsstrongandpossiblypre-attentive
connections to the limbic system. Finally, we note a great
dealofinter-individualvariabilityinmisophonicstimuliand
reactions, suggesting that the disorder may have subtypes
or vary along several scales, perhaps each with its own
neurophysiological correlates.
3.2. Auditory and cognitively-based coping
mechanisms
In the absence of a clear understanding of the causes of
misophoniaorofeffectivetreatments,itmaybeinformative
for developing cognitive models to consider what coping
mechanisms sufferers of misophonia use spontaneously. In
the context of developing the Duke Misophonia Question-
naire(DMQ),Rosenthaletal.(2021)interviewed100miso-
phonia sufferers. After psychometric refinement, the DMQ
contains Coping-Before, Coping-During, and Coping-After
subscales. Coping-Before concerns planning and avoidance
behaviours(e.g.,‘Iavoidedcertainpeople,places,orthings
soIwouldnothavetohearsoundsIdislike’),whilstCoping-
After mostly focuses on mood regulation following (e.g.,
‘I did something to comfort myself (e.g., exercised, went
somewhere calming, pet animals)’). Of particular interest
for our purposes is the 10 item Coping-During subscale,
whichhasitemsclusteredintothreedomains:‘Masking’(‘I
increased the background noise to cover up the bothersome
sound (e.g., turned on TV, rolled down car window)’),
‘Distraction’(e.g.‘Ifocusedmyattentiononanactivity(e.g.,
watched TV or videos)’), and ‘Cognitive Techniques’ (e.g.,
‘I changed my way of thinking about the sound’). Amongst
communitysupportgroupsandvideographictestimonialsof
lived experience (e.g., ‘Breaking the Sound Barrier - Teens
With Misophonia’ by Black, 2024), anecdotes concerning
usingnoise-cancellingheadphonesorearplugsarecommon.
Strategies such as listening to white noise or music are
common in environments where trigger sounds are present,
butwhereavoidancebehaviourswouldleadtonegativecon-
sequences(e.g.,inclassrooms,workplaces,orfamilydining
MA Savard, EBJ Coffey: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 5 of 17

Journal Pre-proofJournal Pre-proof
Models of misophonia
situations).Individualsalsoreportmakingtheirownsounds
in mimicry as a masker, intentionally regulating their mood
throughbreathingtechniques,removingthemselvesfromthe
environment,andcultivatingunderstandingandempathyso
astoreducetheemotionalimpactoftheinterpretationthata
lovedoneismakingtheproblematicsoundoutofmalicious
intent.
The themes that emerge from documenting coping be-
haviours hint at mechanisms that are blocked or reactions
that are mitigated through these behaviours. Adjusting the
audibility or salience of troublesome sounds appears to be
a means of reducing the sounds’ propensity to capture and
monopolize attention. It is possible that some relief can be
achieved via occupying brain networks that are involved in
misophonia with other incompatible activities. For exam-
ple, listening to music might reduce higher-level auditory
processing of misophonic stimuli (i.e., beyond the primary
auditory cortex and planum temporale, Puschmann et al.,
2024), or producing motor activity oneself might engage
motor networks so as to reduce communication between
auditory and motor networks that may be overactive during
misophonic responses (Kumar et al., 2021). That reactions
can sometimes be modulated by voluntarily attending to
other sound sources such as music implicates attentional
networks, as does intentionally modulating the semantic
interpretation of sounds or regulating mood directly. This
group of coping strategies uses executive functions, a set
of cognitive processes that support goal-directed behaviour
(i.e.,attentionalcontrol,cognitiveinhibition,inhibitorycon-
trol, and cognitive flexibility). In misophonia, executive
functions themselves could be abnormal leading to poorer
control, or instead they could function normally yet be
constantlytaxedbytheadditionalworkloadassociatedwith
mitigating misophonia reactions. The latter idea would be
congruentwithreportsthatindividualswithmisophoniaare
moreaffectedbymisophonicsoundswheninfatiguedstates
(i.e., when available cognitive resources are depleted). A
parallel may be found in pain research. People suffering
from chronic pain are thought to use a greater proportion
of their cognitive resources for attentional control and self-
regulation in everyday life than healthy controls, leaving
fewer resources available for other tasks and leading to
apparentcognitiveandself-regulatorydeficits(Phelpsetal.,
2021;SolbergNesetal.,2009).Itmayberelevantforconsid-
eringtheroleofexecutivenetworksinmodelsofmisophonia
that the challenges of coping with misophonia might be the
causeof observed group differences in executive function,
rather than group differences in executive function being
responsible for misophonia.
3.3. Behavioural and cognitive observations
The role of context and sound meaning in misophonia
Recent research shows that both the actual context of a
sound and the way it is cognitively processed can alter the
intensity of the misophonic reaction. Edelstein et al. (2020)
(preprint) demonstrated that individuals rated human-made
sounds as less aversive when they believed the sounds wereof non-human origin. Similar findings were reported by
Heller and Smith (2022), who found that misidentifying
chewing sounds as cereal being stirred reduced their per-
ceivedunpleasantness,Samermitetal.(2022),whodemon-
strated that pairing incongruent visual stimuli with miso-
phonic sounds, such as the sound of chewing paired with a
video of stepping on snow, reduced the aversive response,
as well as Siepsiak et al. (2023) who found that partici-
pantsratedmouthsmackingsoundspairedwithincongruent
videos less negatively than when paired with congruent
videos. Savard et al. (2022) also showed that when miso-
phonicsoundswereidentified,theyelicitedstrongerfeelings
of anger, disgust, and anxiety, particularly among individ-
uals with severe misophonia symptoms. Therapeutic inter-
ventions have explored this avenue by encouraging patients
toreframeormodifytheirperceptionoftriggersounds,such
asimaginingthatthesoundcomesfromabenignsourcelike
a motor, or a gorilla (e.g., Frank and McKay, 2019).
Altogether,evidenceindicatesthatthecognitivecontext
ofsoundprocessingsignificantlyinfluencesemotionalreac-
tivity.Emotionalresponsesarenotsolelydrivenbyacoustic
properties; rather, the brain’s interpretation and identifica-
tion of sounds within specific contexts play a crucial role.
These findings further suggest that misophonia is closely
linked to higher-level cognitive processes (and likely has
a strong learned component (Palumbo et al., 2018)), rather
than being predominantly sensory in nature. They also sug-
gest involvement of the ventral auditory processing stream
(described in Section 5) where perceptual decisions are
made concerning source identification and recognition, in a
processcalled‘auditory-sceneanalysis’.Inearlier,upstream
stages,neuronsencodetheauditorypropertiesofastimulus,
whereas later stages encode sensory evidence that leads
to perceptual decisions (Cohen et al., 2016; Rauschecker,
2018). The ventral pathway, illustrated in Figure 2, may
thereforeberelevantformodelsofmisophoniaasalocusof
actionofabnormalorvoluntaryattentionalprocesses,since
attentioncanaffectthedegreeofenhancementandextentof
processing that neural representations of incoming auditory
information receives (Puschmann et al., 2024).
Cognitive differences in the absence of misophonic
sounds
Differences in cognitive processes in people with miso-
phoniaascomparedwithhealthycontrolshavebeenstudied
inthepresenceandintheabsenceoftriggersounds.Devia-
tionsincognitiveprocessesintheabsenceoftriggersounds
are generally assumed to reflect stable differences in the
auditory system that affect all auditory processing, whereas
those observed during or following symptom provocation
are understood to incorporate differences that may be spe-
cific to the response to trigger sounds, including attentional
and emotional aspects.
In Eijsker et al. (2019), individuals with misophonia
showed slower reaction times and more errors in a visual
response inhibition task compared to control groups in the
MA Savard, EBJ Coffey: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 6 of 17

Journal Pre-proofJournal Pre-proof
Models of misophonia
absence of misophonic sounds, suggesting that misopho-
nia may be linked to impaired response inhibition. Further
evidence of altered cognitive and sensory processing in
misophonia is provided by electroencephalography (EEG)
studies, such as Schröder et al. (2014), who found a dimin-
ished N1 component in response to deviant auditory tones
in misophonia patients, compared to healthy controls, in
the absence of trigger sounds. The authors interpreted this
result as a deficit in early sensory processing, suggesting
thatthereducedN1amplitudereflectsageneralimpairment
in the misophonic brain’s ability to detect and prioritize
novel auditory stimuli. They argue that this deficit may
underlietheheightenedsensitivitytocertainsoundsseenin
misophonia, as the brain is less effective at distinguishing
between relevant and irrelevant sensory information, even
when no explicit trigger is present.
Interestingly, some studies have found enhancements in
some cognitive processes in people with misophonia. For
instance,inastudybySimneretal.(2021),participantswith
misophoniashowedgreateraccuracythanacontrolgroupin
identifying target shapes embedded within complex visual
figures, without increased response times, which suggests
better attention control. In addition, Murphy et al. (2024)
explored cognitive performance in children and adolescents
with misophonia and found superior signal detection abil-
ities compared to those with anxiety disorders, indicating
heightenedperceptualalertness.Theseresultscouldbeinter-
pretedinaneuroplasticframework.Engaginginchallenging
cognitiveprocesses,forexamplethoseinvolvedinmusician-
ship and multilingualism, appears to cause improvements
bothtodomain-specificandsometimesdomain-generalcog-
nitive functions that support task performance (Bialystok
and Craik, 2022; Roman-Caballero et al., 2018; Román-
Caballero et al., 2021). Learning to function with misopho-
nia might be thought of as a kind of long-term naturalistic
training paradigm in which processes such as attentional
controlthatarecontinuallychallengedbecomestrengthened,
potentially leading to some benefits on other tasks. While
quite preliminary, this work offers hope that the effects of
misophoniamightbepartlymitigatedovertimeascognitive
skills are strengthened, and that training-based approaches
could further support these compensatory processes. As
regards models, these observations may inform dynamic
models that consider misophonia’s etiology and evolution,
and the roles of neuroplasticity in both.
Cognitive differences in the presence of misophonic
sounds
Overall, studies which presented misophonic trigger
sounds during cognitive tasks demonstrate that misophonic
responses negatively affect cognitive control. For instance,
in Daniels et al. (2020), participants showed greater cogni-
tive interference during a visual Stroop task when exposed
totriggersounds,andparticipantswithmisophoniainSilva
and Sanchez (2019) performed worse than those without
misophonia in identifying dichotically presented sentences
in the presence of distracting sounds, particularly whenthe distraction consisted of chewing sounds. Seaborne and
Fiorella (2018) asked participants to read a text passage on
which they would receive a comprehension test, while in
the presence of a confederate (i.e., member of the research
teamactingasaparticipant)whoeitheraudiblychewedgum
(sound group) or read quietly (control group). Although the
two groups did not differ overall on their comprehension
test scores, a moderation analysis revealed that students
with higher misophonia sensitivity performed worse than
those with lower sensitivity when exposed to background
chewing sounds, while in the absence of these sounds,
higher sensitivity students outperformed their less sensitive
peers. This finding suggests that the presence of trigger
sounds may hinder attentional focus for individuals with
misophonia, yet these same individuals could experience a
cognitiveadvantageinquieterenvironments,potentiallydue
to an increased ability to concentrate when distractions are
minimized.
These observations are supported by Frank et al. (2020)
and Zumbrunn et al. (2023) ( preprint) who found, when
assessing attention with a visual Attention Network Task
(Posner et al., 1990), that different attention networks (see
Section 6.2) showed different patterns of performance dur-
ing exposure to trigger sounds. Participants with misopho-
nia had poorer alerting attention when exposed to trigger
sounds, which indicates difficulties in maintaining a state
of readiness to respond to stimuli. Interestingly, despite
apparent impairments in the alerting network, participants
with misophonia showed better orienting attention (i.e.,the
process of selecting and prioritizing sensory inputs) than
control participants in Zumbrunn et al. (2023) when re-
sponding to aversive sounds, suggesting heightened atten-
tional responsiveness to threatening stimuli.
Taken together, the results concerning behavioural and
cognitivedifferencesbetweenpeoplewithandwithoutmiso-
phonia are illustrative of the disorder’s complex nature:
it is not a disorder affecting only the peripheral sensory
systems,butratherisaphenomenondeeplyintertwinedwith
cognitive processes, including perceptual decision-making,
attentionalcontrol,responseinhibition,andperceptualalert-
ness. We thus expect comprehensive models of misophonia
toincludemultiplecognitivefunctionsandwidespreadbrain
networks.
3.4. Structural neuroanatomy of misophonia
One means of gaining insights into why populations
differ is by contrasting their neuroanatomy with those of
normative controls. By identifying brain regions and struc-
tures that vary in morphology and other biophysical char-
acteristics, we gain insights into potential neural factors
that contribute to differences in cognition, behaviour, and
subjective experience.
Most approaches to studying group differences in neu-
roanatomynon-invasivelyinvolvemagneticresonanceimag-
ing (MRI). From standard T1-weighted anatomical im-
ages, the shape, size, and properties of brain tissue within
brain structures can be derived, using techniques such as
MA Savard, EBJ Coffey: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 7 of 17

Journal Pre-proofJournal Pre-proof
Models of misophonia
Table 1
Summary of factors potentially relevant for the development of neurocognitive models of misophonia (citations are given in text;
note that the row organization is intended solely to enhance readability of the point-form list and does not carry any inherent
meaning.)
Prevalence &
DemographicsComorbidity Trigger stimuli Responses Impact Common coping
mechanismsFactors that may
impact symptoms
Misophonia exists
on the tail end of
a continuous
distributionMisophonia
without comorbid
disorders:
-no psychiatric
disorder: 72%
-no personality
disorder: 59%Primarily auditory
stimuli, including:
-orofacial
(mouth/nose/throat)
-human-produced
non orofacial (e.g.,
door slamming,
pen clicking)
-non-human
produced (e.g.,
barking dogs,
refrigerator
humming)Emotional
responses: anger,
irritability,
annoyance,
disgust, and
anxietyImpaired
attentional
control, especially
during symptom
provocation (e.g.,
greater cognitive
interference during
tasks)Avoiding problem
stimuli:
-Avoiding certain
situations or
people
-Seeking a
trigger-free
environment
following a
reactionSubstance use:
-Caffeine does not
seem to affect
symptoms
-Some people
report alcohol
helping alleviate
symptoms
-Other chemicals
are sometimes
used to alleviate
symptoms
Prevalence
estimates of
clinically
significant
(moderate to
severe) misophonia
symptoms:
between 5% and
20%Misophonia
without other
auditory disorders
or sensitivities:
94% of casesVisual stimuli
(misokinesia):
-Repetitive
Movements (e.g.,
tapping fingers, leg
shaking)
-Stimuli associated
with auditory
triggers (e.g., sight
of someone eating)Increased
autonomic nervous
system activity:
muscle tension,
sweating,
increased heart
rate, increased
body temperature,
sensation of
pressure in
chest/arms/headSocial isolation
due to avoidance
of gatherings,
classrooms, and
mealsDecreasing
salience/audibility:
-Noise-cancelling
headphones or
earplugs
-Listening to music
or white noise
-Increasing
background noiseFatigue may
worsen symptoms
Prevalence is
similar between
males and females
(in large balanced
samples)Common
comorbidities
(from large-sample
studies):
-OCPD
-Anxiety disorders
-Autism spectrum
conditions
-Mood disordersCan be triggered
by stimuli from
media in addition
to real-life
interactionsReactions more
pronounced when
trigger stimuli are
produced by family
members or
acquaintancesNegatively affects
well-being,
education, and
interpersonal
relationshipsDirecting attention
away:
-Attending to
another sound
source
-Engaging in
pleasurable
activitiesSeverity of
reactions often
depends on social
contexts where
triggers are likely
to be encountered
(e.g., gatherings,
classrooms, family
meals)
Symptoms often
begin in childhood
or adolescence,
with many
individuals
reporting the
emergence of
sensitivity around
this timeCommon
comorbidities
(auditory
disorders):
-Tinnitus
-Hyperacusis
-PhonophobiaGenerally not
self-produced
stimuliFeelings of being
overwhelmed leads
to:
-Escape behaviour
(e.g., leaving the
environment)
-Aggressive
outbursts (e.g.,
verbal or physical
aggression)Some individuals
experience
thoughts of suicide
due to distressAltering
interpretation:
-Change way of
thinking about the
stimuli
-Cultivating
understanding and
empathy to avoid
assigning blameSeverity of
reactions often
depends on the
person producing
the trigger sound
Meaning of the
triggering stimuli
can alter emotional
responses (e.g.,
identifying sounds
incorrectly reduces
the misophonic
response)Difficulty focusing,
hyper-fixation on
soundsDevelopment of
mental health
problems,
increased
emotional
reactivity, and
difficulties
regulating
emotionsTaking steps to
reduce anxiety and
enhance emotional
regulation:
-Mindfulness
-Breathing
techniques
Simply imagining
trigger stimuli can
evoke similar
emotional
responsesExperience of relief
when identifying
the source of the
trigger stimuliMimicry: engaging
in similar actions
to "cancel out"
intrusive stimuli
Recognize
reactions as
unwanted,
uncontrolled, and
sometimes
excessive
voxel-based morphometry or cortical thickness analyses.
Usingspecializedpulsesequencesandprocessingpipelines,
diffusion-weighted brain images capture complementary
information concerning the freedom of movement of water
molecules in the brain, which is affected by differences inwhitematterproperties(seeO’DonnellandPasternak,2015
for an introduction), and has also proven valuable to index
tissue changes and differences in grey matter in clinical
contexts (e.g., in Alzheimer’s Disease; see Silva-Rudberg
and Mecca, 2024). Diffusion-weighted data can be used in
MA Savard, EBJ Coffey: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 8 of 17

Journal Pre-proofJournal Pre-proof
Models of misophonia
a volumetric fashion, i.e., studying the intensity of signals
in whole-brain or volume-based regions of interest proba-
bilistically encompassing white matter tracts. Anatomical
templates can be used to reduce the analysis to a white
matter‘skeleton’,orwhitemattertractscanbeexploredand
dissected using tractography approaches (Johansen-Berg
and Rushworth, 2009). These tools reveal relatively static
differences between people with misophonia and controls
in specific brain regions and in the network of white matter
tracts that allow for inter-region communication.
To date, there have been few studies comparing struc-
turalneuroanatomyinpeoplewithandwithoutmisophonia,
especiallyusingwhole-brainapproaches.Resultsandimpli-
cationsfromthosewhichwerepublishedpriorto2022were
reviewed in Neacsiu et al. (2022). Here follows an abbrevi-
ated summary, which we represent schematically in Figure
1A. In brief, the first reported finding of a structural abnor-
malityinpeoplewithmisophonia(N=20)ascomparedwith
controls (N = 22) comes from Kumar et al. (2017), who
found higher myelination in the ventromedial pre-frontal
cortex whole-brain analysis (using a magnetization transfer
saturationindex,whichreflectsmyelinationingreymatter),
noting that statistical analyses were restricted to regions
foundviafunctionalconnectivityanalysistobeconnectedto
the anterior insular cortex. Eijsker et al. (2021b) compared
patientswithmisophonia(N=24)withcontrols(N=25)in
a whole-brain analysis and found larger grey matter volume
intherightamygdala,whichtheyinterpretedasbeinglinked
to the increased emotional reactivity to misophonia sounds
observed in people with the disorder. Their related work in
the same sample showed greater white matter volumes in
the left inferior fronto-occipital fasciculus, the body of the
corpus callosum connecting bilateral superior frontal gyri,
andtheanteriorthalamicradiation,aswellasloweraveraged
radial and mean diffusivities in widespread white matter
areas in patients as compared to controls (Eijsker et al.,
2021a). The authors speculate that biological alterations
may be related to differences in social-emotional process-
ing. In an investigation of structural anomalies associated
with sound sensitivities (N = 80), Kliuchko et al. (2018)
found correlations between a metric of noise sensitivity
and enlarged grey matter volumes in bilateral hippocampus
and temporal pole, and in right insula. This larger study is
well-powered and likely includes people with misophonia,
but the study design did not differentiate misophonia from
othernoisesensitivities(forwhichreasontheresultsarenot
included on the summary diagram).
The results of structural abnormalities in misophonia
demonstrate that there are indeed observable neurophysio-
logicaldifferencesinthispopulationtowhichMRImeasures
are sensitive. Widespread differences in white matter tissue
properties,particularlyinfrontalregions,agreewiththesug-
gestionthattransferofinformationbetweenregionsinvolved
in higher-level cognitive functions may be relevant to the
disorder,aswellastheinvolvementoflimbicstructuressuch
as amygdala in the emotional experiences associated with
misophonic reactions.Whiletheseresultscouldcontributetospatially-informed
brain-wide models, there are several important caveats to
doingsoatthepresenttime.Mostimportantly,therearefew
studies that take a whole-brain approach, and those which
exist differ considerably in their approaches. It is currently
difficult to combine results across studies, and impossible
to assess replicability. Additionally, the structural brain
differenceswhichhavebeenidentifiedhavegenerallynotyet
been directly associated with specific aspects of cognitive
orbehaviouralmeasuresorsymptomseverity,limitingtheir
interpretability.
Even in fields with an extensive history and corpus of
publishedanatomicalstudies,theclarity,quality,andconsis-
tencyofaggregateresultscanbehamperedbymethodolog-
ical issues including small sample size, characterization of
groups, and whether confounding factors (e.g., medication
use, comorbidities) have been statistically accounted for
(Brambilla et al., 2003). Because misophonia can be con-
fused with other sound-sensitivity disorders (Henry et al.,
2022), and is frequently comorbid with other conditions
(Jager et al., 2020), a thorough investigation of how struc-
turalneuroanatomyinprimarymisophoniadiffersfromboth
healthycontrolsandcomorbiddisordersisneeded(seeTable
2 in Neacsiu et al., 2022 for a summary of brain region
alterations relevant to misophonia in common comorbid
disorders). Thus we encourage caution in interpreting these
findings and including them in models, but suggest that
futuremodelswillbenefitfromdataderivedfromstructural
investigationsinwell-controlled,largesamples,appropriate
controls, whole brain/discovery based analyses in parallel
with the use of ROI-based analyses for focused research
questions, and open science (e.g., through data-sharing).
3.5. Functional neurophysiology of misophonia
Considerably more work is available on functional as
compared with structural neuroanatomy in misophonia.
Blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) fMRI is the most
commonly used technique for investigating brain-behaviour
relationships in a spatially-resolved fashion. It indexes tran-
sient hemodynamic changes that are associated with neu-
ral activity in grey matter. In resting state fMRI studies,
participants are asked to lie passively in the scanner and
allow their minds to wander, usually for about 10 minutes.
The recordings are subsequently used to compute patterns
of connectivity between brain regions and within networks
of regions, many of which have established functions (e.g.,
sensory networks; see Lee et al., 2013 for a review). The
strength of connectivity patterns can differ between groups
and be correlated with external variables.
In task-based fMRI studies, brain activity is evoked by
presenting stimuli or asking participants to perform cogni-
tivetasks,andcontrastsaremadebetweenconditionstoiso-
latespecificfunctionsofresearchinterest.Ascomparedwith
resting state analyses, task-based studies allow for higher
precision and greater explanatory power concerning cogni-
tive processes, though studies must be designed for specific
research questions (and often have smaller samples). Both
MA Savard, EBJ Coffey: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 9 of 17

Journal Pre-proofJournal Pre-proof
Models of misophonia
AMYA) B)
CC
Ant. thal.
radiation
left IFOF
White matter 
Grey matter
vmPFC
OFCSTG
ACC
AMYAIC
SMAdlPFC
Greater activity / 
hyperconnectivity
Figure 1: Brain regions and tracts implicated in misophonia. A) Structural and B) functional differences between people with
misophonia and controls from whole-brain neuroimaging analyses. IFOF = inferior fronto-occipital fasciculus, CC = corpus
callosum, ATR = anterior thalamic thalamic radiation, AMY = amygdala, SMA = supplementary motor area, AIC = anterior
insular cortex, STG = superior temporal gyrus, ACC = anterior cingulate cortex, vmPFC = ventromedial prefrontal cortex, OFC
= orbitofrontal cortex. Note that right hemisphere homologues are shown in due to the orientation of the brain image, hemisphere
is labelled if not observed bilaterally. Drawing by E.B.J. Coffey used with permission.
contrast-basedanalysesandfunctionalconnectivityanalyses
(i.e.,correlationofactivitybetweendifferentregions)canbe
used on data collected during task performance, to identify
brain regions that are more active in one condition than
another,andtoinvestigatecommunicationbetweenthem.As
withstructuralneuroimagingresults,resultsfromfunctional
neuroimaging studies could contribute spatial information
to development of models of misophonia, sometimes with
added specificity concerning links between brain functions
and regions.
Neacsiu et al. (2022) have recently reviewed the fMRI
results associated with misophonia (vs. controls), which
we summarize in Figure 1B (please see also Table 1 in
Neacsiu et al., 2022). Most results as regards lateralization
andconnectivityunderspecificconditionshaveeithernotyet
beendirectlyinvestigatedorreplicated,forwhichreasonwe
aimforahigh-levelviewofinvolvedstructures.Inbrief,dif-
ferences in activation of the amygdala and connectivity be-
tween amygdala and other brain regions have been found in
people with misophonia when they listen to trigger stimuli,
and under resting state conditions (though Schröder et al.,
2019 suggested that observed amygdala activity may relate
more to raised anxiety levels than to the misophonic re-
sponseperse).Otherlimbicregionsimplicatedinprocessing
andregulatingemotionsandbehaviour,includingtheamyg-
dala, have been found in group comparisons. These regions
also include the anterior cingulate cortex, which is involved
inemotion,action,andmemory,andtheorbitofrontalcortex,
to which it is connected and from which it receives infor-
mation about reward and non-reward outcomes (see Rolls,
2019forareview).Theanteriorcingulatecortexalsoshows
hyperconnectivity to frontal, temporal and occipital regions
at rest, hyperactivation during exposure to trigger sounds,
and hyperconnectivity with other structures including the
amygdala and hippocampus, in people with misophonia.
Individuals with misophonia also show greater activity in
theanteriorinsularcortexwhenlisteningtosounds,aregionwhichisthoughttoplayaroleinsubjectiveemotionalexpe-
rience by integrating bottom-up interoceptive signals with
top-down predictions so as to generate a current awareness
state, as well as provide descending predictions to visceral
systems that provide a point of reference for autonomic
reflexes (Gu et al., 2013). In addition, the ventromedial
prefrontal cortex activation, which is involved in evaluating
risk and regulating emotions; and dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex,whichhasarangeofhigher-levelcognitivefunctions
includingworkingmemory,planning,decisionmaking,pro-
cessing threat-induced anxiety, social perspective taking,
theoryofmind,anddeductivereasoning,showirregularities
in connectivity in people with misophonia. Connectivity
differenceshavealsobeenfoundbetweensuperiortemporal
gyrus, which is involved in identifying and interpreting
sound sources and auditory attention, and both limbic and
motorsystemstructures.Finally,arecentstudyadditionally
reportedactivitywithinbilateraldorsalcerebellarregionsin
responsetotriggersound(Grossinietal.,2022).Dorsalcere-
bellelar regions are proposed to play critical roles in social
and emotional processing and learning, via reciprocal con-
nections to cortical networks for sensorimotor integration,
understanding mental and emotional states of others, and a
limbicnetworksupportingcoreemotional(dis)pleasureand
arousal processes (see Van Overwalle (2024)).
fMRI-based approaches have several limitations as we
consider their contributions to our models. Notably for
resting-state designs, participants’ cognitive state and ac-
tivities may vary. For example, participants frequently fall
asleep during resting state scans (Soon et al., 2021; Tagli-
azucchi and Laufs, 2014). Sleep is a unique physiologi-
cal state and vigilance levels and autonomic physiology
both affect brain hemodynamics, sometimes in regionally-
specificways,showingthatthephysiologicalconstituentsof
fMRI signals can vary considerably and confound research
questions (Gold et al., 2024). Vigilance and autonomic
factors may also impact results from task-based results in
unanticipated ways. For example, subjects with misophonia
MA Savard, EBJ Coffey: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 10 of 17

Journal Pre-proofJournal Pre-proof
Models of misophonia
whohavesignedupforastudyinwhichtheyexpecttohear
their trigger sounds may be in a different state of arousal
than those without such expectations. This hypothetical
heightenedvigilancestatedifferencemightaffecthowmuch
sleep data are included in a group contrast, directly affect
how well a participant is able to concentrate on a cognitive
task, and affect at the physiological level properties of the
hemodynamic response.
Despite such potential confounds, our incomplete view
of neuroanatomical differences in misophonia, and limita-
tionsinourknowledgeconcerningthespecificityofcurrent
resultstothedisorder,theregionsinvolvedandtheirknown
function contribute ideas as to which systems and networks
should be included in models of misophonia. In the next
section, we review the few existing models of misophonia
andthenproposeadditionalnetworksthatcouldbeincluded
in future models.
4. Existing models of misophonia
Whilemanypapersontheneurocognitivebasisofmiso-
phonia include mechanistic speculations, few have elabo-
rated these ideas into models. Exceptions include Jastreboff
and Jastreboff (2014, 2023), who focus on connectivity
differencesbetweenauditoryandlimbicsystems;Aryaland
Prabhu (2023), who put forth a neuroaudiological model of
misophonia; and Kumar et al. (2021, 2017), who proposed
a model that focused on interactions between auditory and
motorsystem,whichwasmorerecentlyupdatedwithasocial
cognition focus (Berger et al., 2024). We briefly describe
here the main ideas of these models (see original works for
details).
JastreboffandJastreboff(2023)’smodelemphasizesthe
differences between misophonia and hyperacusis, with a
focus on developing mechanistically-informed treatments
for these disorders. They propose that in hyperacusis, pre-
attentive steps in the auditory pathway are subject to abnor-
mally high gain, resulting in over amplification of neuronal
activity. The over-amplified signal then causes exaggerated
responses of the limbic system via direct connections, and
indirectly via brain regions responsible for perception and
evaluation of sounds. In contrast, the auditory system is
proposed to function normally in misophonia, but to stim-
ulate the limbic and autonomic nervous system regions
through abnormal connectivity. These abnormal connec-
tions are driven by a process called ‘complex conditioned
stimuli’inwhichotherelementsofascenesuchaspersonal
relationships and controllability account for the over repre-
sentation of orofacially-generated sounds and greater reac-
tions to sounds produced by family members. This model
is somewhat situated in the brain, accounts for many extant
findings, and leads to testable predictions. For example, we
mightpredictthatmisokinesia(visually-generated)wouldbe
independentofmisophonia,orthattheseverityofmisopho-
nia would strongly correlate with measures of connectivity
between auditory and limbic systems.
Aryal and Prabhu (2023) centres on the role of auditory
processing in misophonia, whilst acknowledging that it ismost likely a neurophysiological disorder that borders au-
diology,neurology,andpsychiatry.Theirneuroaudiological
model proposes that auditory processing from the auditory
periphery through to the subcortical areas is normal; how-
ever, that (non-classical) pathways from subcortical struc-
turestothelimbicsystemandautonomicnervoussystemare
stronger or hyperactive in people with misophonia, leading
to the disorder’s emotional and physical responses. Aryal
and Prabhu (2023) also hypothesize that impaired sensory
gating (reduced inhibition) leads to abnormal neural ac-
tivity of auditory cortex and association areas, which then
increases negative association of triggers and emotions via
processes of classical conditioning.
This model has many similarities with that of Jastreboff
andJastreboff(2023),andisalsolooselyspatiallysituatedin
thebrain,inthesensethatsubcorticalandcorticalprocesses
and their interaction are indicated. It would account for
several of the main findings related to auditory processing
in people with misophonia, and partly addresses etiology
by invoking processes of classical conditioning. However,
it is not explicit about where, when and how neuroplastic
changes might take place, and which of the group differ-
ences(reducedinhibitionorabnormalconnectivitybetween
subcortical auditory structures and limbic system) might
be the primary neurophysiological cause of misophonia. A
mechanism that explains both the stronger subcortical con-
nection to the limbic system and impaired sensory gating,
andwhetherthesefactorsmightleadtodifferentsubtypesof
misophonia, is not explained. This model does not address
the full range of observations summarized in Table 1; for
example, why general group differences in response inhi-
bition or subcortical pathways to the limbic system should
be linked to specific types of triggers (e.g., predominantly
orofacially-generatedsounds).Theauthorsacknowledgethe
preliminarynatureofthemodelandemphasizetheneedfor
moreworkinlargersamples,andparticularlyoftheneedto
consider comorbidity, potential sub-types, and the severity
of misophonia.
Berger et al. (2024)’s model of misophonia centers
around social cognition, positing that misophonic distress
arises from the interplay between auditory perception and
motor representation (the ‘perception-action’ link). The
authors argue that in misophonia, the brain generates motor
representations of sounds, a process that typically occurs
during normal sound processing. Heightened connectivity
between auditory and motor regions in people with miso-
phonia, influenced by the context of the auditory stimulus,
leads to an aberrant signal possibly in the form of an error
signal being forwarded to the insula, a brain region known
to be involved in ‘motor empathy’, which is defined as
the tendency to automatically mimic the motor response
of others (amongst other functions). From there, abnormal
information is passed to the amygdala and autonomic ner-
vous system, where it generates abnormally high emotional
and physiological responses. Notably, the model allows for
the bidirectional nature of these processes; a feed-forward
pathway from auditory system to limbic system generates
MA Savard, EBJ Coffey: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 11 of 17

Journal Pre-proofJournal Pre-proof
Models of misophonia
a response, but is also influenced by predictive coding
mechanisms that can lead to anticipatory responses and
feedback loops that act to further intensify the emotional
impact of trigger sounds.
The motor-related basis of Berger et al. (2024)’s model
allows for an explanation for observed involvement of the
motor system including reported mimicry behaviours, and
canbeextendedtofurtherpredictionssuchasthatmisopho-
nia suffers would exhibit stronger auditory-motor imagery,
as do professional musicians. It is more explicit than pre-
vious models as regards brain structures, e.g., emphasizing
motor cortex involvement and hypothesizing roles for ante-
rior insular cortex and amygdala.
The three models presented are generally not mutually
exclusive,thoughtheyemphasizedifferentaspectsofcogni-
tion, neuropathophysiology, and etiology; and they differ in
the degree to which neural structures are delineated. While
parsimonious models are desirable, each of these does not
accountforthefullrangeofphenomenological,behavioural
and cognitive observations (Table 1). In the next section,
weintroducesomeneuralnetworksandprocesseswhichare
plausibly involved in misophonia from structural and func-
tional observations (Figure 1), and which may contribute to
a more comprehensive view of the disorder.
5. Situating misophonia within the broader
auditory network
While existing models of misophonia emphasize nor-
mality of lower-level auditory processing - correctly in our
view - it is unclear where the auditory system is thought
tostopin each of these models. For example, Berger et al.
(2024) argue that misophonia is not primarily an auditory
disorder, partly because the first clear abnormality has been
linkedtotheposteriorsuperiortemporalgyrus/sulcus,which
processes both auditory and visual information. We instead
support the view that brain acts as an integrated system,
wellbeyondtheprimaryauditorycortex,toprocessessound.
Increasingly complex and abstract sound representations
are produced at progressively higher levels, combined with
information from other sensory modalities, used by and
influenced by a variety of cognitive systems. Higher-order
processes play a key role in propagating auditory repre-
sentations through the system, even at early stages (e.g.,
Puschmann et al., 2024), via descending projections.
Thisviewhasrelevanceforhowweconceptualizemiso-
phoniaandwhichotherareasofworkmayhaverelevanceto
understandit.Forexample,agreatdealisknownconcerning
how auditory perception gives rise to emotional reactions
in the context of musical pleasure; the neural structures
involved extend well beyond primary auditory cortex and
invoke predictive processes (see Zatorre (2024) for an in-
depth treatise on this topic). Of particular interest is that
auditory processing branches into two streams after exiting
the primary auditory cortex (in superior temporal gyrus),
illustratedinFigure2.Thedorsalstreamdealswithtemporal
dependenciesandpredictions,andsensorimotorintegration.Theventralstreamisspecializedinholdingsoundsinmind,
extractingstructuralregularities,organizingsoundsintocat-
egories, and assigning them meaning. Both streams could
be involved in misophonia. The motor involvement empha-
sized by Kumar et al. (2021) would be in-line with dorsal
streamprocessing,whereastriggersoundidentification(e.g.,
HellerandSmith,2022;Samermitetal.,2022;Savardetal.,
2022) would most congruent with ventral stream functions.
Considerationofdorsalandventralprocessingwouldleadto
models that predict partly dissociable subtypes of misopho-
nia,perhapsaccountingforsomeofthevariabilityobserved
in the disorder.
Sensorypredictionsintheauditorysystemarecomputed
atthecorticallevel(forbothstreams),andbidirectionalcon-
nectivity to subcortical structures is involved in generating
andassigningemotionalresponsessoastoguidebehaviour,
which also strongly influences processes of learning and
neuroplasticity (Zatorre, 2024). As the lack of capacity to
experience musical pleasure can be tied to reduced con-
nectivity between the auditory cortex and the subcortical
reward network (i.e., ‘musical anhedonia’, see Martínez-
Molina et al. (2016)), misophonia may also be related to
abnormalities in the wider auditory system. In fact, some
evidencesuggeststhatthefrequencywithwhichindividuals
experience emotional responses to sound covaries across
both negative (i.e., misophonic triggers) and positive (i.e.,
musical) emotional contexts (Mednicoff et al., 2024).
For the purposes of generating mechanistic models of
misophonia, we suggest that several ideas should be kept in
mind.First,thattheauditorysystemneitherstartsnorendsat
the primary auditory cortex. Its function and dysfunction is
largelydefinedviainteractionswithothercognitivesystems
and structures, which may treat other types of information.
Second, the absence of observed abnormality in one exper-
imental paradigm and measurement method does not pre-
cludetheexistenceofabnormality.Finally,whendifferences
inneuralsignalsareobservedduringearlyprocessingstages,
they may reflect top-down modulation from later stages or
group differences in vigilance states, rather than alterations
in lower-level processes. The importance of higher-level
cognition is suggested by observed patterns in misophonic
responses and coping mechanisms (Table 1) and is congru-
ent with the considerable frontal lobe involvement (Figure
1B); however, the roles of higher-level networks are not
explicitinextantmodels.Inthenextsection,wesummarize
several networks that could be involved in misophonia, for
consideration in future models.
6. Potential involvement of higher-level
networks
6.1. Salience, default mode, & central executive
networks
The salience network (SN), described by Seeley et al.
(2007),playsacriticalroleindetectingandfilteringsignifi-
cant stimuli based on cognitive, homeostatic, or emotional
factors (Craig, 2002, 2009; Goulden et al., 2014). Within
MA Savard, EBJ Coffey: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 12 of 17

Journal Pre-proofJournal Pre-proof
Models of misophonia
A) Dorsal Auditory Stream B) Ventral Auditory Stream
C) Salience and Central Executive Networks D) Attention Networks
ACC
 ACC
AMYTHAL
THAL
dlPFC
 dlPFC
Executive Control
Salience Network
Central Executive
Network
Orienting Network
Alerting NetworkP/AIC PCCIPL
SPL
TPJ
LC
PL
FL
Figure 2: Networksandpathwaysofpotentialinterestformisophoniamodels.A)DorsalandB)ventralauditoryprocessingstreams,
showing simplified schematic depictions of anatomical connectivity, based on diffusion MRI. The dorsal stream is specialized in
temporal dependencies and sensorimotor integration, whereas the ventral stream is involved in holding sounds in mind, extracting
regularities, categorizing sound, and assigning meaning. Both streams are likely to be involved in misophonia, as well as their
differing connectivity with subcortical structures, possibly explaining variability in phenotype. Colours represent different fibre
tracts. C) Illustrates the neuroanatomy of the salience and central executive networks (which are anticorrelated with the default
mode network, not shown). D) Illustrates prominent regions involved in alerting, orienting and executive control aspects of
attention. IPL = inferior parietal lobule, THAL = thalamus, P/AIC = posterior / anterior insular cortex, SPL = superior parietal
lobule, TPJ = tempoparietal junction, FL = frontal lobe, PL = parietal lobe, LC = locus coeruleus. Drawings by E.B.J. Coffey
with pathway overlay as in Zatorre (2024), used with permission.
the SN, the anterior insula facilitates bottom-up detection
of salient events and manages transitions between networks
essentialforattentionandworkingmemory.Itmonitorsboth
internal and external environments, regulating autonomic
responses with the posterior insula (Seeley et al., 2007).
Strong connectivity with the ACC enables quick reactions
tosalientstimuli(MenonandUddin,2010),whiletheACC
integrates cognitive and emotional information, guiding be-
haviour and supporting decision-making via the prefrontal
cortex(Gouldenetal.,2014).TheSN,particularlytheright
AI,coordinatestransitionsbetweennetworks,activatingthe
Central Executive Network (CEN) while deactivating the
DefaultModeNetwork(DMN)toengagedifferentcognitive
processes(Sridharanetal.,2008).Themainareasimplicated
in SN and CEN are illustrated in Figure 2C.
The CEN, which comprises the dorsolateral prefrontal
cortex and parietal regions, is crucial for higher cogni-
tive functions like attention and decision-making, balanc-
ing demands from the dorsal attention system and the
hippocampal-cortical memory system (Seeley et al., 2007;
Vincent et al., 2008). In contrast, the DMN—active during
restandintrospection—supportsself-referentialthoughtand
memoryretrieval,deactivatingduringgoal-directedtaskstomaintain a baseline state of awareness that facilitates the
processingofstimuli(Raichleetal.,2001).TheSNandCEN
are correlated, and both are anti-correlated to the default
mode network (Raichle et al., 2001). The balance between
the SN and DMN is critical for cognitive control; failures
to deactivate the DMN during external attention tasks are
linkedtoattentionlapses(LeechandSharp,2014;Weissman
et al., 2006). A stronger anticorrelation between SN and
DMNactivitycorrelateswithbettercognitivecontrol(Kelly
et al., 2008). Thus, the balance between these networks is
crucial for modulating attentional focus.
In misophonia, heightened SN activation—especially
in the AI—may lead to exaggerated responses to trigger
sounds, affecting emotional and attentional processes, and
increased coupling between the AI and DMN may impair
DMN deactivation, allowing memories and contextual as-
sociations to intensify the misophonic response (Kumar
et al., 2017). Studies suggest hyperactivation of the AI in
misophonia, linking the SN’s role in detecting significant
stimulitotheseintensifiedresponses.Additionally,thetriple
network model posits that aberrant interactions within the
SN, CEN, and DMN contribute to neuropsychiatric dis-
orders (see Schimmelpfennig et al., 2023 for a review),
MA Savard, EBJ Coffey: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 13 of 17

Journal Pre-proofJournal Pre-proof
Models of misophonia
emphasizing the implications of altered salience processing
in conditions like misophonia (Menon, 2011).
6.2. Attention networks
The Attention Network Theory (ANT; Posner et al.,
1990) identifies three interacting attention networks: alert-
ing, orienting, and executive control, the main components
ofwhichareillustratedinFigure2D.Thesenetworksengage
specific brain regions and contribute to different attentional
processes, with research on misophonia highlighting im-
pairments and enhancements in each (see section Cognitive
differencesinthepresenceofmisophonicsounds).Networks
are introduced below, but see Posner and Rothbart (2007)
and Fernandez-Duque and Posner (2001) for more details.
The alerting network, linked to the norepinephrine sys-
tem, activates the thalamus, frontal cortex, and parietal
cortex to increase sensitivity to stimuli (Fan et al., 2005).
It increases activation in the right frontal-parietal system,
even in the absence of stimuli, across sensory modalities,
includingauditoryattention(Belinetal.,1998).Theorient-
ing network is responsible for selecting and aligning atten-
tionwithsensoryinputs,bothautomaticallyandvoluntarily
(Spence and Driver, 1994). Key regions in this network
include the superior parietal lobe (for orienting to a cued
location)andthetemporalparietaljunction(fororientingto
uncued, unattended targets) (Corbetta and Shulman, 2002).
The executive control network monitors and resolves con-
flicts among thoughts and responses, mainly involving the
ACC,whichshowsenhancedconnectivitywiththeattended
sensory modality (Crottaz-Herbette and Menon, 2006). For
reviewsontheroleofexecutiveattentionindifferentcogni-
tive tasks, see Bush et al., 2000; Carter et al., 1999; Posner
andRothbart,1998).Otherkeyareasincludethedorsolateral
prefrontalcortex,andportionsofthebasalganglia.Notably,
ventralareasoftheACCarecloselyinvolvedwithemotional
regulation, while dorsal areas are more involved in purely
cognitive tasks (Bush et al., 1998).
Considering the activity in these networks when devel-
opingmodelsofmisophoniapresentsavaluableopportunity
forresearcherstoelucidatethecognitivemechanismsunder-
lying this disorder. The observed behavioural impairments
in the alerting network indicate difficulties in maintaining
focus and readiness, which may contribute to heightened
emotional responses to aversive stimuli. At the same time,
the enhancements noted in the orienting network suggest a
selective attentional bias toward threatening sounds.
7. Challenges and next steps
Models are only as good as the data upon which they
are based. Recent reviews of the neurobiology of misopho-
nia note the lack of consensus on assessing and defining
misophonia, as well as limited quantity and specificity of
availabledata(Bergeretal.,2024;JastreboffandJastreboff,
2023;Neacsiuetal.,2022).Inconsistencyintheuseofmiso-
phonia questionnaires and in inclusion of comorbid condi-
tions complicates the interpretation of findings, their aggre-
gation, and model development. Therefore, future researchOutstanding Questions
•Does misophonia affect multiple networks through
widespread abnormalities, or via a single process
with widespread connections?
•Are there misophonia subtypes (e.g., related to
dorsal (motor) and ventral (semantic) cortical
streams)?
•Are neurophysiological abnormalities in misopho-
nia common to misokinesia (or other related
disorders), or specific to the auditory modality?
•What is the neurophysiological relationship be-
tween positive and negative emotional experiences
generated through sound (e.g., musical reward,
misophonic distress)?
•If there are cognitive advantages to misophonia
(under quiet conditions), are they the result of
neuroplastic compensatory processes or inherent
to abormalities that have both negative and posi-
tive consequences?
•In which misophonia-relevant networks can neuro-
plastic processes be stimulated (i.e., through cop-
ing mechanisms, training, or brain stimulation)?
•What will we be able to learn about the mecha-
nisms of misophonia from the success or failure of
treatments that target different aspects?
should continue to investigate how misophonia measures
relate and which best capture the misophonic experience,
and care should be taken to control for comorbidities and
examine their interactions with misophonia, to clarify its
unique neurobiological and behavioural profile. In addition
toaddressingtheselimitations,weproposethatmisophonia
modelswouldbesignificantlyadvancedbyresearchaddress-
ing the outstanding questions listed in Box 1.
8. Conclusions
The present work summarizes the growing body of
observationsconcerningthephenotypeofmisophonia,with
a view to building cognitive and neurophysiologically-
informed models of the disorder. In considering the few
available models, we can conclude that while they each
account for some of the observations (and could be used
to generate some testable predictions), misophonia is a
complexdisorderwithconsiderablephenotypicalvariability
which likely cannot be explained by abnormality within a
singlecognitivenetwork.Whileneurocognitivemodelsthat
are as parsimonious as possible are desirable (as with other
sortsofmodelsofcognition;Cassimatisetal.,2008),models
which do not account for the complexity and variability
of the disorder will have limited explanatory value. We
therefore propose consideration of the auditory system as
a unified whole including processes downstream of the
MA Savard, EBJ Coffey: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 14 of 17

Journal Pre-proofJournal Pre-proof
Models of misophonia
primaryauditorycortex,andinclusionofadditionalhigher-
level networks. We hope this work will facilitate refine-
ments in our understanding of misophonia by contributing
to neurologically-informed cognitive models and that will
allow for their evolution, ultimately informing better treat-
ments.
9. Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Robert Zatorre for dis-
cussion, the Misophonia Research Fund and REAM Foun-
dationforsupportingourempiricalworkonmisophonia,as
well as their work and support promoting rigorous scien-
tificinvestigationofmisophoniaworldwide.MASisfunded
by an Alexander Graham Bell Canada Graduate doctoral
Scholarships from the Natural Sciences and Engineering
Research Council of Canada (NSERC) and holds a SoQuiet
Misophonia Student Research Grant. Coffey’s lab is also
supported by NSERC, as well as the Canadian Institutes
of Health Research (CIHR) and the Fonds de recherche du
Québec (FRQ).
10. CRediT author statement
Emily B.J. Coffey & Marie-Anick Savard: Conceptu-
alization, Writing - Original Draft, Writing - Review &
Editing, Visualization.
References
Aazh, H., Moore, B.C., Scaglione, T., Remmert, N., 2023. Psychometric
evaluationofthemisophoniaimpactquestionnaire(miq)usingaclinical
population of patients seeking help for tinnitus, hyperacusis and/or
misophonia. Journal of the American Academy of Audiology .
American-Psychiatric-Association, 2013. Diagnostic and Statistical Man-
ual of Mental Disorders. Fifth edition ed., American Psychiatric
Association. doi: 10.1176/appi.books .
Aryal, S., Prabhu, P., 2023. Understanding misophonia from an audiologi-
cal perspective: a systematic review. European Archives of Oto-Rhino-
Laryngology 280, 1529–1545.
Ash, P.A., Benzaquén, E., Gander, P.E., Berger, J.I., Kumar, S., 2024.
Mimicryinmisophonia:Alarge-scalesurveyofprevalenceandrelation-
ship with trigger sounds. Journal of clinical psychology 80, 186–197.
Belin,P.,McAdams,S.,Smith,B.,Savel,S.,Thivard,L.,Samson,S.,Sam-
son,Y.,1998.Thefunctionalanatomyofsoundintensitydiscrimination.
Journal of Neuroscience 18, 6388–6394.
Berger, J.I., Gander, P.E., Kumar, S., 2024. A social cognition perspective
onmisophonia. PhilosophicalTransactionsoftheRoyalSocietyB379,
20230257.
Bernstein, R.E., Angell, K.L., Dehle, C.M., 2013. A brief course of
cognitive behavioural therapy for the treatment of misophonia: a case
example. The Cognitive Behaviour Therapist 6.
Bialystok, E., Craik, F.I., 2022. How does bilingualism modify cognitive
function? attentionto themechanism. Psychonomic Bulletin &Review
29, 1246–1269.
Black, V., 2024. Breaking the sound barrier - teens with misophonia.
https://youtu.be/l401uIyrE_A . Accessed: November 2024.
Blohm, G., Kording, K.P., Schrater, P.R., 2020. A how-to-model guide for
neuroscience. Eneuro 7.
Brambilla,P.,Hardan,A.,DiNemi,S.U.,Perez,J.,Soares,J.C.,Barale,F.,
2003. Brain anatomy and development in autism: review of structural
mri studies. Brain research bulletin 61, 557–569.Brennan, C.R., Lindberg, R.R., Kim, G., Castro, A.A., Khan, R.A., Beren-
baum,H.,Husain,F.T.,2024. Misophoniaandhearingcomorbiditiesin
a collegiate population. Ear and hearing 45, 390–399.
Brout,J.J.,Edelstein,M.,Erfanian,M.,Mannino,M.,Miller,L.J.,Rouw,R.,
Kumar, S., Rosenthal, M.Z., 2018. Investigating misophonia: A review
of the empirical literature, clinical implications, and a research agenda.
Frontiers in Neuroscience 12, 36.
Bruxner, G., 2016. ‘mastication rage’: a review of misophonia–an under-
recognised symptom of psychiatric relevance? Australasian Psychiatry
24, 195–197.
Bush, G., Luu, P., Posner, M.I., 2000. Cognitive and emotional influences
in anterior cingulate cortex. Trends in cognitive sciences 4, 215–222.
Bush,G.,Whalen,P.J.,Rosen,B.R.,Jenike,M.A.,McInerney,S.C.,Rauch,
S.L., 1998. The counting stroop: an interference task specialized for
functionalneuroimaging—validationstudywithfunctionalmri. Human
brain mapping 6, 270–282.
Carter, C.S., Botvinick, M.M., Cohen, J.D., 1999. The contribution of the
anterior cingulate cortex to executive processes in cognition. Reviews
in the Neurosciences 10, 49–58.
Cassiello-Robbins, C., Anand, D., McMahon, K., Guetta, R., Trumbull,
J., Kelley, L., Rosenthal, M.Z., 2020. The mediating role of emotion
regulationwithintherelationshipbetweenneuroticismandmisophonia:
A preliminary investigation. Frontiers in Psychiatry 11, 847.
Cassimatis, N.L., Bello, P., Langley, P., 2008. Ability, breadth, and par-
simony in computational models of higher-order cognition. Cognitive
Science 32, 1304–1322.
Cavanna,A.E.,Seri,S.,2015.Misophonia:currentperspectives.Neuropsy-
chiatric disease and treatment , 2117–2123.
Claiborn,J.M.,Dozier,T.H.,Hart,S.L.,Lee,J.,2020. Self-identifiedmiso-
phonia phenomenology, impact, and clinical correlates. Psychological
Thought 13, 349.
Cohen, Y.E., Bennur, S., Christison-Lagay, K., Gifford, A.M., Tsunada,
J., 2016. Functional organization of the ventral auditory pathway.
Physiology, Psychoacoustics and Cognition in Normal and Impaired
Hearing , 381–388.
Corbetta,M.,Shulman,G.L.,2002. Controlofgoal-directedandstimulus-
driven attention in the brain. Nature reviews neuroscience 3, 201–215.
Craig, A.D., 2002. How do you feel? interoception: the sense of the
physiological condition of the body. Nature reviews neuroscience 3,
655–666.
Craig, A.D., 2009. How do you feel—now? the anterior insula and human
awareness. Nature reviews neuroscience 10, 59–70.
Crottaz-Herbette, S., Menon, V., 2006. Where and when the anterior
cingulatecortexmodulatesattentionalresponse:combinedfmrianderp
evidence. Journal of cognitive neuroscience 18, 766–780.
Cusack, S.E., Cash, T.V., Vrana, S.R., 2018. An examination of the
relationship between misophonia, anxiety sensitivity, and obsessive-
compulsive symptoms. Journal of Obsessive-Compulsive and Related
Disorders 18, 67–72.
Daniels,E.C.,Rodriguez,A.,Zabelina,D.L.,2020. Severityofmisophonia
symptoms is associated with worse cognitive control when exposed to
misophonia trigger sounds. PloS one 15, e0227118.
Edelstein, M., Brang, D., Rouw, R., Ramachandran, V.S., 2013. Miso-
phonia: physiological investigations and case descriptions. Frontiers in
Human Neuroscience 7, 296.
Edelstein, M., Monk, B., Ramachandran, V., Rouw, R., 2020. Context
influenceshowindividualswithmisophoniarespondtosounds. biorxiv
, 2020–09.
Eijsker,N.,Schröder,A.,Liebrand,L.C.,Smit,D.J.,vanWingen,G.,Denys,
D., 2021a. White matter abnormalities in misophonia. NeuroImage:
Clinical 32, 102787.
Eijsker, N., Schröder, A., Smit, D.J., Van Wingen, G., Denys, D., 2019.
Neural basis of response bias on the stop signal task in misophonia.
Frontiers in psychiatry 10, 765.
Eijsker, N., Schröder, A., Smit, D.J., van Wingen, G., Denys, D., 2021b.
Structural and functional brain abnormalities in misophonia. European
Neuropsychopharmacology 52, 62–71.
MA Savard, EBJ Coffey: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 15 of 17

Journal Pre-proofJournal Pre-proof
Models of misophonia
Enzler, F., Loriot, C., Fournier, P., Noreña, A.J., 2021. A psychoacoustic
test for misophonia assessment. Scientific reports 11, 1–14.
Erfanian, M., Kartsonaki, C., Keshavarz, A., 2019a. Misophonia and
comorbidpsychiatricsymptoms:apreliminarystudyofclinicalfindings.
Nordic journal of psychiatry 73, 219–228.
Erfanian, M., Mitchell, A.J., Kang, J., Aletta, F., 2019b. The psychophys-
iological implications of soundscape: A systematic review of empirical
literatureandaresearchagenda. Internationaljournalofenvironmental
research and public health 16, 3533.
Fan,J.,McCandliss,B.D.,Fossella,J.,Flombaum,J.I.,Posner,M.I.,2005.
The activation of attentional networks. Neuroimage 26, 471–479.
Fernandez-Duque, D., Posner, M.I., 2001. Brain imaging of attentional
networks in normal and pathological states. Journal of Clinical and
Experimental Neuropsychology 23, 74–93.
Ferreira, G.M., Harrison, B.J., Fontenelle, L.F., 2013. Hatred of sounds:
misophonic disorder or just an underreported psychiatric symptom? ,
25, 4 25, 271–274.
Ferrer-Torres, A., Giménez-Llort, L., 2021. Confinement and the hatred
of sound in times of covid-19: a molotov cocktail for people with
misophonia. Frontiers in psychiatry 12, 627044.
Ferrer-Torres, A., Giménez-Llort, L., 2022. Misophonia: a systematic
review of current and future trends in this emerging clinical field.
International journal of environmental research and public health 19,
6790.
Frank, B., McKay, D., 2019. The suitability of an inhibitory learning
approach in exposure when habituation fails: A clinical application to
misophonia. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice 26, 130–142.
Frank,B.,Roszyk,M.,Hurley,L.,Drejaj,L.,McKay,D.,2020. Inattention
inmisophonia:Difficultiesachievingandmaintainingalertness. Journal
of clinical and experimental neuropsychology 42, 66–75.
Gold, B.P., Goodale, S.E., Zhao, C., Pourmotabbed, H., de Zwart, J.A.,
Özbay, P.S., Bolt, T.S., Duyn, J.H., Chen, J.E., Chang, C., 2024. Func-
tionalmrisignalsexhibitstrongercovariationwithperipheralautonomic
measures as vigilance decreases. Imaging Neuroscience .
Goulden, N., Khusnulina, A., Davis, N.J., Bracewell, R.M., Bokde, A.L.,
McNulty, J.P., Mullins, P.G., 2014. The salience network is responsible
for switching between the default mode network and the central execu-
tive network: replication from dcm. Neuroimage 99, 180–190.
Gowda, V., Prabhu, P., 2024. Prevalence of misophonia in adolescents
and adults across the globe: A systematic review. Indian Journal of
Otolaryngology and Head & Neck Surgery , 1–9.
Grossini,E.,Stecco,A.,Gramaglia,C.,DeZanet,D.,Cantello,R.,Gori,B.,
Negroni, D., Azzolina, D., Ferrante, D., Feggi, A., et al., 2022. Miso-
phonia: Analysis of the neuroanatomic patterns at the basis of psychi-
atric symptoms and changes of the orthosympathetic/parasympathetic
balance. Frontiers in Neuroscience 16, 827998.
Gu, X., Hof, P.R., Friston, K.J., Fan, J., 2013. Anterior insular cortex and
emotional awareness. Journal of Comparative Neurology 521, 3371–
3388.
Guetta, R.E., Cassiello-Robbins, C., Trumbull, J., Anand, D., Rosenthal,
M.Z., 2022. Examining emotional functioning in misophonia: The role
ofaffectiveinstabilityanddifficultieswithemotionregulation. Plosone
17, e0263230.
Guetta, R.E., Siepsiak, M., Shan, Y., Frazer-Abel, E., Rosenthal, M.Z.,
2024. Misophonia is related to stress but not directly with traumatic
stress. Plos one 19, e0296218.
Hadjipavlou, G., Baer, S., Lau, A., Howard, A., 2008. Selective sound
intolerance and emotional distress: what every clinician should hear.
Psychosomatic medicine 70, 739–740.
Hansen, H.A., Leber, A.B., Saygin, Z.M., 2021. What sound sources
triggermisophonia?notjustchewingandbreathing. JournalofClinical
Psychology 77, 2609–2625.
Hansen, H.A., Leber, A.B., Saygin, Z.M., 2024. The effect of misophonia
on cognitive and social judgments. Plos one 19, e0299698.
Hansen, H.A., Stefancin, P., Leber, A.B., Saygin, Z.M., 2022. Neural
evidence for non-orofacial triggers in mild misophonia. Frontiers in
Neuroscience 16, 880759.Heller, L.M., Smith, J.M., 2022. Identification of everyday sounds affects
their pleasantness. Frontiers in psychology 13, 894034.
Henry, J.A., Theodoroff, S.M., Edmonds, C., Martinez, I., Myers, P.J.,
Zaugg, T.L., Goodworth, M.C., 2022. Sound tolerance conditions (hy-
peracusis, misophonia, noise sensitivity, and phonophobia): Definitions
and clinical management. American journal of audiology 31, 513–527.
Jager,I.,deKoning,P.,Bost,T.,Denys,D.,Vulink,N.,2020. Misophonia:
Phenomenology,comorbidityanddemographicsinalargesample. PloS
one 15, e0231390.
Jastreboff, M.M., Jastreboff, P.J., 2001. Components of decreased sound
tolerance: hyperacusis, misophonia, phonophobia. ITHS News Lett 2,
1–5.
Jastreboff, M.M., Jastreboff, P.J., 2002. Decreased sound tolerance and
tinnitus retraining therapy (trt). Australian and New Zealand Journal
of Audiology, The 24, 74–84.
Jastreboff,P.J.,Jastreboff,M.M.,2014. Treatmentsfordecreasedsoundtol-
erance (hyperacusis and misophonia), in: Seminars in Hearing, Thieme
Medical Publishers. pp. 105–120.
Jastreboff, P.J., Jastreboff, M.M., 2015. Decreased sound tolerance: hyper-
acusis,misophonia,diplacousis,andpolyacousis. Handbookofclinical
neurology 129, 375–387.
Jastreboff, P.J., Jastreboff, M.M., 2023. The neurophysiological approach
to misophonia: Theory and treatment. Frontiers in Neuroscience 17,
895574.
Jaswal, S.M., De Bleser, A.K., Handy, T.C., 2021. Misokinesia is a sensi-
tivity to seeing others fidget that is prevalent in the general population.
Scientific reports 11, 17204.
Johansen-Berg, H., Rushworth, M.F., 2009. Using diffusion imaging to
studyhumanconnectionalanatomy. Annualreviewofneuroscience32,
75–94.
Johnson,P.L.,Webber,T.A.,Wu,M.S.,Lewin,A.B.,Murphy,T.K.,Storch,
E.A., 2013. When selective audiovisual stimuli become unbearable: a
case series on pediatric misophonia. Neuropsychiatry 3, 569–575.
Kelly, A.C., Uddin, L.Q., Biswal, B.B., Castellanos, F.X., Milham, M.P.,
2008. Competition between functional brain networks mediates behav-
ioral variability. Neuroimage 39, 527–537.
Kılıç, C., Öz, G., Avanoğlu, K.B., Aksoy, S., 2021. The prevalence and
characteristicsofmisophoniainankara,turkey:population-basedstudy.
BJPsych open 7.
Kliuchko,M.,Puoliväli,T.,Heinonen-Guzejev,M.,Tervaniemi,M.,Toivi-
ainen, P., Sams, M., Brattico, E., 2018. Neuroanatomical substrate of
noise sensitivity. Neuroimage 167, 309–315.
Kula, F.B., Cropley, M., Aazh, H., 2022. Hyperacusis and misophonia: a
systematic review of psychometric measures. Journal of the American
Academy of Audiology 33, 417–428.
Kumar, S., Dheerendra, P., Erfanian, M., Benzaquén, E., Sedley, W., Gan-
der,P.E.,Lad,M.,Bamiou,D.E.,Griffiths,T.D.,2021. Themotorbasis
for misophonia. Journal of Neuroscience .
Kumar, S., Hancock, O., Cope, T., Sedley, W., Winston, J., Griffiths, T.D.,
2014. Misophonia:adisorderofemotionprocessingofsounds. Journal
of Neurology, Neurosurgery & Psychiatry 85, e3–e3.
Kumar, S., Tansley-Hancock, O., Sedley, W., Winston, J.S., Callaghan,
M.F.,Allen,M.,Cope,T.E.,Gander,P.E.,Bamiou,D.E.,Griffiths,T.D.,
2017. The brain basis for misophonia. Current Biology 27, 527–533.
Lee, M.H., Smyser, C.D., Shimony, J.S., 2013. Resting-state fmri: a
review of methods and clinical applications. American Journal of
neuroradiology 34, 1866–1872.
Leech, R., Sharp, D.J., 2014. The role of the posterior cingulate cortex in
cognition and disease. Brain 137, 12–32.
Martínez-Molina, N., Mas-Herrero, E., Rodríguez-Fornells, A., Zatorre,
R.J., Marco-Pallarés, J., 2016. Neural correlates of specific musical
anhedonia. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 113,
E7337–E7345.
Mattson, S.A., D’Souza, J., Wojcik, K.D., Guzick, A.G., Goodman, W.K.,
Storch, E.A., 2023. A systematic review of treatments for misophonia.
Personalized medicine in psychiatry 39, 100104.
McGeoch, P.D., Rouw, R., 2020. How everyday sounds can trigger strong
emotions: Asmr, misophonia and the feeling of wellbeing. BioEssays
MA Savard, EBJ Coffey: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 16 of 17

Journal Pre-proofJournal Pre-proof
Models of misophonia
42, 2000099.
Mednicoff, S.D., Barashy, S., Gonzales, D., Benning, S.D., Snyder, J.S.,
Hannon, E.E., 2022. Auditory affective processing, musicality, and the
development of misophonic reactions. Frontiers in neuroscience 16,
924806.
Mednicoff,S.D.,Barashy,S.,Vollweiler,D.J.,Benning,S.D.,Snyder,J.S.,
Hannon,E.E.,2024. Misophoniareactionsinthegeneralpopulationare
correlated with strong emotional reactions to other everyday sensory–
emotionalexperiences. PhilosophicalTransactionsoftheRoyalSociety
B 379, 20230253.
Menon, V., 2011. Large-scale brain networks and psychopathology: a
unifying triple network model. Trends in cognitive sciences 15, 483–
506.
Menon, V., Uddin, L.Q., 2010. Saliency, switching, attention and control:
a network model of insula function. Brain structure and function 214,
655–667.
Möllmann, A., Heinrichs, N., Illies, L., Potthast, N., Kley, H., 2023. The
centralroleofsymptomseverityandassociatedcharacteristicsforfunc-
tional impairment in misophonia. Frontiers in Psychiatry 14, 1112472.
Murphy, N., Lijffijt, M., Guzick, A.G., Cervin, M., Clinger, J., Smith,
E.E., Draper, I., Rast, C.E., Goodman, W.K., Schneider, S., et al.,
2024. Alterations in attentional processing in youth with misophonia:
A phenotypical cross-comparison with anxiety patients. Journal of
Affective Disorders 347, 429–436.
Naylor, J., Caimino, C., Scutt, P., Hoare, D.J., Baguley, D.M., 2021. The
prevalence and severity of misophonia in a uk undergraduate medical
student population and validation of the amsterdam misophonia scale.
Psychiatric Quarterly 92, 609–619.
Neacsiu, A.D., Szymkiewicz, V., Galla, J.T., Li, B., Kulkarni, Y., Spector,
C.W., 2022. The neurobiology of misophonia and implications for
novel,neuroscience-driveninterventions. FrontiersinNeuroscience16,
893903.
Neal, M., Cavanna, A.E., 2013. Selective sound sensitivity syndrome
(misophonia) in a patient with tourette syndrome. The Journal of
neuropsychiatry and clinical neurosciences 25, E01–E01.
O’Donnell, L.J., Pasternak, O., 2015. Does diffusion mri tell us anything
aboutthewhitematter?anoverviewofmethodsandpitfalls.Schizophre-
nia research 161, 133–141.
Palumbo, D.B., Alsalman, O., De Ridder, D., Song, J.J., Vanneste, S.,
2018. Misophoniaandpotentialunderlyingmechanisms:aperspective.
Frontiers in psychology 9, 953.
Phelps, C.E., Navratilova, E., Porreca, F., 2021. Cognition in the chronic
pain experience: Preclinical insights. Trends in cognitive sciences 25,
365–376.
Posner, M., Rothbart, M., 1998. Attention, self–regulation and conscious-
ness. PhilosophicalTransactionsoftheRoyalSocietyofLondon.Series
B: Biological Sciences 353, 1915–1927.
Posner,M.I.,Petersen,S.E.,etal.,1990. Theattentionsystemofthehuman
brain. Annual review of neuroscience 13, 25–42.
Posner, M.I., Rothbart, M.K., 2007. Research on attention networks as a
modelfortheintegrationofpsychologicalscience. Annu.Rev.Psychol.
58, 1–23.
Puschmann, S., Regev, M., Fakhar, K., Zatorre, R.J., Thiel, C.M., 2024.
Attention-drivenmodulationofauditorycortexactivityduringselective
listening in a multispeaker setting. Journal of Neuroscience 44.
Raichle,M.E.,MacLeod,A.M.,Snyder,A.Z.,Powers,W.J.,Gusnard,D.A.,
Shulman,G.L.,2001. Adefaultmodeofbrainfunction. Proceedingsof
the national academy of sciences 98, 676–682.
Rauschecker,J.P.,2018. Where,when,andhow:Aretheyallsensorimotor?
towards a unified view of the dorsal pathway in vision and audition.
Cortex 98, 262–268.
Remmert, N., Schmidt, K.M.B., Mussel, P., Hagel, M.L., Eid, M., 2022.
The berlin misophonia questionnaire revised (bmq-r): development and
validation of a symptom-oriented diagnostical instrument for the mea-
surement of misophonia. PLoS One 17, e0269428.
Rinaldi, L., Simner, J., Koursarou, S., Ward, J., 2023. Autistic traits,
emotionregulation,andsensorysensitivitiesinchildrenandadultswithmisophonia. Journal of autism and developmental disorders 53, 1162–
1174.
Rinaldi,L.,Ward,J.,Simner,J.,2021.Afactorstructurewithinmisophonia:
The sussex misophonia scale for researchers and clinicians.
Rolls, E.T., 2019. The cingulate cortex and limbic systems for emotion,
action, and memory. Brain Structure and Function 224, 3001–3018.
Roman-Caballero, R., Arnedo, M., Triviño, M., Lupiáñez, J., 2018. Mu-
sical practice as an enhancer of cognitive function in healthy aging-a
systematic review and meta-analysis. PloS one 13, e0207957.
Román-Caballero, R., Martín-Arévalo, E., Lupiáñez, J., 2021. Atten-
tional networks functioning and vigilance in expert musicians and non-
musicians. Psychological research 85, 1121–1135.
Rosenthal,M.Z.,Anand,D.,Cassiello-Robbins,C.,Williams,Z.J.,Guetta,
R.E., Trumbull, J., Kelley, L.D., 2021. Development and initial valida-
tion of the duke misophonia questionnaire. Frontiers in psychology ,
4197.
Rouw, R., Erfanian, M., 2018. A large-scale study of misophonia. Journal
of clinical psychology 74, 453–479.
Samermit, P., Young, M., Allen, A.K., Trillo, H., Shankar, S., Klein, A.,
Kay, C., Mahzouni, G., Reddy, V., Hamilton, V., et al., 2022. Develop-
mentandevaluationofasound-swappedvideodatabaseformisophonia.
Frontiers in psychology 13, 890829.
Savard, M.A., Sares, A.G., Coffey, E.B., Deroche, M.L., 2022. Specificity
of affective responses in misophonia depends on trigger identification.
Frontiers in Neuroscience , 722.
Schimmelpfennig,J.,Topczewski,J.,Zajkowski,W.,Jankowiak-Siuda,K.,
2023. Theroleofthesaliencenetworkincognitiveandaffectivedeficits.
Frontiers in human neuroscience 17, 1133367.
Schröder, A., van Diepen, R., Mazaheri, A., Petropoulos-Petalas, D.,
SotodeAmesti,V.,Vulink,N.,Denys,D.,2014.Diminishedn1auditory
evokedpotentialstooddballstimuliinmisophoniapatients. Frontiersin
behavioral neuroscience 8, 123.
Schröder,A.,Vulink,N.,Denys,D.,2013. Misophonia:diagnosticcriteria
for a new psychiatric disorder. PLoS One 8, e54706.
Schröder, A., van Wingen, G., Eijsker, N., San Giorgi, R., Vulink, N.C.,
Turbyne, C., Denys, D., 2019. Misophonia is associated with altered
brain activity in the auditory cortex and salience network. Scientific
reports 9, 1–9.
Schwartz, P., Leyendecker, J., Conlon, M., 2011. Hyperacusis and miso-
phonia: the lesser-known siblings of tinnitus. Minnesota Medicine 94,
42–43.
Seaborne, A., Fiorella, L., 2018. Effects of background chewing sounds
on learning: The role of misophonia sensitivity. Applied Cognitive
Psychology 32, 264–269.
Seeley,W.W.,Menon,V.,Schatzberg,A.F.,Keller,J.,Glover,G.H.,Kenna,
H.,Reiss,A.L.,Greicius,M.D.,2007. Dissociableintrinsicconnectivity
networks for salience processing and executive control. Journal of
neuroscience 27, 2349–2356.
Siepsiak, M., Dragan, W., 2019. Misophonia-a review of research results
and theoretical concepts. Psychiatria polska 53, 447–458.
Siepsiak, M., Sliwerski, A., Lukasz Dragan, W., 2020a. Development and
psychometric properties of misoquest—a new self-report questionnaire
for misophonia. International journal of environmental research and
public health 17, 1797.
Siepsiak,M.,Sobczak,A.M.,Bohaterewicz,B.,Cichocki,Ł.,Dragan,W.Ł.,
2020b. Prevalenceofmisophoniaandcorrelatesofitssymptomsamong
inpatients with depression. International journal of environmental
research and public health 17, 5464.
Siepsiak,M.,Vrana,S.R.,Rynkiewicz,A.,Rosenthal,M.Z.,Dragan,W.Ł.,
2023. Doescontextmatterinmisophonia?amulti-methodexperimental
investigation. Frontiers in neuroscience 16, 880853.
Silva, F.E.d., Sanchez, T.G., 2019. Evaluation of selective attention in
patientswithmisophonia. BrazilianJournalofOtorhinolaryngology85,
303–309.
Silva-Rudberg, J.A., Mecca, A.P., 2024. Diffusion imaging of gray matter
microstructure in alzheimer’s disease. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease ,
1–3.
MA Savard, EBJ Coffey: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 17 of 17

Journal Pre-proofJournal Pre-proof
Models of misophonia
Simner,J.,Koursarou,S.,Rinaldi,L.,Ward,J.,2021. Attention,flexibility,
and imagery in misophonia: Does attention exacerbate everyday dislik-
ingofsound? Journalofclinicalandexperimentalneuropsychology43,
1006–1017.
Simner, J., Rinaldi, L.J., Ward, J., 2024. An automated online measure
for misophonia: The sussex misophonia scale for adults. Assessment ,
10731911241234104.
SolbergNes,L.,Roach,A.R.,Segerstrom,S.C.,2009. Executivefunctions,
self-regulation, and chronic pain: a review. Annals of Behavioral
Medicine 37, 173–183.
Soon,C.S.,Vinogradova,K.,Ong,J.L.,Calhoun,V.D.,Liu,T.,Zhou,J.H.,
Ng,K.K.,Chee,M.W.,2021. Respiratory,cardiac,eeg,boldsignalsand
functionalconnectivityovermultiplemicrosleepepisodes. NeuroImage
237, 118129.
Spence, C.J., Driver, J., 1994. Covert spatial orienting in audition: Exoge-
nousandendogenousmechanisms. Journalofexperimentalpsychology:
Human perception and performance 20, 555.
Sridharan, D., Levitin, D.J., Menon, V., 2008. A critical role for the right
fronto-insularcortexinswitchingbetweencentral-executiveanddefault-
modenetworks. ProceedingsoftheNationalAcademyofSciences105,
12569–12574.
Swedo,S.E.,Baguley,D.M.,Denys,D.,Dixon,L.J.,Erfanian,M.,Fioretti,
A., Jastreboff, P.J., Kumar, S., Rosenthal, M.Z., Rouw, R., et al., 2022.
Consensus definition of misophonia: A delphi study. Frontiers in
Neuroscience , 224.
Tagliazucchi,E.,Laufs,H.,2014.Decodingwakefulnesslevelsfromtypical
fmri resting-state data reveals reliable drifts between wakefulness and
sleep. Neuron 82, 695–708.
Taylor,S.,2017. Misophonia:Anewmentaldisorder? Medicalhypotheses
103, 109–117.
Van Overwalle, F., 2024. Social and emotional learning in the cerebellum.
Nature Reviews Neuroscience , 1–16.
Vincent, J.L., Kahn, I., Snyder, A.Z., Raichle, M.E., Buckner, R.L., 2008.
Evidence for a frontoparietal control system revealed by intrinsic func-
tional connectivity. Journal of neurophysiology 100, 3328–3342.
Vitoratou, S., Hayes, C., Uglik-Marucha, N., Pearson, O., Graham, T.,
Gregory, J., 2023. Misophonia in the uk: Prevalence and norms from
the s-five in a uk representative sample. PLoS One 18, e0282777.
Vitoratou, S., Uglik-Marucha, N., Hayes, C., Erfanian, M., Pearson, O.,
Gregory, J., 2021. Item response theory investigation of misophonia
auditory triggers. Audiology Research 11, 567–581.
Webber,T.A.,Johnson,P.L.,Storch,E.A.,2014. Pediatricmisophoniawith
comorbid obsessive–compulsive spectrum disorders. General hospital
psychiatry 36, 231–e1.
Webber,T.A.,Storch,E.A.,2015. Towardatheoreticalmodelofmisopho-
nia. General Hospital Psychiatry 37, 369–370.
Weissman,D.H.,Roberts,K.,Visscher,K.,Woldorff,M.,2006. Theneural
basesofmomentarylapsesinattention.Natureneuroscience9,971–978.
Williams, Z.J., Cascio, C.J., Woynaroski, T.G., 2022. Psychometric val-
idation of a brief self-report measure of misophonia symptoms and
functionalimpairment:Theduke-vanderbiltmisophoniascreeningques-
tionnaire. Frontiers in Psychology 13, 897901.
Williams,Z.J.,He,J.L.,Cascio,C.J.,Woynaroski,T.G.,2021. Areviewof
decreased sound tolerance in autism: Definitions, phenomenology, and
potential mechanisms. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews 121, 1–
17.
Wu, M.S., Lewin, A.B., Murphy, T.K., Storch, E.A., 2014. Misophonia:
incidence, phenomenology, and clinical correlates in an undergraduate
student sample. Journal of clinical psychology 70, 994–1007.
Zatorre,R.J.,2024. Fromperceptiontopleasure:theneuroscienceofmusic
and why we love it. Oxford University Press.
Zhou,X.,Wu,M.S.,Storch,E.A.,2017. Misophoniasymptomsamongchi-
neseuniversitystudents:Incidence,associatedimpairment,andclinical
correlates. JournalofObsessive-CompulsiveandRelatedDisorders14,
7–12.
Zumbrunn, N.M., McGovern, D., Boran, L., 2023. Investigating sound-
specificattentioncontrolinmildtomoderatemisophoniausingamodi-
fied attention network test .
MA Savard, EBJ Coffey: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 18 of 17

Journal Pre-proofJournal Pre-proof
T oward cognitive models of misophonia
Marie-Anick Savard a,b,c, Emily B. J. Coffey a,b,c 
a Department of Psychology, Concordia University, Montreal, QC, Canada 
b International Laboratory for Brain, Music and Sound Research (BRAMS), Montreal, 
QC, Canada 
c Centre for Research on Brain, Language and Music (CRBLM), Montreal, QC, Canada
Corresponding author: emily.coffey@concordia.ca  (E.B.J.Coffey)

Journal Pre-proofJournal Pre-proof
1. Recent work has revealed misophonia as a complex and heterogeneous disorder
2. Cognitive and neurobiologically-informed models facilitate theoretical 
advancements
3. Existing models require extension to account for observed phenotypes