Academic  Network  of  Health  Sciences  of  Lusophony
Jaime  Ribeiro  –  School  of  Health  of  the  Polytechnic  of  Leiria  (ESSLei),  Portugal  Maria  
João  Trigueiro  –  School  of  Health  of  the  Polytechnic  of  Porto  (ESS|P.Porto),  Portugal  Elisabete  
Roldão  –  School  of  Health  of  the  Polytechnic  of  Leiria  (ESSLei) ),  Portugal  Paula  Portugal  –  School  
of  Health  of  the  Polytechnic  of  Porto  (ESS|P.Porto),  Portugal  Vítor  Simões-Silva  –  School  of  Health  
of  the  Polytechnic  of  Porto  (ESS|P.Porto),  Portugal  Dalila  Dias  –  Instituto  Superior  of  Health  Sciences  
(ISCISA),  Mozambique  Élia  Silva  Pinto  –  Higher  School  of  Health  of  Alcoitão  (ESSA),  Portugal  
Filomena  de  Araújo  –  Higher  Institute  of  Health  Sciences  (ISCISA),  Mozambique  Fortunato  Venguele  
–  Higher  Institute  of  Health  Sciences  (ISCISA) ),  Mozambique  Patrícia  Santos  –  Higher  School  of  
Health  of  the  Polytechnic  Institute  of  Beja  (IPBeja),  PortugalProceedings  of  the  1st  Lusophone  Occupational  Therapy  Conference
(RACS)Academic  Nucleus  of  Occupational  Therapy  (NATO)  
of  the
PublishersMachine Translated by Google

Editorial  
DatasheetMinutes  book  of
1st  Lusophone  Occupational  Therapy  Conference
Only  with  the  sharing  of  scientific  knowledge  is  it  
possible  to  make  the  profession  progress  and  support  
the  practice  in  solid  evidence  in  order  to  promote  
knowledge  and  recognition  of  Occupational  Therapy.This  conference  came  from  the  Academic  Nucleus  of  
Occupational  Therapy  (NATO)  of  the  Academic  
Network  of  Health  Sciences  of  Lusophony  (RACS).
An  oral  communication  can  be  found  in  a  full  article  in  
this  book.–  The  1st  Lusophone  Occupational  Therapy  Conference  
took  place  on  July  9,  2021,  in  virtual  mode  (video  
conference).
14  free  communications  that  resulted  in  13They  were  also  presented  synchronously
full  articles  that  were  published  in  RevSALUS  -  
International  Scientific  Journal  of  the  Academic  
Network  of  Health  Sciences  of  Lusofonia  RACS  https://
revsalus.com/ index.php/RevSALUS .ORGANIZING  COMMITTEE
SCIENTIFIC  COMMISSION
With  more  than  100  international  participants,  this  
edition  was  a  considerable  success  given  its  novelty  
and  pandemic  constraints.In  this  first  edition,  in  virtual  format,  following  the  
pandemic  that  devastated  the  planet,  15  posters  were  
presented  asynchronously  in  video  format  and  made  
available  at  https://www.youtube.com/ playlist?
list=PLKUR7e
HONOR  COMMITTEE
Lusophony.Woyi2QAmZdHuB8qapIIA3PGxPVf .  
The  future  looks  fruitful  and  filled  in  a  Lusophone  
network  that  expands  in  a  sustainable  way.-  
Successes  for  Occupational  Therapy  andIt  intended  to  dynamize  and  disseminate  scientific  
production  in  Occupational  Therapy,  in  Portuguese.  It  
also  intended  to  contribute  significantly  to  the  
discussion  of  the  most  current  and  emerging  topics  
and  to  have  the  participation  of  researchers  and  
professionals  from  the  Portuguese-speaking  world.
Academic  Network  of  Health  Sciences  of  theIn  this  book  of  proceedings  are  published  the  
summaries  of  the  full  articles  published  in  RevSalus  
as  well  as  the  short  articles  that  originated  the  video-
posters.Filomena  de  Araújo  –  Higher  Institute  of  Health  Sciences  (ISCISA),  Mozambique
Filomena  de  AraújoCristina  Prudêncio  –  President  of  the  Escola  Superior  de  Saúde  do  Politécnico  do  Porto  
(ESS|P.Porto),  PortugalJaime  Ribeiro  –  Higher  School  of  Health  of  the  Polytechnic  of  Leiria  (ESSLei),  Portugal
Vice-President  –  Maria  João  Trigueiro  –  Escola  Superior  de  Saúde  do  Politécnico  do  Porto  (ESS|
P.Porto),  Portugal
Raquel  Santana  –  Higher  School  of  Health  of  the  Polytechnic  Institute  of  Beja  (IPBeja),  PortugalPatrícia  Santos  –  Higher  School  of  Health  of  the  Polytechnic  Institute  of  Beja  (IPBeja),  Portugal
Élia  Silva  Pinto  –  School  of  Health  of  Alcoitão  (ESSA),  Portugal
Jaime  RibeiroTiago  Coelho  –  School  of  Health  of  the  Polytechnic  of  Porto  (ESS|P.Porto),  Portugal
Elisabete  Roldão  –  President  of  the  Portuguese  Association  of  Occupational  Therapists  (APTO),  
Portugal
Patricia  SantosElisabete  Roldão  –  School  of  Health  of  the  Polytechnic  of  Leiria  (ESSLei),  Portugal
Vítor  Simões-Silva  –  School  of  Health  of  the  Polytechnic  of  Porto  (ESS|P.Porto),  PortugalPresident  –  Dalila  Dias  –  Higher  Institute  of  Health  Sciences  (ISCISA),  Mozambique
Vítor  Simões-Silva  –  School  of  Health  of  the  Polytechnic  of  Porto  (ESS|P.Porto),  Portugal
Helena  Sousa  –  School  of  Health  of  the  Polytechnic  of  Porto  (ESS|P.Porto),  Portugal
Joaquim  Faias  –  Coordinator  of  the  Degree  Course  in  Occupational  Therapy  at  the  Higher  School  
of  Health  of  the  Polytechnic  of  Porto  (ESS|P.Porto),  Portugal
Elisabete  RoldãoPaula  Portugal  –  School  of  Health  of  the  Polytechnic  of  Porto  (ESS|P.Porto),  PortugalFortunato  Venguele  –  Higher  Institute  of  Health  Sciences  (ISCISA),  Mozambique
President  –  Jaime  Ribeiro  –  Higher  School  of  Health  of  the  Polytechnic  of  Leiria  (ESSLei),  
Portugal
Mônica  Braúna  –  School  of  Health  of  the  Polytechnic  of  Leiria  (ESSLei),  Portugal
Rui  Fonseca-Pinto  –  Director  of  the  Escola  Superior  de  Saúde  do  Politécnico  de  Leiria  (ESSLei),  
Portugal
Vitor  Simões-SilvaMaria  João  Trigueiro  –  School  of  Health  of  the  Polytechnic  of  Porto  (ESS|P.Porto),  Portugal
ISBN:  978-989-53249-0-3  organizersAntónio  Marques  –  School  of  Health  of  the  Polytechnic  of  Porto  (ESS|P.Porto),  Portugal
Susana  Pestana  –  Higher  School  of  Health  of  the  Polytechnic  Institute  of  Beja  (IPBeja),  Portugal
Dulce  Gomes  –  Coordinator  of  the  Degree  in  Occupational  Therapy  at  the  Escola  Superior  de  
Saúde  do  Politécnico  de  Leiria  (ESSLei),  Portugal
Elia  Silva  PintoHelena  Reis  –  School  of  Health  of  the  Polytechnic  of  Leiria  (ESSLei),  PortugalPaula  Portugal  –  School  of  Health  of  the  Polytechnic  of  Porto  (ESS|P.Porto),  Portugal
Vanda  Varela  –  School  of  Health  of  the  Polytechnic  of  Leiria  (ESSLei),  Portugal
Isabel  Ferreira  –  Coordinator  of  the  Occupational  Therapy  Department  at  the  Higher  School  of  Health  
of  Alcoitão  (ESSA),  Portugal
Maria  João  Trigueiro
Fortunato  Venguele
Pagination  and  Graphic  Editing:  Jaime  RibeiroJorge  Torgal  –  Director  of  the  Higher  School  of  Health  of  Alcoitão  (ESSA),  PortugalFerreira  –  School  of  Health  of  Alcoitão  (ESSA),  Portugal
Paula  PortugalÉlia  Silva  Pinto  –  School  of  Health  of  Alcoitão  (ESSA),  Portugal
Dalila  DiasSusana  Pestana  –  Coordinator  of  the  Degree  in  Occupational  Therapy  at  the  Escola  Superior  de  
Saúde  do  Instituto  Politécnico  de  Beja  (IPBeja),  PortugalNuno  Rocha  –  School  of  Health  of  the  Polytechnic  of  Porto  (ESS|P.Porto),  Portugal
Publisher:  Academic  Network  of  Health  Sciences  of  Lusophony  (RACS)Machine Translated by Google

The  MOHOST  in  the  characterization  of  the  client  of  Occupational  Therapy  in  Mental  Health  at  Centro  Hospitalar  do
Baixo  Vouga-Portugal81  INDEX
Characterization  of  Well-Being  in  the  Young  Population  of  the  Porto  Metropolitan  Area
Occupational  Therapy  in  the  implementation  of  Augmentative  and  Alternative  Communication  System:  case  study  with  a  child  with  ASD  at  
preschool  age  202  
50  Validation  of  the  Pemberton  Happiness  Index  (PHI)  for  the  Portuguese  population  Gender  issues  in  
graduate  training  in  Occupational  Therapy  in  Brazil  Training  in  Occupational  Therapy:  design  of  a  
curriculum  transformation  project  for  the  sec.  XXI  8
12  
24  
69  Participation  in  meaningful  activities  in  the  person  with  Parkinson's  disease:  Case  Study4  
Mozambique  13
Regul-A:  Application  for  Regular  Children  with  ASD  between  3-6  years  of  age,  in  a  Home  Context  33
Duchenne  Characterization  of  the  Mental  Health  Literacy  level  of  young  people  in  the  Porto  Metropolitan  Area
9  
Custom  molded  seating  systems  versus  conventional  cushions  and  backrests  (multi-materials):  a  comparative  study  38Communication  in  Children  with  Cerebral  Palsy:  A  Scoping  Review6  
for  the  Portuguese  population  10
58  Laboratory  of  Human  Occupation  Studies  and  Technologies  for  Participation  in  Occupational  Therapy:  dialogues  between  Latin  America  
and  Lusophone  countriesValidation  of  the  Mental  Health  Promoting  Knowledge  Scale  (MHPK-10)  for  the  Portuguese  population
Occupational  performance  in  a  case  with  pyogenic  arthritis
14  
Money  Management  and  Shopping  Skills  Training  Program
Social  entrepreneurship  project  –  Sem-Improviso3  
7  
Mental  health  literacy  program:  misophoniaOccupational  Therapy,  pluralities  and  childhoods:  playing  as  a  significant  activity  for  children  in  the  south  of
Cognitive  rehabilitation  with  virtual  reality  in  people  of  working  age  with  stroke  sequelae:  an  occupational  therapy  intervention
IoT  devices  as  Ambient  Assisted  Living  tools  for  people  with  Muscular  Dystrophy  of
74  The  contribution  of  Occupational  Therapy  to  the  implementation  of  Augmentative  and  Alternative  Systems  of5  
Translation,  adaptation  and  contribution  to  the  validation  of  the  Warwick-Edinburgh  Mental  Well-Being  Scale
29  
54  
Change  in  occupational  performance  after  hospitalization  in  ICU  due  to  Covid-19:  The  perception  of  users  of  Hospital  de  Leiria  89Translation  and  cultural  adaptation  of  The  Mayers'  Life-style  Questionnaire  (2)  to  the  Portuguese  versionEvaluation  of  postural  systems  of  the  pelvis  in  a  person  with  Muscular  Dystrophy  of  the  Waist  type:  results  of  the  three-cushion  analysis  in  the  
promotion  of  dynamic  balance  11
Project  to  promote  capacity  building  for  signaling  and  providing  basic  care  to  children  at  risk  of  developmental  delay  and/or  disability,  in  São  
Tomé  and  Príncipe  15
42  Mental  Health  Literacy  in  Attention  Deficit  Hyperactivity  Disorder:  Pilot  Study
Mental  Health  Literacy  in  Autism  Spectrum  Disorder  –  The  “Bicho  de  7  Cabeças”  Platform46
Lifestyle  Redefining  Program  for  Women  with  Newly  Diagnosed  Breast  CancerGraded  Motor  Imagery:  The  effectiveness  of  Occupational  Therapy  in  modulating  pain  and  improving
1  Machine Translated by Google

ORCID  do  autor:  
Europe  (22.9%),  so  it  is  essential  to  increase  its  literacy.  Objective:  Therefore,  our  goal  was  to  assess  the  efficiency  of  ADHD  7196;  Vítor  Simões-Silva:  0000-0003-2831-9729
knowledge  about  ADHD,  regardless  of  sex,  age  and  education.  The  average  of  the  knowledge  obtained  in  the  training  is
training.  Material  and  Methods:  The  sample  is  16  individuals  between  18  and  29  years  old,  five  of  whom  are  male.  Of  these,  50%  have  
completed  the  12th  grade,  31.25%  have  a  bachelor's  degree,  and  18.75%  have  a  master's  degree.  We  used  as  measures  of  Introduction:  Several  studies  refer  Portugal  as  the  second  country  with  the  highest  prevalence  of  psychiatric  diseases
by  individuals.  Conclusion:  Through  the  present  study  it  was  possible  to  verify  the  effectiveness  of  the  Bicho  7  Cabeças  platform,  in  the
and  the  usability  questionnaire.  Results:  The  results  showed  an  increase  in  ADHD  knowledge  regardless  of  gender,  age,  and  five  male.  Of  these,  50%  are  in  the  12th  year,  31.25%  are  graduates  and  18.75%  have  a  master's  degree.  were  used  as
The  individuals  positively  evaluated  the  usability  of  the  platform.  Conclusion:  Through  this  study,  it  was  possible  to  verify  the  School  of  Health  of  the  Polytechnic  of  Porto,  Porto,  Portugal.
training  on  ADHD,  carried  out  through  the  Bicho  7  Cabeças  platform,  to  increase  the  knowledge  of  adults,
Keywords:  ADHD;  literacy;  online  platform;  technology.
training,  carried  out  through  the"  Bicho  7  Cabeças"  platform,  in  expanding  the  knowledge  of  adult  individuals  with  no  health  individual  about  ADHD,  along  with  the  usability  questionnaire.  Results:  The  results  showed  an  increase  in  theAna  Rita  Gonçalves:  0000-0002-4274-0424;  Catarina  Oliverira:  0000-0002-7542-2449;  Maria  João  Trigueiro:  0000-0003-4439-
Introduction:  Several  studies  refer  to  Portugal  as  the  country  with  the  second-highest  prevalence  of  psychiatric  disorders  in  
Keywords:  ADHD;  literacy;  online  platform;  technology.  Summary
of  8.36  out  of  10  and  in  all  assessments,  the  percentage  was  higher  than  70%.  The  usability  of  the  platform  was  evaluated  positively
knowledge  the  value  obtained  in  the  results  after  the  training  and  a  question  about  the  individual's  level  of  knowledge  about  ADHD  increase  in  population  literacy.in  Europe  (22.9%),  and  it  is  important  to  increase  the  literacy  of  the  population.  Objective:  Our  objective  was  to  evaluate  the  effectiveness  of  the
education.  The  average  knowledge  obtained  in  training  is  8.36  out  of  10,  and  in  all  evaluations,  the  percentage  was  above  70%.  without  training  in  the  health  field.  Material  and  Methods:  The  sample  consists  of  16  individuals,  between  18  and  29  years  old,  being
Abstract  
efficiency  of  the  "Bicho  7  Cabeças"  platform  to  improve  the  population's  literacy.  Psychosocial  Rehabilitation  Laboratory  of  the  Polytechnic  of  Porto,  Porto,  Portugal.
knowledge  measures  the  value  obtained  in  the  results  after  the  training  and  in  a  question  about  the  level  of  knowledge  of  theMental  Health  Literacy  in  Hyperactivity  Disorder  and  Attention  Deficit:  Pilot  Study  Mental  Health  Literacy  in  Hyperactivity  Disorder  and  Brain  Deficit
Attention:  Pilot  Study
Ana  Rita  Gonçalves1 ;  Catarina  Oliveira1 ;  Maria  João  Trigueiro1,2;  Vítor  Simões-Silva1,2
2  1  
2  Machine Translated by Google

1  
School  of  Health  of  the  Polytechnic  of  Porto,  Porto,  Portugal.
Abstract  
Keywords:  Mental  Health  Literacy;  Young  People;  Mental  Health;  Prevalence.  To  assess  possible  predictors  of  LSM  in  young  people,  a  multiple  linear  regression  was  used.  Results:  It  was  found  that
metropolitan  area  of  Porto.  Methods:  A  total  of  847  young  people  participated  in  the  study.  A  sociodemographic  questionnaire  indicative  of  an  LSM  level.  The  predictors  of  a  higher  level  of  LSM  were  being  older  (95%CI<age ]0.03;  0.10[),Maria  João  Trigueiro:  0000-0003-4439-7196;  Vítor  Simões-Silva:  0000-0003-2831-9729;  António  Marques:  0000-0002-8656-
(MHLM)  were  used.  As  exclusion  criteria,  young  people  should  not  have  a  confirmed  pathology  that  would  prevent  them  from  metropolitan  port.  Methods:  847  young  people  participated  in  the  study.  A  sociodemographic  questionnaire  was  used  and  the  versions
used.  Results:  It  was  found  that  75.65%  of  the  sample  had  a  score  of  four  or  more  on  the  MHPK-10  and  71.97%  had  a  score  on  Summary
mental  (95%CI ]0.45;  1.59[).  Conclusion:  According  to  the  results,  the  levels  of  LSM  in  the  young  population  in  Portugal,
Aim:  The  aim  of  this  study  was  to  map  the  level  of  Mental  Health  Literacy  (MHL)  among  young  people  14-18  years  old  living  in  the  Psychosocial  Rehabilitation  Laboratory  of  the  Polytechnic  of  Porto,  Porto,  Portugal.
As  an  exclusion  criterion,  young  people  should  not  have  confirmed  pathology  that  would  prevent  them  from  reading  and  understanding  the  questions.
Keywords:  Mental  Health  Literacy;  Young  people;  Mental  health;  prevalence.
being  female  (95%CImale ]0.06;  0.20[),  having  higher  education  (95%CI>educat ]1.12;  2.66[),  and  knowing  someone  with  mental  illness  
high,  with  values  in  the  order  of  70%  knowledge.  ORCID  do  autor:  
75.65%  of  the  sample  had  a  score  equal  to  or  greater  than  four  on  the  MHPK-10  and  71.97%  had  a  result  on  the  MHLM
and  the  Portuguese  versions  of  the  Mental  Health  Promoting  Knowledge  Scale  (MHPK-10)  and  the  Mental  Health  Literacy  Measure  being  female  (95%CI  male ]0.06;  0.20[),  having  higher  education  (95%CI>school ]1.12;  2.66[),  and  knowing  someone  with  a  disease5023  
reading  and  understanding  the  questions.  To  assess  possible  predictors  of  MHL  in  young  people,  multiple  linear  regression  was  Objective:  To  characterize  the  Mental  Health  Literacy  (MLS)  level  of  young  people  14-18  years  old,  living  in  the  area
is  relatively  high,  with  values  in  the  order  of  70%  of  knowledge.
the  MHLM  indicative  of  a  level  of  LSM.  The  predictor  variables  of  a  higher  level  of  LSM  were  being  older  (95%CI<age ]0.03;  0.10[),  
(95%CIknow ]0.45;  1.59[).  Conclusion:  According  with  the  results,  the  levels  of  LSM  in  the  young  population,  in  Portugal,  is  relatively  portuguesas  da  Mental  Health  Promoting  Knowledge  Scale  (MHPK-10)  e  da  Mental  Health  Literacy  Measure  (MHLM).  Como  Mapping  the  Mental  Health  Literacy  level  of  young  people  in  the  Metropolitan  Characterization  of  the  Mental  Health  Literacy  level  of  young  people  in  the  Area
Metropolitan  of  Porto
Area  of  Oporto  
3  ;  António  Marques1,2; Maria  João  Trigueiro1,2;  Vítor  Simões-Silva1,2;  Susana  Lucas
2  1  Machine Translated by Google

Characterization  of  Wellbeing  in  the  Youth  Population  of  the  Metropolitan  Area  of  Characterization  of  Well-Being  in  the  Young  Population  of  the  Metropolitan  Area  of
Harbor
Harbor
4  *Beatriz  Couto1 ;  Maria  João  Trigueiro1,2;  Vítor  Simões-Silva1,2 ;  António  Marques1,2
António  Bernardino  de  Almeida,  400,  4200-072,  Porto,  Portugal
Abstract  
Keywords:  Wellbeing;  Young;  Warwick-Edinburgh  Mental  Wellbeing  Scale;  Pemberton  Happiness  Index;  Prevalence.  Beatriz  Couto:  0000-0001-8602-6911;  Maria  João  Trigueiro:  0000-0003-4439-7196;  Vitor  Simões-Silva:  0000-0003-2831-9729;
Results:  There  were  statistically  significant  differences  in  the  levels  of  well-being  regarding  the  variables  of  sex
meaning  and  purpose  in  his  occupations  by  building  a  personal  identity  and  maintaining  socially  valued  roles.  Objective:  This  is  Summary
(pWEMWS  <0.031)  and  city  of  residence  (pWEMWS  <0.045;  pPHI  <0.011).  Conclusion:  It  was  identified  that  being  a  young  male,
people,  between  14  and  18  years  old,  in  the  Metropolitan  Area  of  Porto.  Material  and  Methods:  It  was  conducted  a  cross-sectional  *Corresponding  author:  10150147@ess.ipp.pt;  Occupational  Therapy,  Escola  Superior  de  Saúde  do  Politécnico  do  Porto,  Rua  Dr.
Material  and  Methods:  A  cross-sectional  study  was  carried  out  on  847  young  people  from  secondary  schools  in  Porto,  Vila  Nova  de  Gaia,
assessment  scales,  the  Warwick-Edinburgh  Mental  Wellbeing  Scale  and  the  Pemberton  Happiness  Index  and  a  self-filling  of  well-being.1School  of  Health  of  the  Polytechnic  of  Porto,  Porto,  Portugal.
find  meaning  and  purpose  in  their  occupations  through  building  a  personal  identity  and  maintaining
Introduction  Wellbeing  is  a  multidimensional  concept  that  assumes  that  the  individual  must  be  involved  in  his  daily  life  and  find  ORCID  do  autor:  
Mental  Wellbeing  Scale  and  the  Pemberton  Happiness  Index  and  a  self-completed  sociodemographic  questionnaire.
prevalence.
<0.001),  meeting  someone  with  mental  health  problems  (pWEMWS  <0.001;  pPHI  <0.001),  educational  levels  (pWEMWS  <0.031)  and  city  
mental  health  problems  and  having  a  lower  level  of  education  are  significant  predictors  of  wellbeing.  António  Marques:  0000-0002-8656-5023
(pWEMWS  <0.001;  pPHI<0.001),  knowing  someone  with  mental  health  problems  (pWEMWS  <0.001;  pPHI  <0.001),  educational  level
a  recent  concept  and  still  little  studied,  so  the  purpose  of  this  study  is  to  describe  the  prevalence  of  the  wellbeing  level  of  young  not  knowing  individuals  with  mental  health  problems  and  having  a  lower  level  of  education  are  significant  predictorsIntroduction  Well-being  is  a  multidimensional  concept  that  presupposes  that  the  individual  must  be  involved  in  his  daily  life  and
study  on  847  young  people  from  secondary  schools  in  Porto,  Vila  Nova  de  Gaia,  Matosinhos  and  Gondomar.  Using  two  wellbeing  socially  valued  roles.  Objective:  This  is  a  recent  concept  and  still  little  studied,  so  the  objective  of  this  study  is  to  describe  the  prevalence  of  the  level  of  well-
being  of  the  young  population,  between  14  and  18  years  old,  in  the  Porto  Metropolitan  Area.
Keywords:  Well-being;  Young  people;  Warwick-Edinburgh  Mental  Well-Being  Scale;  Pemberton  Happiness  Index;
sociodemographic  questionnaire.  Results:  It  was  found  statistically  significant  differences  regarding  gender  (pWEMWS  <0.001;  pPHI  2  Psychosocial  Rehabilitation  Laboratory  of  the  Polytechnic  of  Porto,  Porto,  Portugal.
of  residence  (pWEMWS  <0.045;  pPHI  <0.011).  Conclusion:  It  was  identified  that  being  young  males,  not  knowing  individuals  with  Matosinhos  and  Gondomar,  using  two  well-being  assessment  scales,  the  Portuguese  versions  of  the  Warwick-EdinburghMachine Translated by Google

Validation  of  the  Mental  Health  Promoting  Knowledge  Scale  (MHPK-10)  for  the  
Portuguese  population
Validation  of  the  Mental  Health  Promoting  Knowledge  Scale  (MHPK-10)  for  the  
Portuguese  population  
Simões  de  Almeida1,2;  Vítor  Simões-Silva1,2;  Paula  Portugal1,2;  Sara  Sousa1,2;  Filipa
5  *Ana  Cláudia  Guimarães1 ;  Maria  João  Trigueiro1,2;  Tiago  Coelho1,2;  Inês  Maia1 ;  Raquel
Fields1,2;  António  Marques1,2
*Corresponding  author:  10150069@ess.ipp.pt;  Porto  Polytechnic  School  of  Health,  Rua  Dr.  António  Bernardino  de  Almeida  400,  4200-072,  Porto,  
Portugal.
a  positive  contribution  to  the  validation  of  the  MHPK-10.
instrument.  From  the  factor  analysis  forced  to  a  factor  resulted  satisfactory  values,  explaining  a  variance  of  35,92%.  In  the  criterion  Ana  Guimarães:  0000-0002-3548-811X;  Maria  João  Trigueiro:  0000-0003-4439-7196;  Tiago  Coelho:  0000-0001-7847-2401;  Inês
probabilistic,  for  convenience,  in  several  institutions  of  the  Porto  Metropolitan  Area  and  through  an  online  questionnaire.  THE
Abstract  0000-0001-9689-4050;  Sara  Sousa:  0000-0002-3639-8634;  Filipa  Campos:  0000-0001-6550-7660;  António  Marques:  0000-
reliability  -  test-test  and  internal  consistency  -  content  validity,  construct  validity  and  criterion  validity.  Results:
comprehensive  measures  are  needed  to  assess  it.  In  Portugal  there  is  no  validated  measure  to  assess  knowledge  about  factors  
additional  studies  are  needed.  The  present  work  is  a  positive  contribution  to  the  validation  of  MHPK-10.  2Psychosocial  Rehabilitation  Laboratory  of  the  Escola  Superior  de  Saúde  do  Politécnico  do  Porto,  Porto,  Portugal.
and  to  assess  it,  valid  and  comprehensive  measures  are  needed.  In  Portugal,  there  is  no  validated  measure  that
Material  and  Methods:  The  sample  was  recruited  through  a  non-probabilistic  method,  for  convenience,  in  several  institutions  of  Summary
and  test-retest  values  support  instrument  reliability.  The  factor  analysis  forced  to  a  factor  resulted  in  values
Keywords:  Mental  Health  Literacy;  measurement;  health  promotion.ORCID  do  autor:  
culturally  the  MHPK-10  for  the  Portuguese  population.  Material  and  Methods:  The  sample  was  recruited  using  a  non-invasive  method.
The  psychometric  properties  appear  to  be  reasonable,  although  further  studies  are  needed.  The  present  work  is
of  the  MHPK-10  original  version  and  the  analysis  of  the  psychometric  properties:  reliability  –  test-retest  and  internal  consistency  
95  years.  The  internal  consistency  value  is  reasonable  (ÿ=  0,79)  and  the  test-retest  values  (r=0,72)  support  the  reliability  of  the  Maia:  0000-0003-3186-5384;  Raquel  Almeida:  0000-0003-4703-1712;  Vítor  Simões-Silva:  0000-0003-2831-9729;  Paula  Portugal:
validation  encompassed  the  translation  and  cultural  adaptation  of  the  original  version  of  the  MHPK-10  and  the  analysis  of  psychometric  properties:
Introduction:  Mental  Health  Literacy  refers  to  the  knowledge  and  abilities  needed  to  promote  mental  health  and  valid  and  
validity,  a  low  correlation  was  obtained  (r=0,32).  Conclusion:  Psychometric  properties  appear  to  be  reasonable,  although  The  sample  comprises  1728  individuals  aged  between  14  and  95  years.  The  value  of  internal  consistency  is  reasonable  (ÿ=0.79)0002-8656-5023  
that  promote  positive  mental  health.  Objective:  Translate  and  culturally  adapt  the  MHPK-10  to  the  Portuguese  population.  
Keywords:  Mental  Health  Literacy;  measure;  health  promotion.  Introduction:  Mental  Health  Literacy  refers  to  the  knowledge  and  skills  necessary  to  promote  health
satisfactory,  explaining  a  variance  of  35.92%.  In  criterion  validity,  a  low  correlation  was  obtained  (r=0.32).  Conclusion:
the  Porto  Metropolitan  Area  and  through  an  online  questionnaire.  The  validation  included  the  translation  and  cultural  adaptation  1School  of  Health  of  the  Polytechnic  of  Porto,  Porto,  Portugal.
content  validity,  construct  validity  and  criterion  validity.  Results:  The  sample  is  made  up  of  1728  individuals  aged  between  14  and  to  assess  knowledge  about  the  factors  that  promote  positive  mental  health.  Objective:  Translate  and  adaptMachine Translated by Google

Keywords:  Well-being;  Mental  health;  Validation  Study;  Pemberton  Happiness  Index.
putting  in  question  the  validity  of  this  item.  Criterion  validity  had  a  high  correlation  (r=0,75;  pÿ0,01),  when  compared  to  the  women  (n=1185),  with  a  mean  age  of  20.04  ±  20.38  years.  The  internal  consistency  of  the  PHI  was  very  good  (ÿ=0.90),  as  well  as
Introduction  Given  the  attention  that  well-being  has  received  worldwide  as  being  a  crucial  aspect  of  the  overall  health  of  Summary
Section  A  and ]-0.05;0.69[ in  Section  B.  In  terms  of  construct  validity,  only  item  10  of  Section  A  presented  values  lower  than
that  assess  the  levels  of  well-being  in  the  population  emerges.  Objective:  Contribute  to  the  cultural  adaptation  and  psychometric  
in  this  study,  this  instrument  can  contribute  to  advance  in  the  complex  task  of  measuring  well-being,  as  well  as  monitoring  and  *Corresponding  author:  10150273@ess.ipp.pt;  Porto  Polytechnic  School  of  Health,  Rua  Dr.  António  Bernardino  de  Almeida  400,  
4200-072,  Porto,  Portugal.
psychometric  analysis  of  the  Pemberton  Happiness  Index  (PHI)  for  the  Portuguese  population.  Material  and  Methods:  The  sample  was
out  using  a  convenience  sample  of  1728  individuals,  with  online  and  in  paper  collections.  Internal  consistency,  teste-retest  when  compared  to  the  Warwick-Edinburgh  Mental  Well-Being  Scale  (WEMWBS).  Conclusion:  Considering  the  good1School  of  Health  of  the  Polytechnic  of  Porto,  Porto,  Portugal
your  evaluation  becomes  increasingly  important.  Thus,  the  need  for  validation  of  brief  and
Keywords:  Well-being;  Mental  Health;  Validation  Study;  Pemberton  Happiness  Index.  Abstract  test-retest,  construct,  content  and  criterion  validity.  Results:  The  sample  consisted  mainly  of
0,05;  0,69  [ in  Section  B.  In  the  construct  validity,  only  item  10  of  section  A  presented  values  lower  than  the  standard  values,  being,  as  well  as  monitoring  and  evaluating  changes  at  these  levels.
with  a  mean  age  of  20,04  ±  20,38  years.  The  internal  consistency  of  the  PHI  was  very  good  (ÿ  =0,90),  as  well  as  test-retest  as  the  test-retest  reliability,  with  r=0.79  and  pÿ0.01  for  the  correlation  between  totals  and  with  values  varying  between ]0.20;  0.46[ in
individuals,  its  measurement  becomes  increasingly  important.  Thus,  the  need  for  validation  of  brief  and  integrative  instruments  
Warwick-Edinburgh  Mental  Well-Being  Scale  (WEMWBS).  Conclusion:  Considering  the  good  psychometric  properties  obtained  tabled,  calling  into  question  the  validity  of  this  item.  Criterion  validity  showed  a  high  correlation  (r=0.75;  pÿ0.01),Introduction  Given  the  attention  that  well-being  has  received  worldwide  as  a  crucial  aspect  of  the  general  health  of  individuals,
validation  of  the  Pemberton  Happiness  Index  (PHI)  for  the  Portuguese  population.  Material  and  Methods:  The  study  was  carried  
assess  changes  at  these  levels.  integrative  measures  that  assess  the  levels  of  well-being  in  the  population.  Objective:  Contribute  to  cultural  adaptation  and  validation
psychometric  properties  obtained,  this  instrument  can  serve  as  a  contribution  to  advance  in  the  complex  task  of  measuring  the  good
reliability,  construct,  content  and  criterion  validity  were  analysed.  Results:  The  sample  consisted  mainly  of  women  (n  =  1185),  2Psychosocial  Rehabilitation  Laboratory  of  the  Escola  Superior  de  Saúde  do  Politécnico  do  Porto,  Porto,  Portugal
realibility,  with  r=  0,79  and  pÿ0,01  for  the  correlation  between  totals  and  with  values  ranging  from]  0,20;  0,46  [ in  Section  A  and]  -  convenience,  composed  of  1728  individuals,  with  online  and  paper  collections.  Internal  consistency,  reliabilityValidation  of  the  Pemberton  Happiness  Index  (PHI)  for  the  portuguese  population  Validation  of  the  Pemberton  Happiness  Index  (PHI)  for  the  Portuguese  population
*Inês  Teixeira  Maia1 ;  Tiago  Coelho1,2;  Ana  Claudia  Guimarães1 ;  Raquel  Simões  de
6  Almeida1,2;  Vitor  Simões-Silva1,2;  Paula  Portugal1,2;  Sara  Sousa1,2;  Filipa  Campos1,2;
António  Marques1,2;  Maria  João  Trigueiro1,2
ORCID  do  autor:  
4703-1712;  Simões-Silva,  V:  0000-0003-2831-9729;  Portugal,  P:  0000-0001-9689-4050;  Sousa,  S:  0000-0002-3639-8634;  Fields,  F:
0000-0001-6550-7660;  Marques,  A:  0000-0002-8656-5023;  Trigueiro,  MJ:  0000-0003-4439-7196Maia,  IT:  0000-0003-3186-5384;  Coelho,  T:  0000-0001-7847-2401;  Guimarães,  AC:  0000-0002-3548-811X;  Almeida,  RS:  0000-0003-Machine Translated by Google

*Corresponding  author:  ricardo@medicina.ufrj.br;  Department  of  Occupational  Therapy,  Faculty  of  Medicine,  Center  for  Health  Sciences  
(CCS).
intense  engagement  of  professors-researchers,  students  and  occupational  therapists  in  the  agenda  of  social  and
statistics,  a  documentary  and  content  analysis  approach  were  used  for  the  treatment  of  the  data.  Results:  Of  the  384  documents  (PPP),  academic  curricula  (available  electronically  on  the  Lattes  Platform  -  CNPQ)  and  lesson  plans.  It  was  used
Keywords:  teaching;  higher  education;  genre;  sexuality;  occupational  therapy.Of  the  384  documents  mined,  65.3%  address  issues  related  to  “gender  issues”.  However,  this  percentage  only  saysSummary
Introduction:  The  oppressions  of  gender  and  sexualities  that  people  experience  in  everyday  life  imply  occupational  involvement  
Occupational  Therapy  courses,  concentrated  in  6  universities,  5  public  and  1  private.  And  the  themes  are  mostly  developed  in  UFS  –  Federal  University  of  Sergipe,  Department  of  Occupational  Therapy,  Campus  Lagarto  (DTOL),  Sergipe,  Brazil.
in  Occupational  Therapy  in  Brazil.  Material  and  Methods:  An  exploratory  and  descriptive  research  of  a  qualitative  nature  was  carried  out.
To  identify  and  characterize  the  means  that  inform  the  incorporation  of  the  theme  "gender  issues"  in  graduate  education  in  are  developed  mostly  in  research  actions.  Conclusion:  Topics  about  "gender  issues"  are  littleUFRJ  –  Federal  University  of  Rio  de  Janeiro,  Department  of  Occupational  Therapy,  Faculty  of  Medicine  (DTO/FM),  Rio  de  Janeiro,  
Brazil.
occupational  therapy  and,  therefore,  it  is  necessary  that  this  theme  be  incorporated  into  the  graduate  training  of  occupational  therapists.
in  Brazil.  However,  changes  are  observed  with  the  revision  of  the  National  Curriculum  Guidelines  to  reorient  PPPs  and  people  of  gender  and  sexual  minorities.ORCID  do  autor:  
degree  in  Occupational  Therapy  from  Brazilian  universities,  related  to  the  curriculum,  Political  Pedagogical  Projects
of  the  National  Curriculum  Guidelines  to  reorient  PPPs  and  undergraduate  curricula.  This  is  opportune  because  of  the
nature,  was  conducted  between  April  2020  and  May  2021.  Documents  (media)  were  mined  on  the  electronic  sites  of  36  
Politician  (PPP),  academic  curricula  (available  electronically  on  the  Lattes  Platform  -  CNPQ)  and  lesson  plans.  Simple  descriptive  
occupational  therapists  in  the  agenda  of  social  and  human  rights  of  gender  and  sexual  minorities.  simple  descriptive  statistics,  document  and  content  analysis  approach  to  data  processing.  Results:  Two
Abstract:  
mined,  65,3%  address  topics  related  to  “gender  issues”.  However,  this  percentage  accounts  for  only  19.4%  of  the  universe  of  19.4%  of  the  universe  of  Occupational  Therapy  courses,  concentrated  in  6  universities,  5  public  and  1  private.  And  the  themesIntroduction:  The  oppressions  of  gender  and  sexualities  that  people  experience  in  everyday  life  imply  the  involvement
and,  therefore,  it  is  necessary  that  this  theme  be  incorporated  into  the  graduated  training  of  occupational  therapists.  Objective:  
research.  Conclusion:  Themes  on  "gender  issues"  are  rarely  addressed,  in  an  official  way,  in  the  training  in  Occupational  Therapy  
undergraduate  curricula.  This  proves  to  be  opportune  due  to  the  intense  engagement  of  professors-researchers,  students  and  Objective:  To  identify  and  characterize  the  means  that  inform  the  incorporation  of  the  theme  "gender  issues"  in  graduate  education
addressed,  in  an  official  way,  in  the  training  in  Occupational  Therapy  in  Brazil.  However,  changes  are  observed  with  the  revision
Occupational  Therapy  in  Brazil.  Material  and  Methods:  An  exploratory  and  descriptive  research,  of  a  qualitative  and  quantitative  
undergraduate  courses  in  Occupational  Therapy  from  Brazilian  universities,  related  to  the  curricular  matrix,  Projects  Pedagogical  
Keywords:  teaching;  higher  education;  gender;  sexuality;  occupational  therapy.  quantitative,  between  April  2020  and  May  2021.  Documents  (means)  were  mined  on  the  electronic  sites  of  36  courses  ofGender  issues  in  undergraduate  degree  in  Occupational  Therapy  in  Brazil  Gender  issues  in  graduate  training  in  Occupational  Therapy  in  Brazil
Souza1 ;  Andrade,  Francisco  Leal2 ;  Figueiredo,  Raionara2*Correia,  Ricardo  Lopes1 ;  Nascimento,  Israel  Ribeiro  do1 ;  Proenca,  Rosimeri  de  Oliveira
7  1  
2  
Provenance:  0000-0002-4526-3264;  Francisco  Leal  Andrade:  0000-0002-9788-9496;  Raionara  Figueiredo:  0000-0003-0047-759XRicardo  Lopes  Correia:  0000-0003-3108-2224;  Israel  Ribeiro  do  Nascimento:  0000-0002-1702-4725;  Rosimeri  de  Oliveira  SouzaMachine Translated by Google

*  Sílvia  Martins1 ;  Cristina  Vieira  da  Silva1 ;  Élia  Silva  Pinto1 ;  Isabel  Ferreira1 ;  Nuno  Moreira1
8  1  Training  in  Occupational  Therapy:  design  of  a  curriculum  transformation  project  
for  the  sec.  XXI
Training  in  Occupational  Therapy:  design  of  a  curriculum  transformation  project  
for  the  21st  century  
Isabel  Ferreira:  0000-0002-8978-896X;  Nuno  Moreira:  0000-0002-4215-9672
Introduction:  The  development  and  redesign  of  curricula  is  seen  as  a  key  activity  of  higher  education  institutions.  At  the  
methodology  and  participatory  methods,  together  with  the  use  of  a  group  of  experts,  allowed  participants  to  reach  a  consensus  Introduction:  The  development  and  renewal  of  curricula  is  seen  as  a  key  activity  of  higher  education  institutions.
consensus  on  the  design  of  the  project,  namely,  Vision,  Mission  and  Values;  objectives  aimed  at  the  curriculum,  students  and
educational  paths  that  correspond  to  the  aspirations  of  the  population's  future  and  the  needs  of  society.  The  paradigm  shifts  that  educational  programs  that  correspond  to  the  population's  future  aspirations  and  society's  needs.  The  changes  of
guide  the  process  of  curricular  transformation.  Conclusion:  The  action-research  methodology  and  participatory  methods,
project  of  a  curriculum  revision  for  an  occupational  therapy  program.  Material  and  methods:  In  this  1st  research  cycle,  an  action  
Keywords:  Curriculum  redesign;  occupational  therapy;  innovation;  action-research  methods.  Sílvia  Martins:  0000-0003-2089-813X;  Cristina  Vieira  da  Silva:  0000-0002-4651-5005;  Élia  Silva  Pinto:  0000-0002-8774-5456;
into  two  teams,  a  core  one,  composed  of  two  full-time  professors  and  an  extended  one,  including  three  more  professors,
staff  and  an  extended  one,  integrating  three  more  staff  members,  also  full-time.  Participatory  methods  were  used  to  involve  staff  main  aspects  to  be  included  in  the  curriculum  transformation  process.*Corresponding  author:  silviam.martins@essa.scml.pt;  Department  of  Occupational  Therapy,  Escola  Superior  de  Saúde  do  Alcoitão,  
Rua  Conde  Barão,  2649-506  Alcabideche,  Portugal.
This  study  builds  the  design  of  a  curriculum  review  project  for  training  in  occupational  therapy.  Material  and  methods:
international  and  national  level,  there  is  an  evident  growing  interest  in  research  in  curriculum  design,  and  in  creating  diverse  Summary
key  stages  of  the  process,  a  group  of  experts  in  the  area  of  curriculum  review  was  used.  Results:  Obtaining  a  version
Abstract  
support  the  reflection.  Results:  Obtention  of  a  consensus  version  of  the  project  design,  namely,  1)  Vision,  Mission  and  Values;  2)  
of  competence  and  4)  selection  of  Theory  U  to  guide  the  process  of  curricular  transformation.  Conclusion:  The  action  research  At  the  international  and  national  level,  the  growing  interest  in  research  in  curriculum  design  is  evident,  and  in  creating
to  teachers;  stakeholders  in  the  process  and  their  distribution  by  domains  in  areas  of  competence  and  selection  of  Theory  U  for
have  occurred  in  recent  years  make  this  reflection  urgent  in  occupational  therapy.  Objective:  This  study  intends  to  design  the  
version  on  the  main  aspects  to  include  in  the  curriculum  transformation  process.  together  with  the  use  of  the  expert  group,  allowed  the  participants  to  reach  a  consensus  version  on  theAlcoitão  School  of  Health  (SCML/ESSAlcoitão)  –  Department  of  Occupational  Therapy,  Alcoitão,  Portugal.
paradigm  that  occurred  in  occupational  therapy  in  recent  years,  make  this  reflection  urgent.  Objective:  It  was  intended  with
research  methodology  was  used.  Participants  in  the  study  were  grouped  into  two  teams,  a  nuclear  one,  composed  of  two  full-time  In  this  1st  research  cycle,  an  action  research  methodology  was  used.  Study  participants  were  grouped
Keywords:  Curriculum  review;  occupational  therapy;  innovation;  research-action  methodology.
in  moments  of  reflection.  In  key  stages  of  the  process,  a  group  of  experts  in  the  field  of  curriculum  redesign  has  been  used  to  ORCID  do  autor:  
objectives  aimed  at  the  curriculum,  students  and  teachers;  3)  actors  in  the  process  and  their  distribution  by  domains  in  their  areas  also  full  time.  Participatory  methods  were  used  to  involve  teachers  in  moments  of  reflection.  InMachine Translated by Google

ORCID  do  autor:  
SummaryCarolina  Matos:  0000-0001-8918-1933;  Janete  Moreno:  0000-0003-1134-7281Neuroser,  Telheiras,  Portugal
2Higher  School  of  Health  of  Alcoitão,  Cascais,  LisbonParticipation  in  significant  activities  in  the  person  with  Parkinson's  disease:  
*Corresponding  author:  cmatos@neuroser.ptParticipation  in  meaningful  activities  in  the  person  with  Parkinson's  disease:
Case  study
Case  Study  
*Carolina  Ferreira  Matos1 ;  Janete  Mendes  Moreno2
9  Abstract:  
a  means,  through  sessions  to  build  a  suspended  flower  box.  Results:  Carpentry  increased  motivation,  feelings  of  well-being  and  being  described  focuses  on  the  stimulation  of  skills  in  deficit,  using  occupation  as  a  means,  through  sessions  of  building
as  bradykinesia,  rigidity,  postural  instability  and  tremor.  The  intervention  currently  described  involves  not  only  pharmacological  treatment,  such  as  bradykinesia,  rigidity,  postural  instability  and  tremor.  The  intervention  currently  described  involves  pharmacological  treatment  and
proving  to  be  a  beneficial  activity,  to  relieve  many  of  the  motor  symptoms,  but  mainly  emotional  and  cognitive  symptoms.
Presents  the  diagnosis  of  PD  in  the  moderate  phase,  carrying  out  a  multidisciplinary  intervention  plan.  Objective:  To  describe  the  case  of  
Conclusion:  Participation  in  significant  activities,  such  as  carpentry,  contributes  to  alleviating  some  symptoms  of  PD,  at  least  during  its  Functional  Assessment  of  Adults  and  Elderly  People  (IAFAI),  the  Quality  of  Life  Scale  and  the  Functional  Assessment,  the  Arm  and  Hand  Activities  Inventory
74-year-old  patient,  diagnosed  with  moderate-phase  PD,  carrying  out  a  multidisciplinary  intervention  plan.  In  the  evaluation,  several  the  carpentry.  Material  and  methods:  The  case  reported  is  a  74-year-old  patient,  diagnosed  with  moderate-phase  PD,
during  the  performance  of  the  same,  producing  satisfaction  to  the  person,  as  well  as  enhancing  their  sense  of  competence,  increasing  their
and  predisposition  in  everyday  life.  Introduction:  Parkinson's  Disease  (PD)  is  a  chronic  and  progressive  neurodegenerative  disease  characterized  by  motor  symptoms  such  (ADL's)  and  activities  of  interest,  due  to  the  presence  of  motor,  emotional  and  cognitive  symptoms  associated  with  PD.  The  intervention  plan
cognitive  symptoms  associated  with  PD.  The  described  intervention  plan  focuses  on  the  stimulation  of  skills  in  deficit,  using  occupation  as  Keywords:  Parkinson's  Disease;  Significant  Activities;  Occupational  therapy;  flow;  Quality  of  life.
Functional  Assessment,  the  Chedocke  Arm  and  Hand  Activity  Inventory.  Occupational  problems  related  to  the  user's  performance  and  Introduction:  Parkinson's  Disease  (PD)  is  a  chronic  and  progressive  neurodegenerative  disease,  characterized  by  motor  symptoms
a  hanging  planter.  Results:  Carpentry  potentiated  an  increase  in  motivation,  feelings  of  well-being  and  being  able,
but  also  a  multidisciplinary  intervention.  Case  reported:  74-year-old  patient,  married  and  retired  from  the  profession  of  civil  engineer.  
able,  proving  to  be  a  beneficial  activity  to  alleviate  many  of  the  motor  symptoms,  but  mainly  emotional  and  cognitive  symptoms.  Conclusion:  Participation  in  meaningful  activities,  such  as  carpentry,  helps  to  alleviate  some  PD  symptoms,  at  leastmultidisciplinary  intervention.  Objective:  To  describe  the  case  of  a  person  with  PD  and  their  participation  in  significant  activities,  such  as
a  person  with  PD  and  their  participation  in  significant  activities,  such  as  carpentry.  Material  and  methods:  The  case  reported  is  about  a  
performance,  producing  satisfaction  for  the  person,  as  well  as  enhancing  their  sense  of  competence,  increasing  their  levels  of  confidence  
Keywords:  Parkinson's  disease;  Significant  Activities;  Occupational  Therapy;  Flow;  Quality  of  life.  carrying  out  a  multidisciplinary  intervention  plan.  In  the  evaluation,  several  instruments  were  used,  such  as  the  Evaluation  Inventory
levels  of  confidence  and  predisposition  in  everyday  life.
instruments  were  used,  such  as  the  Functional  Assessment  Inventory  for  Adults  and  Elderly  (IAFAI),  the  Quality  of  Life  Scale  and  the  
participation  in  Activities  of  Daily  Living  (ADLs)  and  activities  of  interest  were  identified,  due  to  the  presence  of  motor,  emotional  and  from  Chedocke.  Occupational  problems  related  to  the  performance  and  participation  of  the  user  in  the  Activities  of  Daily  Living  were  identifiedMachine Translated by Google

*Corresponding  author:  10150467@ess.ipp.pt;  Higher  School  of  Health  of  the  Polytechnic  of  Porto
Figueiredo,  S:  0000-0002-0550-9936;  Trigueiro,  MJ:  0000-0003-4439-7196;  Marques,  A:  0000-0002-8656-5023;  Almeida,  R:2Psychosocial  Rehabilitation  Laboratory  of  the  Escola  Superior  de  Saúde  do  Politécnico  do  Porto,  Porto,  Portugal
ORCID  do  autor:  
0000-0003-4703-1712;  Coelho,  T:  0000-0001-7847-2401;  Sousa,  S:  0000-0002-3639-8634;  Portugal,  P:  0000-0001-9689-4050;
Campos,  F:  0000-0001-6550-7660;  Simões-Silva,  V:  0000-0003-2831-97291School  of  Health  of  the  Polytechnic  of  Porto,  Porto,  PortugalTranslation,  adaptation  and  contribution  for  the  validation  of  the  Warwick  Translation,  adaptation  and  contribution  to  the  validation  of  the  Warwick-Edinburgh  scale
Mental  Well-Being  Scale  for  the  Portuguese  population
Edinburgh  Mental  Well-Being  Scale  for  the  portuguese  population  
Rabbit1,2;  Sara  Sousa1,2;  Paula  Portugal1,2;  Filipa  Campos1,2;  Vitor  Simões-Silva1,2
10  *Sofia  Figueiredo1 ;  Maria  João  Trigueiro1,2;  António  Marques1,2;  Raquel  Almeida1,2;  Tiago
that  assesses  subjective  and  psychological  mental  well-being  for  the  Portuguese  population.  Material  and  Methods:  After  approval  of  the  translation
validations.  There’s  a  high  correlation  between  the  WEMWBS  and  the  scale  used  as  criterion  measure,  with  an  r=0,75.  The  test-retest  internal  consistency  and  an  exploratory  factor  analysis  for  construct  validity.  Both  instruments  were  applied  twice
Introduction  The  concept  of  Mental  Well-Being  has  been  gaining  highlight  internationally,  as  a  crucial  aspect  of  health,  with  an  impact  on  Cronbach  's  alpha  of  0.91,  suggesting  very  good  internal  consistency.  Factor  analysis  confirmed  the  unidimensionality  of  the
Objective:  Translate,  culturally  adapt  and  contribute  for  the  validation  of  the  Warwick-Edinburgh  Mental  Well-Being  Scale,  that  assesses  
Portuguese  population  are  close  to  the  ones  obtained  in  the  original  validation,  being  possible  to  consider  it  has  a  legitimate  and  important  populations.  Objective:  To  translate,  culturally  adapt  and  contribute  to  the  validation  of  the  Warwick-Edinburgh  Mental  Well-Being  Scale  (WEMWBS),
Portuguese  translation  by  an  expert  panel,  the  scale  was  given  to  1728  subjects  from  Porto’s  metropolitan  area,  as  well  as  the  Pemberton  Introduction  The  concept  of  Mental  Well-Being  has  gained  more  prominence  internationally,  being  a  crucial  aspect  of  health,  with
as  a  criterion  measure,  with  r=0.75.  The  test-retest  reliability  obtained  a  high  correlation,  with  r=0.77.  Conclusion:  The  values  obtained
Keywords:  Assessment;  mental  well-being;  mental  health;  WEMWBS;  validation.  Abstract:  Portuguese  by  a  panel  of  experts,  the  scale  was  applied  to  1728  individuals  from  the  Porto  metropolitan  area  recruited  by  convenience,  as  well  as  
the  Pemberton  Happiness  Index,  for  an  analysis  of  criterion  validity.  Cronbach  's  alpha  was  used  to  assess  the
factor  analysis  confirmed  the  one-dimensionality  of  the  scale,  since  all  items  saturated  into  one  single  factor,  similarly  to  previous  be  considered  as  a  legitimate  and  important  contribution  to  its  realization.
analysis  for  the  construct  validity.  Both  scales  were  given  twice  to  39  participants,  approximately  one  week  after  the  first  application,  to  to  39  participants,  approximately  one  week  apart,  to  test  test-retest  reliability.  Results:  A
the  functionality.  Therefore,  there’s  a  need  to  have  validated  measures  that  can  assess  the  Portuguese  population’s  mental  well-being.  
reliability  had  a  high  correlation,  with  an  r=0,77.Conclusion:  The  obtained  values  in  this  first  validation  study  of  the  WEWMBS  for  the  instrument,  with  all  items  saturating  a  single  factor.  There  was  a  high  correlation  between  the  WEMWBS  and  the  instrument  usedSummary
subjective  and  psychological  mental  well-being,  for  the  Portuguese  population.  Material  and  Methods:  After  the  approval  of  the  
contribution  for  the  validation  of  the  scale.  impact  on  functionality.  Thus,  in  Portugal,  there  is  a  need  to  have  validated  measures  that  assess  the  well-being  of
in  this  first  WEMWBS  validation  study  for  the  Portuguese  population  are  close  to  those  of  the  original  version,  and  may
Happiness  Index,  to  analyze  the  criterion  validity.  Cronbach’s  alpha  was  used  to  analyze  the  internal  consistency  and  an  exploratory  factor  
analyze  the  test-retest  reliability.  Results:  It  was  obtained  a  Cronbach’s  alpha  of  0,91,  suggesting  a  very  good  internal  consistency.  The  Keywords:  Evaluation;  mental  well-being;  mental  health;  WEMWBS;  validation.Machine Translated by Google

Cíntia  Marques1 ;  Carolina  Matos1 ;  Joana  Cavaleiro1 ;  Juliana  Simões1 ;  Rui  Fonseca
Pinto1,2,4;  Nuno  Vieira  Lopes2,3;  Jaime  Moreira  Ribeiro1,2
11  4  Telecommunications  Institute,  PortugalEvaluation  of  postural  systems  of  the  pelvis  in  a  person  with  Muscular  Dystrophy  
of  the  Waist  type:  results  of  the  three-cushion  analysis  in  the  promotion  of  
dynamic  balance
Dystrophy:  results  of  the  analysis  of  three  cushions  in  the  promotion  of  dynamic  balance  Evaluation  of  postural  systems  of  the  pelvis  in  a  person  with  Limb-Girdle  Muscular  
effective  in  promoting  dynamic  balance,  with  an  advantage  in  the  use  of  a  cushion  composed  of  foam  and  fluid.
of  movements  and  cushion  randomization;  2)evaluation  of  user  perception  with  a  questionnaire  and  visual  analogue  pain  scale,  after  four  Rui  Fonseca-Pinto:  0000-0001-6774-5363;  Nuno  Lopes:  0000-0002-2232-1839;  Jaime  Ribeiro:  0000-0002-1548-5579
carried  out  in  two  moments:  1)  collect  anthropometric,  kinematic  and  dynamic  data,  through  direct  measurement  of  the  range,
Abstract  Introduction:  Anti-decubitus  pads  are  specialized  devices  for  pressure  redistribution  and  load  management  on  fabrics.
cushions;  2)  evaluation  of  the  user's  perception  with  a  questionnaire  and  visual  analogue  pain  scale,  after  four  hours  of  stay
They  should  maintain  postural  alignment,  facilitate  movement,  create  a  stable  base,  relieve  pain  and  be  comfortable.  They  can  be  
position,  coefficient  of  variation  and  mean  pressure  in  frontal  trunk  flexion.  Cushion  B  showed  more  positive  results  in  the  contact  area,  3School  of  Technology  and  Management,  Polytechnic  of  Leiria,  Leiria,  Portugal
during  everyday  activities.  Objectives:  To  evaluate  the  effectiveness  in  maintaining  dynamic  balance  of  three  types  of  gamma  pads
focused  on  weight  distribution  and  has  neglected  the  dynamic  behaviour  of  the  cushion  during  everyday  activities.  Objectives:  To  evaluate  of  the  coefficient  of  variation  and  the  mean  pressure  in  the  forward  flexion  of  the  trunk.  Cushion  B  showed  more  positive  results  in  the  area  of1School  of  Health,  Polytechnic  of  Leiria,  Leiria,  Portugal
They  can  be  composed  exclusively  of  a  material  such  as  foam,  gel,  air  and  fluid,  or  a  combination  of  two  or  more  of  these.
analysis.  Conclusion:  The  anti-sores  cushions  that  combine  two  materials  in  their  composition  are  more  effective  in  promoting  dynamic  Keywords:  Cushion;  Dynamic  balance;  Stability;  Pressure  ulcer.ORCID  do  autor:  
using:  a  foam  and  air  cushion  (A),  a  foam  and  fluid  bag  cushion  (B)  and  an  air  cushion  (C).  Data  collection  was
acceleration  and  subjective  analysis.  Conclusion:  Anti-decubitus  pillows  that,  in  their  composition,  combine  two  materials,  are  more
Methods:  Study  with  a  female  person  with  Girdle-Limb  Muscular  Dystrophy,  using:  a  foam  and  air  cushion  (A),  a  foam  and  fluid  bag  cushion  
through  direct  measurement  of  reach,  videorecording  and  accelerometer,  and  pressures  exerted  on  the  cushions,  by  means  of  a  protocol  Summary
Keywords:  Cushion;  Dynamic  balance;  Stability;  Pressure  ulcer.  video  recording  and  accelerometer,  and  pressures  exerted  on  the  pads,  through  a  protocol  of  movements  and  randomization  of
Introduction:  Pressure  ulcer  cushions  are  specialised  devices  for  pressure  redistribution  and  management  of  tissue  load  and  microclimate.  
hours  of  staying  on  the  cushion.  Results:  Cushion  A  revealed  better  results  at  the  level  of  maximum  reach,  peak  pressure  in  the  initial  on  the  pillow.  Results:  Cushion  A  showed  better  results  in  terms  of  maximum  reach,  peak  pressure  in  the  starting  position,and  the  microclimate.  They  must  maintain  postural  alignment,  facilitate  movement,  create  a  stable  base,  relieve  pain,  and  be  comfortable.
composed  exclusively  of  one  material  such  as  foam,  gel,  air  and  fluid,  or  a  combination  of  two  or  more  of  these  materials.  Research  has  
coefficient  of  variation  and  mean  pressure  in  the  initial  position,  peak  pressure  in  frontal  trunk  flexion,  acceleration  variation  and  subjective  
balance,  with  the  advantage  of  the  cushion  composed  of  foam  and  fluid.  materials.  The  investigations  carried  out  focus  on  weight  distribution  and  neglect  the  dynamic  behavior  of  the  cushion.
contact,  coefficient  of  variation  and  mean  pressure  in  the  starting  position,  peak  pressure  of  forward  trunk  flexion,  variation  of
the  effectiveness  in  maintaining  dynamic  balance  of  three  types  of  medium-high  range  cushions  with  different  compositions.  Material  and  2Center  for  Innovative  Care  and  Health  Technology  (ciTechCare),  Politécnico  de  Leiria,  Leiria,  Portugal
(B)  and  an  air  cushion  (C).  Data  collection  was  performed  in  two  moments:  1)anthropometric,  kinematic  and  dynamic  data  collection,  medium-high  with  different  compositions.  Methods:  Study  with  a  female  with  Waist-Type  Muscular  Dystrophy,Machine Translated by Google

3  
4  1  
2  *Ana  Paula  Martins1,2,  Mamie  Brunk3 Rita  Cruz4
12  ,  Graded  Motor  Imagery:  The  effectiveness  of  Occupational  Therapy  in  modulating  
pain  and  improving  Occupational  Performance  in  a  case  with  Pyogenic  Arthritis
Graded  Motor  Imagery:  Occupational  Therapy’s  effectiveness  on  pain  modulation  
and  Occupational  Performance  in  a  case  with  Pyogenic  Arthritis  
Corresponding  author:  Ana  Paula  Martins:  anapmartins@ipbeja.pt
protective  pain  response.  Objective:  To  verify  the  effectiveness  of  Occupational  Therapy  intervention  in  pain  modulation  and  performance
progression).
years  old  and  retired.  Were  used  as  evaluation  assessments:  the  Canadian  Performance  Measure,  the  Visual  Analogue  Scale,  the  Jebson  movement,  commonly  in  a  single  joint,  which  results  in  occupational  deprivation.  Graded  Engine  Imagery  (GMI)  is  an  approach
Occupational  Therapy  intervention  in  pain  modulation  and  Occupational  Performance,  using  the  GMI  approach,  in  a  client  with  Pyogenic  The  effectiveness  of  the  application  of  the  GMI  in  this  case  study  was  proven,  however,  more  confirmatory  studies  are  needed  and  with
Keywords:  Graded  Motor  Imagery;  Occupational  Therapy;  Pain;  Occupational  Performance;  Pyogenic  Arthritis.  Muscle,  Dynamometer  and  Goniometry.  The  three  sequential  phases  of  the  GMI  were  used  -  handedness  discrimination,  imagination
evolves  over  hours  or  days.  Symptoms  are  rapid  onset  pain,  stroke  and  restricted  range  of  motion,  usually  in  a  single  joint,  which  results  
washing  the  body  and  eating).  Conclusion:  The  effectiveness  of  the  Graded  Motor  Imagery  application  in  this  case  study  has  been  proven,  periarticular,  which  evolves  over  hours  or  days.  Symptoms  are  rapid  onset  pain,  effusion,  and  restricted  range  of  motion.
the  objectives  identified  by  the  client  in  the  Canadian  Measure  (driving,  maintaining  the  garden,  washing  the  body  and  eating).  Conclusion:
gradually  involve  the  motor  cortical  areas  without  triggering  a  protective  pain  response.  Objective:  To  verify  the  effectiveness  of  the  Abstract  (4  weeks),  every  three  weeks.  The  client  was  male,  71  years  old  and  retired.  as  measures  of
approach  -  left/right  discrimination,  motor  imagery  and  mirror  therapy.  Results:  There  was  a  decrease  in  pain  and  an  improvement  in  the  Summary
Occupational,  using  the  GMI  approach,  in  a  client  with  Pyogenic  Arthritis.  Material  and  Methods:  A  longitudinal  study  was  carried  out
Taylor  Hand  Function  Test,  the  Dynamometer,  the  Muscle  Test  and  the  Goniometry.  There  were  used  all  three  sequential  phases  of  this  Keywords:  Graded  Motor  Imagery;  Occupational  therapy;  Pain;  Occupational  Performance;  Pyogenic  Arthritis.
sequencing  and  progression).  biopsychosocial,  recent  to  the  treatment  of  pain,  which  aims  at  the  gradual  involvement  of  the  motor  cortical  areas  without  triggering  a
larger  populations  that  allow  the  validation  of  specific  protocols  (treatment  duration,  sequencing  and
Arthritis.  Material  and  Methods:  A  longitudinal  study  (4  weeks)  was  carried  out,  with  a  three-weekly  periodicity.  The  client  was  male,  71  Introduction:  Pyogenic  Arthritis  starts  with  an  acute  bacterial  infection  in  the  joints,  usually  in  the  synovial  tissues  or
motor  and  mirror  therapy.  Results:  There  was  a  decrease  in  pain  and  an  improvement  in  hand  functionality,  reaching
in  occupational  deprivation.  The  Graded  Motor  Imagery  (GMI)  is  a  recent  biopsychosocial  approach  to  pain  management  that  aims  to  
but  it  is  advised  do  create  more  confirmatory  studies  with  larger  sample  population  that  validates  specific  protocols  (duration  of  treatment,  evaluation  used:  the  Canadian  Performance  Measure,  the  Visual  Analogue  Scale,  the  Jebson  Taylor  Hand  Function  Test,  the
Introduction:  Pyogenic  Arthritis  begins  with  an  acute  bacterial  infection  of  the  joints,  usually  in  the  synovial  or  periarticular  tissues,  which  
functionality  of  the  hand,  having  achieved  the  stated  objectives  by  the  client  in  the  Canadian  Measure  (driving,  maintaining  the  garden,  José  Régio  School  Group,  Portalegre,  Portugal.IPBeja  –  Polytechnic  Institute  of  Beja,  School  of  Health,  Department  of  Health,  Beja,  Portugal.
Author  ORCID:  Ana  Paula  Martins:  0000-0003-1394-4038Centro  Hospitalar  Universitário  do  Algarve  EPE,  Faro,  Portugal.Garcia  de  Orta  Hospital,  EPE,  Almada,  Portugal.
*  Machine Translated by Google

1  from  southern  Mozambique  
*  Marina  Di  Napoli  Pastore1Occupational  Therapy,  pluralities  and  childhoods:  play  as  significant  activity  of  children  
13  Occupational  Therapy,  pluralities  and  childhood:  playing  as  a  significant  activity  
for  children  in  southern  Mozambique
re-readings  of  worlds  and  actions  from  sociocultural  perspectives.  This  work  presents  a  longitudinal  research
children  and  childhood  in  occupational  therapy  in  Portuguese-speaking  countries  and  beyond,  encompassing  the  child  in  their  ways  of  life  and
therapist  as  a  researcher.  Material  and  Methods:  Ethnography  with  field  research  in  Mozambique,  in  the  community  of  Matola  Introduction:  Recent  studies  on  children  and  childhood  on  the  world  stage  have  pointed  to  an  understanding  of  children
results  point  to  a  kaleidoscope  of  diversities  and  languages  used  by  children  in  play,  understood  as
Mozambique,  with  children  from  three  to  fifteen  years  of  age,  in  which  the  discussion  about  playing  and  the  relationship  with  
Keywords:  Children;  Mozambique;  Sociocultural  perspective;  childhood  studies;  occupational  therapy  in  childhood.  Introduction:  Recent  studies  on  children  and  childhoods  on  the  world  stage  have  pointed  to  an  understanding  of  children  as  
by  children  in  play,  understood  as  a  way  of  being  in  the  world  and  from  their  space-time  relationships.  Conclusion:  This  research  Summary
actions  from  sociocultural  perspectives,  specially  to  the  play.  This  paper  presents  a  longitudinal  research  conducted  in  Keywords:  Children;  Mozambique;  Sociocultural  perspective;  Childhood  Studies;  Occupational  Therapy  in  Childhood.disused  material  (disposal);  playing  and  the  relationship  with  nature  and  landscapes;  images  of  playing  and  the  use  of  photography.  You
analyzed,  the  main  points  involved:playing  and  building  toys  fromdisuse  material  (discard);  playing  and  the  relationship  with  nature  ISCISA  -  Higher  Institute  of  Health  Sciences,  Maputo,  Mozambique
occupational  therapy  is  present.  Objective:  To  understand  play  as  a  significant  activity  for  children  and  the  role
historical  contexts  and  expands  possibilities  of  actions  and  research  in  sociocultural  contexts  and  perspectives.  Health  (ISCISA),  Maputo,  Mozambique.
community  of  Matola  A,  in  the  community  of  Mabotine  and  in  Nhandlovo,  between  2014  and  2018.  Results:  From  theheld  in  Mozambique,  with  children  from  three  to  fifteen  years  of  age,  in  which  the  discussion  about  playing  and  the  relationship  with
historical  contexts  and  expands  possibilities  for  actions  and  research  in  sociocultural  contexts  and  perspectives.
A,  in  the  community  of  Mabotine  and  Nhandlovo  between  the  years2014  and  2018.  Results:  Based  on  the  data  collected  and  as  sociocultural  beings  and  active  agents  in  the  productions  of  the  world  that  surrounds  them,  finding  in  playing  possibilities  of
way  of  being  in  the  world  and  from  its  spatio-temporal  relationships.  Conclusion:  This  research  contributes  to  studies  with
occupational  therapy  is  present.  Objective:  To  understand  playing  as  a  significant  activity  of  children  and  the  role  of  occupational  ORCID  do  autor:  Marina  Pastore  0000-0002-5924-8719  
data  collected  and  analyzed,  the  main  points  worked  involved:  playing  and  the  construction  of  toys  from
sociocultural  beings  and  active  agents  in  the  productions  of  the  world  around  them,  finding  possibilities  of  rereading  worlds  and  
contributes  to  the  studies  with  children  and  childhoods  in  occupational  therapy,  engloband  the  children  to  their  lifestyles  and  *Corresponding  author:  marinan.pastore@gmail.com;  Department  of  Occupational  Therapy.  Higher  Institute  of  Sciences  of
of  the  occupational  therapist  as  a  researcher.  Material  and  Methods:  Ethnography  with  field  research  in  Mozambique,  in
Abstract  
and  landscapes;  images  of  play  and  the  use  of  photography.  The  results  point  to  a  kaleidoscope  of  diversities  and  languages  used  Machine Translated by Google

,  Sara  Mira1 Francisca  Duarte1,  Gabriela  Leal1  ,  Jaime  Ribeiro1,2,  Sofia  Ribeiro1
neuromusculoskeletal,  sensory-perceptual  and  cognitive  disorders  often  give  rise  to  complex  communication  needs,  whose
as  well  as  the  identification  of  gaps,  which  suggest  investment  in  future  investigations.  Conclusion:  OT  has  a  relevant  role
frequently  involves  the  implementation  of  Augmentative  and  Alternative  Communication  Systems  (AACS).  The  Occupational  Therapist  can  
positioning,  the  most  appropriate  type  of  access  and  contexts  and,  in  the  intervention  through  positioning,  adaptation  and  training  in  the  Abstract  
Introduction:  Cerebral  Palsy  (CP)  is  a  lesion  of  the  Central  Nervous  System  with  a  strong  impact  on  functionality.  The  changes
Introduction:  Cerebral  Palsy  (CP)  is  a  Central  Nervous  System  lesion  with  strong  impact  on  functionality.  The  neuromusculoskeletal,  of  articles  using  the  webQDA  software.  Results:  10  articles  were  selected  from  the  353  studies  initially  found,
multidisciplinary  team,  as  well  as  the  identification  of  gaps,  which  suggest  investment  in  future  research.  Conclusion:  OT  has  a  relevant  activities,  whose  participation  is  restricted  by  communication  deficits.  Methodology:  Scoping  Review  developed  based  on  the
investment  in  research  and  training.
Analyses  extension  for  Scoping  Reviews  (PRISMA-ScR)  and  according  to  the  Joanna  Briggs  Institute  (JBI)  protocol,  conducted  using  the  according  to  the  Joanna  Briggs  Institute  (JBI)  protocol,  initiated  with  research  at  b-on.  A  thematic  categorical  analysis  was  carried  out
Abstract  positioning,  most  appropriate  type  of  access  and  contexts;  intervention,  through  positioning,  adaptation  and  training  in  use(SAAC).  The  occupational  therapist  can  collaborate  in  this  intervention,  especially  when  Supportive  Technologies  (AT)  are  involved.
Therapy  (OT)  in  the  implementation  of  AACS  in  children  with  CP,  checking  the  influence  on  the  activities  in  which  participation  is  restricted  
investment  in  research  and  training.  multidisciplinary  intervention  often  involves  the  implementation  of  Augmentative  and  Alternative  Communication  Systems
collaborate  in  this  intervention,  especially  when  assistive  technologies  are  involved.  Objective:  To  describe  the  process  of  Occupational  in  the  implementation  of  SAAC  in:  evaluation,  with  identification  of  capacities  and  needs  at  different  levels,  including  the
according  to  the  inclusion  criteria  of  the  353  studies  initially  found,  demonstrating  the  contribution  of  the  OT  process,  the  importance  of  a  
use  of  the  AACS,  as  well  as  training,  consulting  and  advocacy  of  stakeholders.  The  implementation  of  AACSis  an  area  that  still  needs  according  to  the  inclusion  criteria,  demonstrating  the  contribution  of  the  OT  process,  the  importance  of  a  multidisciplinary  team,
sensory-perceptive  and  cognitive  changes  frequently  originate  complex  communication  needs,  whose  multidisciplinary  intervention  
role  in  the  implementation  of  an  AACS:  in  the  assessment,  with  identification  of  capacities  and  needs  at  different  levels,  including  guia  orientador  Preferred  Reporting  Items  for  Systematic  Reviews  and  Meta-Analyses  extension  for  Scoping  Reviews  (PRISMA-ScR)  e  de  
b-on  library.  A  thematic  categorical  analysis  of  the  articles  was  performed  using  the  webQDA  software.  Results:  Ten  articles  were  selected  Objective:  To  describe  the  process  of  Occupational  Therapy  (OT)  in  the  implementation  of  SAAC,  in  children  with  CP,  verifying  the  influence
of  SAAC,  training,  consultation  and  stakeholder  advocacy .  The  implementation  of  SAAC  is  an  area  that  still  lacks
by  communication  deficits.  Methodology:  Scoping  Review  based  on  the  Preferred  Reporting  Items  for  Systematic  Reviews  and  Meta  Author  ID:  Jaime  Ribeiro:  0000-0002-1548-5579;  Francisca  Duarte:  0000-0002-4594-6102;  Gabriela  Loyal:  0000-0003-
0447-2833;  Sara  Mira:  0000-0003-3743-6863;  Sofia  Ribeiro:  0000-0003-0182-5402Center  for  Innovative  Care  and  Health  Technology  (ciTechCare),  Politécnico  de  Leiria,  Leiria,  PortugalSchool  of  Health,  Polytechnic  of  Leiria,  Leiria,  PortugalAlternative  Communication  Systems  in  children  with  Cerebral  Palsy:  a  Scoping  Review  
14  The  contribute  of  Occupational  Therapy  to  the  implementation  of  Augmentative  and  The  contribution  of  Occupational  Therapy  to  the  implementation  of  Systems
Augmentatives  and  Communication  Alternatives  in  Children  with  Paralysis
Cerebral:  uma  Scoping  Review  
Keywords:  Communication;  Children;  Cerebral  Palsy;  Augmentative  and  Alternative  Communication  Systems;  Occupational  Therapy.  Keywords:  Communication;  Children;  Cerebral  Palsy;  Augmentative  and  Alternative  Communication  Systems;  Occupational  therapy.1  
2  Machine Translated by Google

2  ,  Tiago  Coelho1,2; Fabiana  Rocha1 ;  Raquel  Simões  de  Almeida1,2;  Humberta  Amorim1
15  António  Marques1,2;  Sandra  Nascimento1 ;Vitor  Simões-Silva1,2;  *Maria  João  Trigueiro1,  2Rita  Barbosa1 ;  Filipa  Henriques1 ;  Inês  Marques1 ;  Francisca  Oliveira1 ;  Sofia  Ponte1 ;Sao  Tome  and  Principe
PrinceProject  to  promote  capacity  building  for  signaling  and  providing  basic  care  to  
children  at  risk  of  developmental  delay  and/or  disability,  in
Project  to  promote  training  for  screening  and  provision  of  primary  care  to  
children  at  risk  of  developmental  delay  and/or  disability,  in  São  Tomé  and  
developmental  delay  and  improve  the  provision  of  basic  care,  involving  the  family.  Material  and  Methods:  These  areORCID  do  autor:  
of  the  family  members  involved.  In  this  way,  we  believe  that  school  problems  can  be  prevented  and  the  propensity  to
signposted/traced,  children  receiving  care  from  guardians  and  the  number  of  professionals  who  after  specialised  training  are  able  Psychosocial  Rehabilitation  Laboratory  of  the  Polytechnic  of  Porto,  Porto,  Portugal
early  detection  of  children  at  risk  of  developmental  delay  or  support  for  their  families.  Objective:  Intends
in  development  and/or  disability  are  flagged/tracked  and  cared  for  by  tutors,
basic  care,  involving  the  family.  Methods:  This  is  a  psychological  case  study  which  aims  to  promote  support  to  children,  parents  ensure  the  screening  of  children.  The  degree  of  parental  knowledge  will  be  measured  through  a  questionnaire.  Results:  Increase
Introduction:  São  Tomé  and  Príncipe  is  a  developing  country  which  currently  has  no  early  signposting/screening  services  to  Introduction:  São  Tomé  and  Príncipe  is  a  developing  country  that  currently  does  not  have  signaling/tracking  services.
the  degree  of  knowledge  of  the  parents  for  the  provision  of  care.  Conclusions:  It  is  expected  that  children  at  risk  of  delay
of  health  and  education  professionals  to  identify  and  screen  children  at  risk  of  developmental  delay  and  improve  the  provision  of  Keywords:  Capacity  building;  mentoring;  Tracking;  basic  care.Oliveira:  0000-0001-9996-6320;  Fabiana  Rocha:  0000-0003-3249-4618;  Raquel  Almeida:  0000-0003-4703-1712;  humberta
distance  therapeutic  mentoring.  The  counts  of  the  number  of  flagged/tracked  children,  of  the  children  thatBirth:  0000-0003-0238-5103;  Victor  Silva  0000-0003-2831-9729;  Maria  João  Trigueiro:  0000-0003-4439-7196Rita  Barbosa:  0000-0002-7326-6833;  Filipa  Henriques:  0000-0001-6657-8655;  Inês  Marques:  0000-0002-8101-461X;  francisca
a  psychological  case  study  that  aims  to  promote  support  for  children,  parents  and  health  professionals,  according  to  a  model  of
adoption  of  deviant  behavior  and  institutionalization  may  be  mitigated.
to  ensure  the  screening  of  children.  The  degree  of  parents'  knowledge  will  be  measured  through  a  questionnaire.  Results:  Increase  *Corresponding  author:  mjtrigueiro@ess.ipp.pt;  P.Porto  Higher  School  of  Health,  Porto,  Portugal
to  promote  the  training  of  professionals  in  the  area  of  health  and  education,  for  the  signaling/screening  of  children  at  risk  of
involving  the  family.  Furthermore,  the  objective  is  to  increase  the  health  literacy  of  health  and  education  professionals  as  well  as
and  health  professionals,  according  to  a  distance  therapeutic  mentoring  model.  Counts  will  be  used  of  the  number  of  children  1School  of  Health  of  the  Polytechnic  of  Porto,  Porto,  Portugal
Summary
in  the  number  of  professionals  involved,  increase  in  the  number  of  children  who  are  flagged  and  receive  care,  an  increase  in
detect  children  at  risk  of  developmental  delay  and  no  support  for  their  families.  Objective:  This  study  aims  to  promote  the  training  Amorim:  0000-0003-0519-6084;  Tiago  Coelho:  0000-0001-7847-2401;  António  Marques:  0000-0002-8656-5023;  Sandra
receive  care  provided  by  tutors  and  the  number  of  professionals  who,  after  specialized  training,  are  able  to
Abstract  Machine Translated by Google

health  literacy  of  health  and  education  professionals,  as  well  as  of  the  family  members  involved.  Thus,  we  consider  that  school  of  knowledge  of  parents  for  care  provision.  Conclusions:  It  is  expected  that  children  at  risk  of  developmental  delay  and/or  
Keywords:  Training;  mentoring;  screening;  primary  care.  problems  may  be  prevented  and  the  propensity  to  adopt  deviant  behaviour  and  institutionalisation  may  be  attenuated.  disability  are  signposted/traced  and  receive  care  provision  by  guardians,  involving  the  family.  Furthermore,  we  aim  to  increase  the  in  the  number  of  professionals  involved,  increase  in  the  number  of  children  signposted  and  receive  care,  increase  in  the  degree  
to  effectively  carry  out  a  diagnosis,  requiring  travel  to  the  central  hospital.
possible  (Elba  &  Olívio,  2015).  There  is  no  legal  framework  in  STP  that  allows  thespecialists  is  very  low  and  the  lack  of  knowledge  about  child  development
and  benefit  from  medical  and  rehabilitation  services  and  the  child  with
adequate  care  (National  Statistics  Institute  of  São  Tomé  and  Príncipe,  2019;  UNICEF,
16  neurodevelopment  has  the  right  to  special  care,  which  allows  for  the  well-being,by  other  health  professionals  is  evident  (Costa,  2020;  Global  Change  Data  Lab,
2016)  In  addition,  these  children  are  still  victims  of  stigma,  resulting  from  lowto  709  children.  In  STP,  there  is  no  early  signaling/screening  to  detect  the  risk
al.,  2018).  
there  are  special  education  professionals  in  the  country  (Democratic  Republic  of  São  Tomé  andAccording  to  UNICEF  (2016),  the  child  has  the  right  to  enjoy  the  best  state  of  healthdevelopmental  delay  and/or  disability,  the  number  of  health  professionals
Príncipe,  2012)  and  families  do  not  have  the  necessary  knowledge  to  ensure  thehours  by  motor  vehicle  or  six  to  nine  hours  on  foot  from  the  hospital,  so  there  is  a  largegulf  of  guinea.  According  to  UNICEF  (2016),  1.14%  of  all  children  in  the  country,  up  to  11
and/or  disability,  does  not  attend  school  (UNICEF,  2016).  Kindergarten  teachers  andinclusion  of  all  children  and  half  of  children  at  risk  of  developmental  delay
primary  school  teachers  are  not  trained  in  special  educational  needs  oryears,  are  at  risk  of  developmental  delay  and/or  disability,  corresponding  to
difficulty  in  accessing  health  care  (Instituto  Marquês  de  Valle  Flôr,  2011;  Neves  et  al.Introduction
health  literacy  by  the  general  population  (Bordia  Das  and  Espinoza,  2019).  as  therapists2017).  In  addition,  health  centers  do  not  have  the  necessary  materials  and  equipment.São  Tomé  and  Príncipe  (STP)  is  a  developing  country  made  up  of  two  islands,  in  the
The  means  of  transport  in  the  country  are  expensive  and  about  17%  of  the  population  lives  two
live  with  dignity  and  achieve  the  highest  degree  of  autonomy,  participation  and  social  integrationMachine Translated by Google

ensuring  that  the  information  and  education  provided  to  clients  or  professionals  is
distance.
influence  future  policies  or  procedures  (Merrian,  2001).
with  the  aim  of  promoting  the  signaling  of  children  at  risk  of  developmental  delayGutman,  2011),  through  the  use  of  approaches  to  promote  health  literacy  in
in  the  area  of  health  and  education  and  tutors,  making  them  agents  of  change  and,  later,
exhaustive  data  about  a  unique  individual,  system  or  community  (Hancock  and
intends  to  present  a  model  of  distance  therapeutic  mentoring.STP.  The  project  aims  to  promote  signaling/tracking  and  improve  care  deliveryoccupational  activities,  we  aim  to  promote  the  health  and  well-being  of  these  children  (Smith  and
psychological  case  study  (according  to  the  classification  of  Hancock  and  Algozzine,  2006)  thatsocial  entrepreneurship  entitled  “Bomu  Kêlê  –  Vamos  Acreditar!”,  aimed  at  children  up  tobasic  care  in  the  families  of  these  children.  For  this,  it  is  intended  to  train  professionals
A  case  study  is  a  type  of  qualitative  study  design  that  aims  to  collectand  social  aspects  of  that  person  (American  Occupational  Therapy  Association,  2011).  In  this  way,  the
with  risk  of  developmental  delay  and/or  deficiency  in  STP,  in  the  different  areas  and
which  specific  training  will  be  given  for  the  observation  and  provision  of  basic  care  ofchildren  by  existing  health  professionals  and  early  childhood  educators  and  with  the  lack  of
basic.adapted  to  literacy,  cultural  sensitivities,  and  verbal,  cognitive,
The  present  work  intends  to  study  the  phenomenon  of  the  implementation  of  a  project  ofThus,  the  impact  objective  of  this  project  will  be  the  reduction  of  child  neglect
and/or  disability  and  of  tutors  (unemployed  people  from  São  Paulo  and  with  the  12th  year  completed),  to  theunderstandable,  accessible  and  usable  by  the  entire  spectrum  of  consumers,
Algozzine,  2006),  in  order  to  gain  the  necessary  knowledge  so  that  they  canperpetuate  the  provision  of  care  through  international  cooperation  with  mentoring  to  the
The  envisaged  solution  involves  the  training  of  professionals  in  the  area  of  health  and  educationscreening  for  these  children.  It  is  also  intended  to  act  on  the  lack  of  knowledge  about  the
Material  and  methods
provided  to  them  by  parents,  health  and  education  professionals.  It  is,  therefore,  acauses  in  which  it  is  intended  to  intervene  are  related  to  the  lack  of  training  in  development
contexts  in  which  they  operate,  promoting  the  continuous  and  efficient  provision  of  care
aged  11,  at  risk  of  developmental  delay  and/or  disability,  in  Lembá,  district  of
17  Machine Translated by Google

Using  a  case  study  approach,  researchers  monitor  the
it  is  intended  to  evaluate  the  percentage  of  mentors  engaged  in  the  counseling  given
and/or  disability  in  STP,  distance  mentoring  will  also  allow  the  creation  of  opportunities
of  continuous  and  effective  basic  care  given  to  children.benefiting  from  distance  mentoring  provided  by  volunteer  occupational  therapists,
of  requests  for  clarification/doubts  about  a  child  questioned  to  the  mentor  by  the  tutor
Conclusion
deviant  behavior  and  institutionalization  can  be  overcome,  not  only  bybe  prevented  through  awareness-raising  resulting  from  the  training  provided  to  teachers,health  to  previously  flagged  children.  We  want  tutors  to  support  families,
allow  the  increase  of  knowledge  of  families.  In  the  long  term,  the  propensity  to  adoptWith  these  measures,  it  is  intended  that  some  of  the  effects  of  the  neglect  of  children  withthe  screening  of  children.  By  filling  in  a  form,  the  number  of
It  is  also  expected  to  increase  the  level  of  knowledge  of  parents  for  the  provision  of  care.annual  number  of  flagged/tracked  children,  monthly  number  of  children  receiving
Resultsprovision  of  care,  through  the  application  of  a  questionnaire.  Additionally,  it  will
specialized  training  is  able  to  guarantee  the  screening  of  children  and,  in  this  way,  increase  theimplementation  of  the  model  and  its  clinical  utility  for  the  target  population,  through  the  analysis
of  employment  to  São  Toméans,  acting  as  tutors  and  integrating  the  team.to  tutors.
18  thereby  improving  basic  care  support  for  children.
In  addition  to  the  decrease  in  neglect  children  at  risk  of  developmental  delayweekly.  In  addition,  using  the  random  visualization  of  mentoring  sessions,
knowledge  and  support  provided  by  tutors  to  families,  as  well  as  the  consequent  provisionanalyzed  the  number  of  professionals  who,  after  specialized  training,  are  able  to  guarantee
number  of  children  who  are  flagged  and  cared  for  by  tutors.
as  well  as  the  continuous  monitoring  of  the  tutors,  monitored  by  the  volunteers,  willthe  provision  of  care  by  the  tutors  and  the  degree  of  knowledge  revealed  by  the  parents  in  the
With  this  project,  we  hope  to  increase  the  number  of  professionals  who,  after  a
developmental  delay  are  addressed.  We  believe  that  dropping  out  of  school  canMachine Translated by Google

19  Bibliographic  references
Therapy  65:S78-S79,  2011.  
Smith  L  and  Gutman  A.  Health  Literacy  in  Occupational  Therapy  Practice  and  Research.  American  Journal  of  Occupational  National  Institute  of  Statistics  of  São  Tomé  and  Príncipe.  São  Tomé  and  Príncipe  -  Survey  on  multiple  indicators,  2019Global  Change  Data  Lab.  São  Tomé  and  Príncipe,  Our  World  in  Data,  2017.American  Occupational  Therapy  Association.  AOTA’s  Societal  Statement  on  Health  Literacy.  American  Journal  of  Occupational  
Education  CeF  ed),  2012.Marquês  de  Valle  Flôr  Institute.  “Health  for  All”  Project  -  Changing  the  Health  Care  delivery  paradigm  in  São  Tomé  and  Príncipe,  2011.Costa  P.  Deliberation  nº  15/USTP/2020  -  List  of  training  offers,  (Principe  UdSTe  ed),  2020
UNICEF  Study  report:  Signaling  Program  for  children  with  disabilities  or  at  risk  of  development,  2016.Democratic  Republic  of  São  Tomé  and  Príncipe.  Education  Policy  Charter  -  São  Tomé  and  Príncipe  (Vision  2022),  (Ministry  ofBordia  Das  M  and  Espinoza  S.  Inclusion  Matters  in  Africa,  2019.  
Therapy  65:367-369,  2011.  Neves  F,  Teixeira  C  and  Abreu  A.  Internship  in  Primary  Health  Care  in  São  Tomé  and  Príncipe,  Ordem  dos  Médicos,  2018Machine Translated by Google

Results:  For  the  analysis  and  interpretation  of  the  qualitative  data,  the  WebQDA  software  will  be  used  to  perform  the  content  3Research  Center  on  Didactics  and  Technology  in  the  Training  of  Trainers  (CIDTFF),  University  of  Aveiro,  Portugal
of  CAA,  implementing  devices  and  interfaces  customized  to  the  user.  Objective:  To  describe  the  OT  intervention  in  the
to  the  role  of  the  TO  in  the  implementation  of  a  SAAC  for  the  development  of  non-verbal  communication  of  a  child  with  ASD.
non-verbal  ASD.  Material  and  Methods:  Qualitative  approach  through  a  single  case  study,  focusing  on  the  use  of  an  android  1School  of  Health,  Polytechnic  of  Leiria,  Leiria,  Portugal
promotes  the  autonomy  of  people  with  ASD,  so  that  they  can  establish  effective  communication  with  their  peers.  At  the
expected  results  will  evaluate  the  evolution  in  terms  of  communication  skills,  resulting  from  the  implementation  with  training
Therapy  (OT)  focuses  on  promoting  access  to  the  AAC  system,  implementing  devices  and  interfaces  tailored  to  the  user.  Pre-Verbal,  from  Schedule  of  Growing  Skills  II,  by  interviewing  professionals  and  caregivers,  and  by  participant  observation.
Introduction:  Autism  Spectrum  Disorder  (ASD)  is  a  neurodevelopmental  disorder,  which  is  expressed  through  changes  and  
analysis  and  Microsoft  Excel  will  be  used  to  treat  the  quantitative  data  from  the  assessment  scales.  The  expected  results  will  assess  through  changes  and  deficits  in  social  and  communication  skills.  Alternative  and  Augmentative  Communication  (AAC)
content  analysis  and  Microsoft  Excel  for  processing  quantitative  data  from  the  assessment  scales.  You
with  ASD  so  that  they  can  establish  an  effective  communication  with  their  peers.  Within  the  multidisciplinary  team,  Occupational  Occupational;  Children.ORCID  do  autor:  
Material  and  Methods:  Qualitative  approach  through  a  single  case  study,  focusing  on  the  use  of  a  device
Communication  Scale,  the  Schedule  of  Growing  Skills  II,  interviews  with  professionals  and  caregivers,  and  participant  observation.  Summary*Corresponding  author:  jaime.ribeiro@ipleiria.pt;  Higher  School  of  Health  of  the  Polytechnic  of  Leiria,  Campus  2  -  Morro  do  Lena,  Alto  do  Vieiro  
-  Apartment  4137,  2411-901  Leiria
implementation  of  Assistive  Technologies  (AT)  for  AAC  with  a  preschool-age  child  with  non-verbal  ASD.
Keywords:  Communication;  PEA;  Support  Technologies;  Augmentative  and  Alternative  Communication  Systems;  Therapy
mobile  device  with  touch  screen  and  adapted  interface  with  pictograms.  Data  will  be  obtained  through  the  Pre-Verbal  2Center  for  Innovative  Care  and  Health  Technology  (ciTechCare),  Politécnico  de  Leiria,  Leiria,  Portugal
Within  the  scope  of  the  action  of  the  multidisciplinary  team,  the  work  of  Occupational  Therapy  (OT)  focuses  on  promoting  access  to  the  system
of  the  Augmentative  and  Alternative  Communication  System.  Conclusion:  This  investigation  will  produce  knowledge  in  what  it  reports
Objective:  To  describe  the  OT  intervention  in  the  implementation  of  Assistive  Technology  (AT)  for  AAC  with  a  preschooler  with  Introduction:  Autism  Spectrum  Disorder  (ASD)  consists  of  a  neuro-developmental  disorder,  which  is  expressed
Results:  For  the  analysis  and  interpretation  of  qualitative  data,  the  WebQDA  software  will  be  used  to  carry  out  the
deficits  in  social  and  communication  skills.  Augmentative  and  Alternative  Communication  (AAC)  promotes  the  autonomy  of  people  Jaime  Ribeiro:  0000-0002-1548-5579;
android  mobile  with  touch  screen  and  adapted  interface  with  pictograms.  Data  will  be  obtained  through  the  Communication  Scale
Abstract  Communication  System:  a  case  study  with  a  preschool  child  with  ASD  Occupational  Therapy  in  the  Implementation  of  Augmentative  and  Alternative  Occupational  Therapy  in  the  implementation  of  Augmentative  and  Alternative  
Communication  System:  case  study  with  a  preschool-aged  child  with  ASD
,  Mariana  Santos1 Sara  Sousa1 ,*Jaime  Ribeiro1,2,3 Inês  Jordão1
20  ,  Catarina  Tome1,  Machine Translated by Google

Keywords:  Communication;  ASD;  Assistive  Technology;  Augmentative  and  Alternative  Communication  Systems;  Occupational  Communication  System.  Conclusion:  This  research  will  produce  knowledge  on  the  role  of  OT  in  the  implementation  of  an  AACS  
Therapy;  children.  for  the  development  of  the  communication  skills  of  a  non-verbal  child  with  ASD  the  evolution  in  communication  skills,  resulting  from  the  implementation  and  training  of  the  Augmentative  and  Alternative  
2016;  Pereira,  2016)
2011;  Schirmer,  2020).  
non-verbal;of  the  use  of  Assistive  Technologies  (AT)  within  the  scope  of  Augmentative  Communication  and
thus  enabling  the  development  or  improvement  of  communication  and/or  language,
Establishing  the  following  objectives:In  this  way,  we  aim  to  answer  the  research  question:  How  does  the  intervention  ofAbout  30%  of  people  with  ASD  are  non-verbal,  so  there  is  a  need  to
school  with  non-verbal  ASD?of  an  Android  tactile  mobile  device  equipped  with  a  dedicated  program  for  CAA,  withthe  communication  of  people  with  deficits  in  this  area,  complementing  or  replacing  speech,
non-verbal.Introduction
deficient  or  non-existent,  allowing  involvement  and  participation  in  occupations.  soand  deficits  in  social  and  communication  skills,  restrictions  on  activities,  interests  and
enhance  communication  through  the  use  of  Augmentative  and  Alternative  Systems  ofATs  consist  of  devices  or  instruments  that  compensate  or  replace  functions
It  is  intended  to  study,  within  the  scope  of  Occupational  Therapy  intervention,  the  implementation
  To  describe  the  intervention  of  OT  with  SAAC  in  a  preschool-aged  child  with  ASDAlternative  (CAA),  as  a  way  to  overcome  barriers  in  communication  (Maya  and  Lima,
so  that  they  can  express  themselves  and  promote  independence  (Duarte,  2013;  Mavrou,
  Evaluate  the  implementation  of  AT  for  AAC  in  a  preschool-aged  child  with  ASDbehaviors,  with  possible  presence  of  stereotypes  (Pereira  et  al.,  2020).
Communication  (SAAC).  They  consist  of  a  set  of  strategies,  techniques  and  aids  that  facilitate
TO,  in  the  implementation  of  AT  for  CAA,  promotes  communication  in  a  child  of  prePEA  is  a  neuro-developmental  disorder,  which  manifests  itself  through  alterations
particular,  in  people  with  ASD,  faced  with  a  communication  deficit,  AT  can
using  a  system  of  pictograms.
21  Machine Translated by Google

depth  of  OT's  contribution  to  a  child's  adoption  of  a  SAAC  and  of  those
information  about  the  communicative  behaviors  of  the  child  and  their  partners  and
After  the  intervention,  the  perceptions  of  caregivers  and
ResultsA  qualitative  approach  will  be  adopted  through  a  single  case  study.  Its  about
SGS  II  assesses  competences  related  to  child  development  in  different  domains
The  Pre-Verbal  Communication  Scale  (ECPV)  will  be  applied  to  assess  the  evolution  of
in  Microsoft  Excel,  in  order  to  calculate  the  variation,  in  order  to  understand  if  it  presented  orusing  the  WebQDA  software,  in  order  to  perform  data  content  analysis  (Souza  et  al.Material  and  methods
The  evaluation  data,  collected  through  ECPV  before  and  after  the  intervention,  will  be  processedutilization,  dynamics  with  interlocutors  and  observed  benefits.the  Schedule  of  Growing  Skills  II  (SGS  II)  scale  and  a  semi-structured  interview  with  the  caregiver.  THE
supported  on  a  mobile  device,  in  an  interface  with  pictograms.The  participating  child  diagnosed  with  non-verbal  ASD,  at  preschool  age,  will  be
environment  and  problem  solving.  It  is  also  intended  to  understand  which
socialization  derived  from  PEA,  can  be  mitigated  through  the  use  of  SAAC.application  and  should  not  use  SAAC,  prior  to  this  study.
needs.surround  them  in  their  real-life  context  (Ribeiro  et  al.,  2016).
professionals  regarding  the  use  of  SAAC,  especially  learning,  ease  ofcommunication,  in  particular  communicative  intentionality,  strategies  for  interacting  with  the
Based  on  the  literature,  it  is  predicted  that  deficits  in  communication,  language  andincluding  language.  The  semi-structured  interview  and  participant  observation  will  collect
communication,  using  the  SAAC.a  particularistic  investigation  that  will  generate  a  multifaceted  understanding  and  in
not  communicative  evolution.In  order  to  trace  the  occupational  profile  of  the  child  under  study,  it  is  planned  to  initially  apply
A  SAAC  adjusted  to  the  characteristics  of  the  child  will  be  implemented,  predictably
al.,  2011).  intentionally  recruited  from  among  volunteer  families  who  fill  out  an  application  form.
caregivers'  expectations  regarding  the  use  of  SAAC,  as  well  as  their
Qualitative  data  from  the  interview  and  observation  will  be  analyzed  with
22  Machine Translated by Google

compensated  by  the  depth  of  the  study  and  the  particularities  observed  (Alarcão,neuromotorase  (Follin-Arbelet,  2017;  Pereira,  2016).perceptual  and  cognitive-motor  skills,  as  well  as  the  form  of  access,  mode  of  selection  of
pictograms  and  interaction  with  technology,  in  order  to  select  devices,  software,
Although  at  an  early  stage  it  can  be  considered  that  a  case  study  can  be  limitingof  these  systems  there  are  improvements  in  communicative  skills,  as  happened  in  theWhen  implementing  a  solution  in  this  area,  in  a  multidisciplinary  team,  the  TO  needs
studies  of  children  in  a  school  context  with  special  needs  and  with  alterationsperform  an  appropriate  and  appropriate  assessment  for  the  child,  to  assess  sensory  skills
Bibliographic  referencesso  that  the  child  obtains  maximum  independence  in  all  occupations,  havingConclusion
into  account  the  contexts  in  which  it  is  involved.  It  is  expected  that  after  implementationTherefore,  knowledge  will  be  obtained  about  the  role  of  TO  in  the  implementation  of
23  adaptation  of  the  interface  and  training  to  be  carried  out.
a  technology-based  SAAC,  as  a  strategy  to  overcome  barriers  in  communication,
in  the  construction  of  knowledge,  it  is  considered  that  what  is  lost  in  extension  will  be
2014).  
Alarcão  I.  “Dilemmas”  of  the  young  researcher.  From  “dilemmas”  to  problems,  in  Qualitative  Research:  innovation,  dilemmas  
and  challenges  (Costa  AP,  Souza  FNd  and  Souza  DNd  eds)  pp  103-124,  Ludomedia,  Oliveira  de  Azeméis,  2014
Pereira  JMMM.  Augmentative  and  alternative  communication  as  a  factor  for  the  inclusion  of  students  with  special  educational  
needs,  Escola  Superior  de  Educação  João  de  Deus,  RCAAP  -  Open  Access  Scientific  Repositories  of  Portugal,  2016Mavrou  K.  Assistive  technology  as  an  emerging  policy  and  practice:  Processes,  challenges  and  future  directions.  Technology  and  
Disability  23:41-52,  2011  
Digital  Theme  22:68-85,  2020of  autism:  impacts  on  communication.  CoDAS  32,  2020Pereira  ET,  Montenegro  ACdA,  Rosal  AGC  and  Walter  CCdF.  Alternative  and  augmentative  communication  in  spectrum  disorderneuromotor  pathology,  Fernando  Pessoa  University,  Institutional  Repository  of  the  Fernando  Pessoa  University  2017Follin-Arbelet  ASM.  Perception  of  professionals  about  the  use  of  augmentative  and  alternative  communication  with  children  with
Schirmer  CR.  Research  on  high-tech  resources  for  communication  and  autism  spectrum  disorder.  ETD  -  EducationChildren  with  Autism.  Journal  of  Child  and  Adolescent  Psychology  7:323-332,  2016
Souza  FNd,  Costa  AP  and  Moreira  A.  Questioning  on  the  Qualitative  Data  Analysis  Process  with  the  support  of  WebQDA  
software.  EDUSER:  Education  Journal  3:19-30,  2Duarte  MGFM.  The  importance  of  Augmentative  and  Alternative  Communication  Systems  (SAAC),  as  a  stimulus  for  children's  
language  in  Kindergarten,  ESEAG  –  Almeida  Garrett  School  of  Education,  Lusófona  Scientific  Repository,  2013
Ribeiro  J,  Brandão  C  and  Costa  AP.  Case  study  methodology  in  health:  contributions  to  its  quality,  qualitative  research  in  health:  
knowledge  and  applicability  (Oliveira  E,  Barros  N  and  Silva  R  eds)  pp  143-160,  Ludomedia,  Oliveira  de  Azeméis,  2016Maya  CdFe  and  Lima  CBd.  The  Use  of  iPad  Applications  for  Communication  and  Language  Development  inMachine Translated by Google

1  
2  
1  3  1  
3  
24  *Ricardo  Lopes  Correia1 ;  Elisa  Maria  de  Brito  Gomes1 ;  Lívia  Machado  Santos  de  Almeida3 ;  Raphael  Aguiar  Leal  Campos1 ;
ORCID  do  autor:  
Introduction:  In  the  context  of  Latin  America  and  Lusophony,  there  are  still  references  of  Anglo-Saxon  dominance  and  with
in  Latin  America  and  the  Lusophone  Community.*Corresponding  author:  ricardo@medicina.ufrj.br;  Department  of  Occupational  Therapy,  Faculty  of  Medicine,  Health  Sciences  Center,  Federal  
University  of  Rio  de  Janeiro  (UFRJ).  Rua  Professor  Paulo  Rodolpho  Rocco,  s/n,  Cidade  Universitária,  Ilha  do  Fundão.  21919-590,  Rio  de  Janeiro,  RJ,  
Brazil.
0002-8461-1241;  Naila  Pereira:  0000-0001-6307-5235
The  elaboration  of  the  epistemic  network  called  Human  Occupation  Studies  (EOH)  stands  out.  Conclusion:  LEOH  is  aMaria  Eduarda  de  Araujo  Monteiro:  0000-0003-3551-1743;  Flávia  Pereira  da  Silva:  0000-0002-4063-7335;  Daniela  Gontijo:  0000-
Methods:  This  is  an  experience  report  that  describes  LEOH's  teaching-research-extension  activities,  from  2020  toLaboratory  of  Human  Occupation  Studies  and  Technologies  for  Participation  in  Occupational  Therapy  (LEOH).  Rio  de  Janeiro,  RJ,  Brazil.
Belt:  0000-0002-3904-9691;  Amanda  Gusmão  Dias:  0000-0001-8005-0021;  Isabel  Marianne  dos  Santos  Barbosa:  0000-
professors-researchers  and  occupational  care  therapists.  Teaching,  research  and  extension  activities  are  developed.Objective:  To  describe  the  teaching-research-extension  activities  of  the  Laboratory  of  Human  Occupation  Studies  (LEOH)  to;  Maria  Eduarda  de
Almeida:  0000-0001-9111-5214;  Raphael  Aguiar  Leal  Campos:  0000-0001-8771-4775;  Lucas  Eduardo  Soares  de  Moraes:  0000-Araujo  Monteiro
2UFPE  –  Federal  University  of  Pernambuco,  Department  of  Occupational  Therapy.  Health  Sciences  Center  (CCS).  Academic  League  of  Human  
Occupation  Studies  (LIGOH)  and  Laboratory  of  Human  Occupation  Studies  and  Technologies  for  Participation  in  Occupational  Therapy  (LEOH).  
Recife,  PE,  Brazil;Lucas  Eduardo  Soares  de  Moraes1 ;  Beatriz  Monteiro  de  Pontes1 ;  Keiciane  dos  Santos  Cassemiro
Ricardo  Lopes  Correia:  0000-0003-3108-2224;  Elisa  Maria  de  Brito  Gomes:  0000-0003-3374-6610;  Livia  Machado  Santos  de;  Naila  Pereira
significant  gaps  in  sharing  the  production  and  dissemination  of  knowledge  about  human  occupation.
Keywords:  Latin  America;  higher  education;  lusophony;  community-institution  relations;  occupational  therapy.Summary
institutional  mechanism  that  has  proven  to  be  relevant  to  promote  production  and  dissemination  of  knowledge  in  occupationLuanna  Correia  dos  Santos2 ;  Amanda  Gusmao  Dias2 ;  Isabel  Marianne  dos  Santos  Barbosa
IFRJ  –  Federal  Institute  of  Education,  Science  and  Technology  of  Rio  de  Janeiro,  Occupational  Therapy  Course,  Campus  Realengo.
0002-2117-0143;  Vinicius  Barbosa  de  Freitas  Silva:  0000-0002-7028-8260;  Larissa  Beserra:  0000-0002-2092-7378;  Luanna
2021.  Results:  LEOH  has  members  of  inter-institutional  origin,  being  undergraduate  and  graduate  students,;  Flavia  Pereira  Silva2 ;  Daniela  Tavares  Gontijo2 ;  Vinicius  Barbosa  de  Freitas  Silva2 ;  Larissa  Beserra2 ;
UFRJ  –  Federal  University  of  Rio  de  Janeiro,  Department  of  Occupational  Therapy,  Faculty  of  Medicine.  Health  Sciences  Center  (CCS).  Laboratory  
of  Human  Occupation  Studies  and  Technologies  for  Participation  in  Occupational  Therapy  (LEOH)  and  Academic  League  of  Human  Occupations  
Studies  (LIGOH).  Rio  de  Janeiro,  RJ,  Brazil;
0001-6768-6471;  Pontes,  Beatriz  Monteiro:  0000-0002-0768-5669;  Keiciane  dos  Santos  Cassemiro:  0000-0002-1343-3935;
regarding  the  production  and  dissemination  of  knowledge  about  human  occupation  in  Latin  American  and  Portuguese-speaking  countries.  material  andLaboratory  of  Human  Occupation  Studies  and  Participation  Technologies  in
Occupational  Therapy:  dialogues  between  Latin  America  and  Lusophone  countries
Laboratory  for  Studies  of  Human  Occupation  and  Technologies  for  Participation  in  
Occupational  Therapy:  dialogues  between  Latin  America  and  Portuguese  speaking  
countries  Machine Translated by Google

This  work  addresses  the  institutional  mechanisms  for  the  production  and  dissemination  of  knowledge
and  area  of  knowledge,  and,  currently,  from  an  inter  and  transdisciplinary  perspective,  the  OccupationOn  screen,  the  Human  Occupation  can  be  understood  as  a  construct  that  characterizes  the
Lusophone  occupational  therapists  are  quite  scarce.
from  Latin  America  and  Lusophony.experience  of  involving  people,  groups  and  populations  in  their  environments  (Law,  2002).
Therefore,  the  objective  of  this  work  is  to  describe  the  teaching-research-extension  activitiesabove  all,  the  sharing  and  dialogue  devices  around  the  diffusion  of  knowledge
methodologies  in  Occupational  Therapy  still  little  known  and  systematized,  which  printproduced  in  the  local  and  global  dimensions  of  the  area.
particularities  of  the  area  in  the  region.  On  the  other  hand,  specifically  to  Brazil,  the  relations  betweenin  welfare  states  and  the  guarantee  of  social  rights  (Ramugondo,  Galvaan  and  Duncan,  2015).Lusophones.  It  is  about  recognizing  the  theoretical-practical  specificities  produced  before  and  after  the
Humanity  is  of  interest  as  a  determinant  in  the  structuring  of  social  life,  in  the  formation  of  identity,  and
In  Latin  America,  above  all,  there  is  a  diversity  of  theoretical  referencesinstitutionalization  of  Occupational  Therapy  in  these  regions  in  the  1950s,  its  developments  and,
LEOH  on  the  production  and  dissemination  of  knowledge  about  human  occupation  in  countriesStarting  from  studies  that  preceded  Occupational  Therapy,  until  its  foundation  as  a  professionon  human  occupation  in  Occupational  Therapy  in  the  context  of  Latin  American  countries  andof  knowledge  in  human  occupation  in  Latin  America  and  the  Lusophone  Community.  Methods:  This  is  an  experience  report,  of  a  qualitative  and  exploratory  nature,  which  describes  LEOH's  teaching-research  (LEOH  in  portuguese),  proposes  Studies  on  Human  Occupation  (SHO)  as  an  epistemic  network  on  theoretical  and  methodological  
extension  activities  are  carried  out.  The  elaboration  of  the  epistemic  network  called  Studies  of  Human  Occupation  (EOH)  stands  regarding  the  production  and  dissemination  of  knowledge  about  SHO  in  Latin  American  and  Lusophone  countries.  Material  and  dissemination  of  knowledge  about  human  occupation.  Objective:  Describe  LEOH's  teaching-research-extension  activities  Introduction:  The  Laboratory  of  Studies  on  Human  Occupation  and  Technologies  for  Participation  in  Occupational  Therapy  Abstract  
undergraduate  and  graduate  students,  professors-researchers  and  occupational  therapists  in  care.  Teaching,  research  and  there  are  still  references  of  Anglo-Saxon  dominance  and  with  significant  differences  in  the  sharing  of  the  production  and  
out.  Conclusion:  LEOH  is  an  institutional  mechanism  that  has  been  shown  to  be  relevant  to  foster  production  and  dissemination  extension  activities,  from  2020  to  the  present  moment.  Results:  LEOH  has  members  of  inter-institutional  origin,  including  
Keywords:  Latin  America;  higher  education;  lusophony;  community-institution  relationship;  occupational  therapy.  references  that  underlie  the  discipline  of  Occupational  Therapy  and  related  areas.  In  the  context  of  Latin  America  and  Lusophony,  
Introduction
25  Machine Translated by Google

Results
26  methods
course,  as  well  as  some  data  on  a  research  in  progress.
with  the  objective  of  promoting,  developing  and  disseminating  human  occupation  as  one  of  the
Regarding  the  research  axis,  a  project  entitled  “Studies
select,  via  the  snowball  method,  professionals  to  be  interviewed.  Thus,  it  will  be  possibleThis  is  an  experience  report,  of  a  qualitative  and  exploratory  nature,  which  describes  the
Created  in  May  2020  at  DTO/FM/UFRJ,  Brazil,  LEOH  is  made  up  of  its  students  and
linked  to  teaching-research-extension  in  an  inseparable  way,  in  order  to  share  and  highlight,  in  the  Brazilian  
and  international  scope,  productions  and  knowledge  conceived  by  the  profession  in  addition  to  the
from  this,  it  is  intended  to  start  the  second  stage,  which  will  consist  of  the  composition  of  a  network  ofexploratory-dialectical  and  interpretive  in  nature,  possible  through  the  use  of  mixed  methods  both  in  the  
production  and  in  the  analysis  of  data.  The  research  is  organized  in  two  stages.  THEsociocultural  and  historical  contexts  in  which  the  discipline  is  present.  LEOH  develops  several  activities
human  occupation  construct  and  correlates  in  scientific  productions  from  26  countries  in  these  regions.  THEpathways  of  assimilation,  interpretation,  use  and  dissemination  of  the  human  occupation  constructDepartment  of  Occupational  Therapy  at  the  Faculty  of  Medicine  of  the  Federal  University  of  Rio  de  Janeiro
Human  Resources  (EOH)  and  to  develop  models  of  practice  and  intervention  technologies.of  Pernambuco  (DTO/UFPE)  and  the  Occupational  Therapy  course  at  the  Federal  Institute  of  Rio  de  Janeiro.
theoretical-methodological  references  on  human  occupation  as  a  disciplinary  object  andThe  data  comprised  the  period  from  March  2020  to  June  2021,  produced  in  the
of  Human  Occupation  in  Latin  America  and  Portuguese-speaking  Countries”,  which  aims  to  investigate  theof  Occupational  Therapy,  in  addition  to  seeking  to  deepen  and  discuss  tensions  and  other  phenomena  of  
interest  related  to  what  we  call  Occupation  Studiesteaching-research-extension  activities  of  the  Laboratory  of  Human  Occupation  Studies  and  Technologies  for  
Participation  in  Occupational  Therapy  (LEOH).  The  activities  in
Anglophone  part  of  society.professors,  from  the  DTO/UFPE,  from  the  CTO/IFRJ  and  occupational  therapists  of  assistance.  LEOH  has
authors  who  make  use  of  the  occupation  construct  in  their  scientific  productions,  in  order  tode  Janeiro  (CTO/IFRJ),  all  public  higher  education  institutions  in  Brazil.
interdisciplinary  in  Occupational  Therapy,  aligned  with  the  recognition  of  the  multiple  realities
The  first,  under  development,  consists  of  a  review  of  the  literature  and  documents  about  theJaneiro  (DTO/FM/UFRJ),  together  with  the  Department  of  Occupational  Therapy  at  the  University
The  EOH,  in  LEOH,  is  understood  as  an  epistemic  network  to  designate  the  different
as  an  object  of  knowledge  and  intervention  of  Occupational  Therapy.  It  is  a  searchMachine Translated by Google

In  relation  to  extension,  an  extension  project  on
LEOH,  in  which  he  discusses  human  occupations,  cities  and  territories.  In  addition,  they  are  carried  out
Some  data  already  produced  by  LEOH,  preliminarily,  demonstrate  the  concentration  oftheoretical-methodological  methods  used.  The  research  project  foresees  the  participation,  with  procedures
activities  of  seven  undergraduate  and  three  master's  students.  A  postgraduate  course
dominated  the  field  of  knowledge  in  the  area,  without  criticism  about  its  coherence  with  reality,  making  
local  knowledge  and  other  routes  for  the  production  and  dissemination  of  knowledge  in  Therapy  invisible.
disciplinary  foundations  of  Occupational  Therapy;  2)  theoretical-methodological  contributionIn  this  sense,  LEOH  has  been  employing  a  commitment  to  foster  this  debate  anddeepen  socioculturally  about  the  understandings  and  uses  of  the  construct,  in  addition  to  the  references
development  of  epistemic  bases  on  human  occupation,  which  form  a  network  ofof  Course  Conclusion  carried  out  by  seven  students,  two  of  them  having  recently  graduated  from  UFRJ  -  
who,  based  on  its  products,  started  to  integrate  and  collaborate  with  the  Laboratory  -  as  well  as  the
considerable  epistemic  distance,  especially  among  the  Lusophone  community.  Such  perspectivesStudies  on  Human  Occupations  (LIGOH)  at  UFPE.
Occupational  is  still  a  developing  or  non-existent  profession.  This  data  is  quiteinto  practice  activities  on  the  foundations  of  human  occupation,  care  technologies  in
in  which  the  debate  on  human  occupation  in  Occupational  Therapy,  in  Latin  America  and  Lusophony,scientific  dissemination  on  social  media.  Also  noteworthy  is  the  partnership  with  the  Academic  League  of
scientific  productions  in  a  few  countries,  such  as  Brazil,  Chile,  Argentina  and  Colombia.  It  is  also  observed  
that  both  in  Latin  America  and  in  Portuguese-speaking  African  and  Asian  countries,weekly  inter-institutional  theoretical  and  research  meetings.already  approved,  established  ethical  standards  of  140  professionals.
Occupational.degree  in  Psychosociology  of  Communities  and  Social  Ecology,  given  by  the  coordinator  of  the
interdisciplinary  on  human  occupation  that  collaborates  with  knowledge  for  other  disciplines;Occupational  Therapy  and  other  phenomena  of  interest  to  the  field  of  EOH.  It  is  the  case  of  the  Works
is  supported  mostly  by  hegemonic  Anglo-Saxon  perspectives,  as  well  as  a
strengthen  international  relations  on  the  subject  based  on  three  axes:  1)  identification  andIn  the  teaching  axis,  both  at  the  undergraduate  and  graduate  levels,
The  creation  and  institutionalization  of  LEOH  is  justified  in  a  socio-historical  and  cultural  context
relevant  to  promote  technical  and  political  cooperation  actions  for  the  creation  of  the  discipline  in  these  
countries.
27  conclusionsMachine Translated by Google

Law,  M.  Participation  in  the  occupations  of  everyday  life.  American  Journal  of  Occupational  Therapy.  56:  640–649,  2002.  doi:  
10.5014/ajot.56.6.640.
Ramugondo,  E.,  Galvaan,  R.,  Duncan,  E.  Theoring  about  human  occupation.  South  African  Journal  of  Occupational  Therapy.  45:  
1–2,  2015  doi:  http://dx.doi.org/10.17159/2310-3833/2015/ v45no1a1  and  3)  Occupational  Therapy  as  a  social  right,  assuming  the  commitment  to  respond  to  the
increasingly  complex  demands  of  society.
28  Bibliographic  referencesMachine Translated by Google

acquired.  In  the  cognitive  component,  there  may  be  changes  in  brain  processes  and  mechanisms  that  can  result  in
satisfaction  with  the  intervention.  For  the  evaluation  of  interventions,  the  MiniMental  State  Examination  (MMSE)  will  be  applied.
performance.  The  typical  intervention  in  case  of  cognitive  deficits  is  based  on  the  use  of  traditional  pencil  and  paper  exercises,  Summary
will  be  collected  in  two  moments,  before  and  after  the  intervention.  Two  questionnaires  will  be  used  with  closed  questions  and
Introduction:  Stroke  is  one  of  the  main  causes  of  death  and  of  acquired  motor  and  cognitive  disability.  In  the  cognitive  component,  
satisfaction  regarding  the  intervention.  The  MMSE  and  LOTCA  will  be  used  as  cognitive  assessment  tools  to  assess  the  essential  for  scientific  construction  in  the  field  of  cognitive  rehabilitation,  through  VR.
between  18  and  55  years  old.  Material  and  Methods:  This  is  an  experimental  study  with  a  control  group  of  randomised  Jaime  Ribeiro:  0000-0002-1548-5579
Abstract  It  is  expected  that  in  the  implementation  of  this  project  results  will  be  obtained  that  prove  changes  related  to  competencesMaterial  and  Methods:  This  is  an  experimental  study  with  a  randomization  control  group  of  participants.  The  data2Center  for  Innovative  Care  and  Health  Technology  (ciTechCare),  Politécnico  de  Leiria,  Leiria,  Portugal
traditional  pencil  and  paper  exercises,  classified  as  boring  and  uninnovative.  Then  comes  Virtual  Reality  (VR)
activities,  adaptability,  the  possibility  of  increased  motivation,  and  great  diversity.  Objective:  The  main  objective  of  this  research  
questions  will  be  used  to  obtain  sociodemographic  data,  information  regarding  the  participant's  health  status  and,  at  the  end,  their  *Corresponding  author:  jaime.ribeiro@ipleiria.pt;  Higher  School  of  Health  of  the  Polytechnic  of  Leiria,  Campus  2  -  Morro  do  Lena,  
Alto  do  Vieiro  -  Apartment  4137,  2411-901  Leiria
enough  diversity.  Objective:  This  investigation  has  as  main  objective  to  evaluate  the  evolution  of  cognitive  skills1School  of  Health,  Polytechnic  of  Leiria,  Leiria,  Portugal
and  the  Loewenstein  Occupational  Therapy  Cognitive  Assessment  (LOTCA)  as  a  cognitive  assessment  tool.  Results:disturbances  of  occupational  performance.  The  typical  intervention  in  case  of  cognitive  deficits  is  based  on  the  use  of
often  called  boring  and  not  very  innovative.  Faced  with  this  reality,  VR  has  emerged  as  a  therapeutic  resource  with  diverse  Introduction:  Cerebral  Vascular  Accident  (CVA)  is  one  of  the  main  causes  of  death  and  motor  and  cognitive  disability.
open,  to  obtain  sociodemographic  data,  information  regarding  the  health  status  of  the  participant  and,  in  the  end,  their
alterations  may  appear  in  a  set  of  cerebral  processes  and  mechanisms  which  may  result  in  disturbances  in  occupational  ORCID  do  autor:  
resulting  from  intervention  with  VR,  in  people  with  stroke  sequelae  aged  between  18  and  55  years.
Keywords:  Cognitive  Dysfunction;  Virtual  reality;  Occupational  therapy;  Stroke  and  Software.
participants.  Data  will  be  collected  in  two  moments,  before  and  after  the  intervention.  Two  questionnaires  with  closed  and  open  3Research  Center  on  Didactics  and  Technology  in  the  Training  of  Trainers  (CIDTFF),  University  of  Aveiro,  Portugal
as  a  therapeutic  resource  with  different  activities,  with  adaptability,  possible  increased  motivation  and  presenting
cognitive,  more  accentuated  in  the  experimental  group,  which  uses  VR  as  a  therapeutic  method.  Conclusion:  This  project  is
is  to  evaluate  the  evolution  of  cognitive  skills  resulting  from  the  intervention  with  VR  in  people  with  stroke  sequels  with  ages  Cognitive  rehabilitation  with  virtual  reality  in  people  of  working  age  with  sequele  
of  stroke:  an  occupational  therapy  intervention  Cognitive  rehabilitation  with  virtual  reality  in  people  of  working  age  with  stroke  
sequelae:  an  occupational  therapy  intervention
Ribeiro1,2,3Sharon  Marques1 ;  Ana  Pereira1 ;  Maria  Chantal  Silva1 ;  Mariana  Curvelo1 ;  *Jaime
29  Machine Translated by Google

cognitive  functions  (Maggio  et  al.,  2019).  Using  the  three-dimensional  representation  of  environments
through  literature  review.al.,  2015).  Traditional  pencil  and  paper  methods  are  commonly  used  in  the
use  of  VR,  within  the  scope  of  Occupational  Therapy  (OT)  intervention,  as  a  therapeutic  method.
In  post-stroke  patients,  VR  has  been  highlighted  as  one  of  the  most  promising  means,  due  to  the
Systemic  Lisbon  Battery.  It  is  intended,  then,  to  expose  the  participants  to  virtual  environments  similar  to  the  contexts  of  various  
activities  inherent  to  the  occupation  areas.It  was  also  aimed  at  identifying  the  software  to  be  used,  as  well  as  the  intervention  protocol,rehabilitation,  however,  a  new  therapeutic  resource  with  an  enormous  capacity  of  adaptation,  motivation  and  that  presents  a  lot  
of  diversity,  is  emerging,  the  Virtual  Reality  (VR).  So  the  VRsurroundings  (Lyon  et  al.,  2021).  Cognitive  sequelae  can  have  a  profound  impact  on
occupational  and  promoting  the  person's  independence  (Aramaki  et  al.,  2019).  In  this  study,  we  intend  to  determine  the  
effectiveness  of  the  use  of  VR  in  cognitive  rehabilitation  in  people  between  18  and  55  years  old,
users  (Santos  and  Oliveira,  2018).with  cognitive  sequelae  of  stroke.  The  project's  main  objective  is  to  verify  the  impact  ofoccupational  performance,  jeopardizing  the  autonomy  and/or  independence  of  the  person  (Babulal  et  al.
After  a  survey  of  possible  software  to  use,  two  are  worth  mentioning:  VReha  andsimulated  and  projected  objects.  It  has  been  proven  that  exposure  to  virtual  tasks  improves  yourIn  particular,  executive  functions  such  as  concentration,  memory,  and
physical  level,  such  as  gait  and  balance,  but  also  in  relation  to  cognitive  aspects,resource  capacity  it  offers,  but  also  for  the  ability  to  generate  flexible  environments  suitable  for  successful  recovery.  Thus,  it  has  
proved  to  be  an  effective  method,  not  only  the
also  demonstrating  positive  results  at  a  motivational  level,  improving  the  commitment  of  theability  to  solve  problems,  among  others,  conditioning  the  interaction  of  the  individual  with
execution  in  real  life,  thus  contributing  to  an  increase  in  the  quality  of  life,  performancebrain.  It  is  currently  one  of  the  leading  causes  of  death  and  acquired  disability,  both  motor  andStroke  is  characterized  by  the  abrupt  interruption  of  blood  supply  to  a  certain  area.
by  the  complete  involvement  of  the  senses  and  perceptual  processes,  it  acts  greatly  on  theas  cognitive,  worldwide  (Silva,  2016).  Cognitive  impairment  is  often  associated  with  somatosensory,  visual  and  motor  deficits,  
speech  and  language  disorders  and,
real  life  and  using  the  movement  of  the  body,  a  virtual  interaction  is  created  between  the  user,  the  environmentmore  pronounced  in  the  experimental  group,  which  uses  VR  as  a  therapeutic  method.  Conclusion:  This  project  is  essential  for  interventions.  Results:  It  is  hoped  that  the  implementation  of  this  project  will  yield  results  that  prove  changes  in  cognitive  skills,  
scientific  construction  in  the  field  of  cognitive  rehabilitation  through  VR.  
Keywords:  Cognitive  Dysfunction;  Virtual  Reality;  Occupational  Therapy;  Stroke  and  Software.  
Introduction
30  Machine Translated by Google

Aramaki  AL,  Sampaio  RF,  Reis  ACS,  Cavalcanti  A  and  Dutra  FCMS.  Virtual  reality  in  the  rehabilitation  of  patients  with  stroke:  an  
Babulal  GM,  Huskey  TN,  Roe  CM,  Goette  SA  and  Connor  LT.  Cognitive  impairments  and  mood  disruptions  negatively  impact  
Haydu  VB,  Kochhann  J  and  Borloti  E.  Virtual  reality  exposure  therapy  strategies:  a  review  discussed  from  the  perspectiveintegrative  review.  Arq  Neuropsiquiatr  77:268-278,  2019  
instrumental  activities  of  daily  living  performance  in  the  first  three  months  after  a  first  stroke.  Topics  in  stroke  
rehabilitation  22:144-151,  2015  
behavior-analytic.  Clinical  Psychology  28:15-34,  2016conclusionsmethods
Bibliographic  references
31  Results
It  is  expected  that  in  the  implementation  of  this  project  results  will  be  obtained  that  show
will  provide  scientific  evidence  regarding  its  use.45  minutes  per  week  for  three  months,  a  period  often  considered  for  detection  ofmixed  approach,  in  the  treatment  of  the  data  obtained,  through  the  application  of  two  instruments,
number  of  fatalities,  as  well  as  acquired  disability  related  to  these  two  aspects.  With
evolution  of  VR  in  therapeutic  intervention,  it  is  possible  to  improve  the  intervention  and  make  it  even  more  
effective  and  motivating,  thus  obtaining  better  results.  As  VR  is  a  therapeutic  method  in  strongcognitive  changes  (Haydu  et  al.,  2016;  Marques,  2019;  Nascimento,  2018;  Silva,  2016).namely  the  LOTCA  and  the  MMSE.  These  instruments  will  make  it  possible  to  detect  changes  in  the
number  and  duration  of  sessions,  it  is  not  possible  to  identify  a  pattern  in  the  literature,  but  in  thisThe  idealized  project  is  an  experimental  study,  in  the  form  of  a  clinical  trial,  with  the
The  investigation  of  innovative  therapeutic  resources,  associated  with  physical  and  cognitive  rehabilitation
post-stroke  is  a  current  need,  since  this  diagnosis  continues  to  be  associated  with  a  highsample  randomly  distributed  in  the  experimental  group  that  will  be  exposed  to  VR  and  the  control  group  that  
will  benefit  from  traditional  rehabilitation  methods.  It  was  designed  to  use  a
study,  the  participants  of  the  experimental  group  will  be  submitted  to  two  weekly  sessions  from  30  to
VR  as  a  therapeutic  method.Social  Sciences  (SPSS)  for  processing  quantitative  data  and  webQDA  for  processing
qualitative  data,  through  content  analysis  (Machado  and  Vieira,  2020).  Regarding  theof  the  inclusion  criteria.  Two  questionnaires  with  answer  questions  will  also  be  appliedbasic  cognitive  abilities  resulting  from  the  intervention,  the  MMSE  will  also  make  it  possible  to  determine  a
closed  and  open  regarding  the  experience  of  intervention  through  VR.  Data  processing  is  expected  to  be  
carried  out  through  two  different  software,  using  the  Statistical  Package  for  the
changes  related  to  cognitive  skills,  more  pronounced  in  the  experimental  group,  which  uses
expansion  nowadays,  this  research  project  is  considered  quite  relevant,  since,Machine Translated by Google

Growing  Use  of  Virtual  Reality  in  Cognitive  Rehabilitation:  Fact,  Fake  or  Vision?  A  Scoping  Review.  J  Natl  Med  Assoc  
Marques  I.  Serious  game  and  virtual  reality  in  chronic  stroke  rehabilitation:  individualized  protocol,  in  Faculdade  de  EngenhariaMachado  ALG  and  Vieira  NFC.  Use  of  webQDA  software  on  qualitative  nursing  research:  an  experience  report.  Revista  
111:457-463,  2019  
Birth  ASS.  Effects  of  virtual  reality  on  the  rehabilitation  of  the  person  after  stroke:  Systematic  review  of  the
127,  2018  Brazilian  Nursing  73,  2020
Electric  -  Federal  University  of  Uberlândia  pp  115-115,  2019
literature,  in  Escola  Superior  de  Saúde  de  Viseu,  Scientific  Repository  of  the  Polytechnic  of  Viseu,  2018
Silva  TPMd.  Effects  of  Virtual  Reality  on  Rehabilitation  in  Post-CVA  Individuals:  a  bibliographic  review,  Universidade  Fernando  Pessoa,  
Institutional  Repository  of  Universidade  Fernando  Pessoa,  2016Maggio  MG,  Maresca  G,  De  Luca  R,  Stagnitti  MC,  Porcari  B,  Ferrera  MC,  Galletti  F,  Casella  C,  Manuli  A  and  Calabrò  RS.  TheLyon  P,  Keijzer  F,  Arendt  D  and  Levin  M.  Reframing  cognition:  getting  down  to  biological  basics.  Philosophical  transactions  of  the  Royal  
Society  of  London  Series  B,  Biological  sciences  376:20190750-20190750,  2021  
Santos  LV  and  Oliveira  JG.  Virtual  reality  for  therapeutic  purposes.  Journal  of  Child  and  Adolescent  Psychology  9:119-
32  Machine Translated by Google

2  
33  1Center  for  Innovative  Care  and  Health  Technology  (ciTechCare),  Politécnico  de  Leiria,  Portugal
Summary
collaboration  with  the  Department  of  Informatics  Engineering.  Conclusions:  It  is  believed  that  the  “Regul-A”  app  will  constitute
focus  group  formed  by  four  occupational  therapists  with  several  years  of  experience  in  working  with  children  with  ASD  and  with  7492;  Mariana  Ferreira:  0000-0002-7393-7430;  Raquel  Pereira:  0000-0002-0702-8642;  Sara  Dias:  0000-0001-6782-7481;
attributed  to  the  app,  since  its  main  purpose  is  to  help  regulate  children  with  ASD.  The  results
to  regulate  children  with  ASD  aged  3-6  years  old  through  the  application  of  sensory  strategies  to  improve  participation  in  daily  
parents  and  occupational  therapists.  Abstract  
ASD.  The  results  cover  the  various  sensory  strategies  selected  by  the  focus  group,  as  well  as  the  structure  of  the  app.  Helena  Isabel  da  Silva  Reis:  0000-0001-7430-6297;  Inês  Eusébio:  0000-0003-3418-6053;  Margarida  Sousa:  0000-0001-7051-
and  functional  participation.  Objective:  This  study  describes  the  several  steps  of  an  app  development  that  intends  to  help  families  implementing  strategies  and  sharing  information  between  parents  and  occupational  therapists.A  collaboration  was  established  with  the  Department  of  Informatics  Engineering,  and  through  joint  biweekly  meetings,  it  was  possible  
to  develop  the  entire  configuration  and  programming  of  the  app  in  an  articulated  way.  Results:  “Regul-A”  was  the  nameSchool  of  Health,  Polytechnic  of  Leiria,  Leiria,  Portugal
involvement  and  functional  participation.  Objective:  The  present  study  describes  the  process  of  developing  an  app
of  Polytechnic  of  Leiria,  and  through  biweekly  meetings  it  was  possible  to  develop  the  entire  configuration  and  programming  of  
related  to  their  occupational  performance  facilitating  the  implementation  of  strategies  and  the  sharing  of  information  between  901  Leiria.
focus  group  composed  of  four  occupational  therapists  with  several  years  of  experience  working  with  children  with  ASDIntroduction:  Children  with  ASD  are  characterized  by  presenting  atypical  responses  to  sensory  stimuli,  having  an  impact
a  potential  tool  to  gather,  analyze  and  manage  data  on  children  related  to  their  occupational  performance,  facilitating
specialized  training  in  Sensory  Integration  Therapy.  A  collaboration  was  established  with  the  Department  of  Computer  Engineering  *Helena  Reis1 ;  Inês  Eusébio2 ;  Margarida  Sousa2 ;  Mariana  Ferreira2 ;  Raquel  Pereira2 ;  Sara  Dias1 ;  Catarina  Reis1
cover  the  various  sensory  strategies  selected  by  the  focus  group,  as  well  as  the  structure  of  the  app,  developed  inCatarina  Reis:  0000-0003-1529-629X
routines  in  home  setting.  Material  and  Methods:  To  develop  and  analyze  the  content  of  the  app,  a  study  was  performed  by  a  
Keywords:  Autism  Spectrum  Disorder;  Sensory  regulation;  app;  home  setting;  Occupational  Therapy.  Authors'  ORCID:
and  with  specialized  training  in  the  area  of  Sensory  Integration,  in  order  to  develop  and  analyze  the  content  of  the  app.
Introduction:  Children  with  ASD  are  characterized  by  atypical  responses  to  sensory  stimuli,  which  have  an  impact  on  involvement  
Conclusions:  It  is  believed  that  the  “Regul-A”  app  will  become  a  potential  tool  to  gather,  analyze  and  manage  children's  data  *Corresponding  author:  helena.s.reis@ipleiria.pt;  Guest  Adjunct  Professor  of  the  Degree  Course  in  Occupational  Therapy  at  the  
Higher  School  of  Health  of  Leiria,  Portugal  |  Campus  2  -  Morro  do  Lena,  Alto  do  Vieiro  -  Apartment  4137,  2411-
with  the  aim  of  helping  families  to  regulate  children  with  ASD,  between  3-6  years  old,  through  the  application  of  sensory  strategies,  
to  improve  participation  in  daily  routines  at  home.  Material  and  Methods:  For  the  study,  a
Keywords:  Autism  Spectrum  Disorder;  sensory  regulation;  app;  home  context;  Occupational  therapy.
the  app.  Results:  “Regul-A”  is  the  name  assigned  to  the  app,  since  it  has  the  main  purpose  to  help  parents  regulate  children  with  Regul-A:  App  to  regulate  children  with  ASD  between  3-6  years  old  in  the  home  
setting  Regul-A:  Application  for  Regular  Children  with  ASD  between  3-6  years  of  age,  in  
a  Home  ContextMachine Translated by Google

34  Introduction
typical  of  the  child  affecting  its  functionality  in  different  contexts  (American  Psychiatric
intensity  of  stimuli  to  provide  a  response,  and  may  show  indifference  or  demand
should  use  these  strategies  as  an  integral  part  of  their  daily  lives  (Monteiro  et  al.,  2020;  Schaaf  et  al.,  2020;  Schaaf  et  al.
Studies  show  that  families  of  children  with  ASD  feel  the  need  for  aAutism  Spectrum  Disorder  (ASD)  is  defined  as  a  disorder  of  the
inherent  to  the  routine  and,  consequently,  reach  adapted  responses  and  behaviors  (Galianaresponse  strategies.  Hyper-reactivity  occurs  when  the  child  has  a  low  threshold  and  needs  few  stimuli  to  
respond,  reacting  quickly  and  adversely  to  them.  THE
deregulation  through  the  implementation  of  strategies  (Dunn,  2007;  Thompson  &  Rains,  2009).
through  the  creation  and  implementation  of  strategies,  facilitating  child  performance  and  improvingSensory,  which  manifests  itself  in  hyper-reactivity  and  hypo-reactivity,  according  to  the  neurological  threshold  and  the
child  processes  sensory  information  in  order  to  predict  their  responses  and  avoid  moments  of
In  this  way,  the  intervention  of  Occupational  Therapy  allows  to  reduce  sensory  difficultiesParents  of  children  with  ASD  reported  that  the  greatest  difficulties  in  performing  ADLsChildren  with  ASD  usually  have  Sensory  Processing  Disorders  (SPD),
Thus,  occupational  therapists  have  the  role  of  collaborating  with  these  families,  in  order  to  analyze
child  participation  in  their  routine  (Sood  et  al.,  2015).  In  this  sense,  technologies  can  allowthus  influencing  daily  family  dynamics  (Pastor-Cerezuela  et  al.,  2020;  Thompson  &  Rains,  2009).
Bonis  (2016),  the  fear  and  anxiety  of  the  parents,  for  not  being  able  to  respond  in  the  moments  of  
deregulation  of  the  child,  can  affect  the  routines  in  the  family  environment.Association,  2014).  
sensory  stimuli  (Dunn,  2007;  Tavassoli  et  al.,  2018).
al.,  2011).  
regular  monitoring,  in  the  search  and  implementation  of  strategies,  in  order  to  promote  theneurodevelopment,  originating  in  the  Central  Nervous  System,  which  compromises  the  development
According  to  Dunn  (2007),  to  ensure  the  child's  success  in  participating  in  family  routines,  parentshypo-reactivity  occurs  when  the  child  demonstrates  a  high  threshold,  requiring  greater  amounts  and
Simal  et  al.,  2020).According  to  Schaaf  &  Mailloux  (2015),  one  of  the  common  patterns  of  DPS  is  Reactivity
Thus,  it  is  essential  that  parents  are  able  to  understand  how  the
family  functioning  (Dunn  et  al.,  2012;  Sood,  Szymanski  &  Schranz,  2015).that  compromise  adaptive  responses,  involvement  and  occupational  performance  in  routine,
consist  of  eating,  personal  hygiene,  dressing  and  bathing  (Naik  &  Vajaratkar,  2019).  Second
the  factors  that  affect  the  child's  performance  in  the  domestic  context  and  intervene,  namely,Machine Translated by Google

between  3  and  6  years  of  age,  through  the  application  of  sensory  strategies  that  help  children
according  to  the  needs  of  these  children,  in  order  to  understand  the  content  that  the  app  should
children  and  the  users  of  the  web  application  will  be  the  occupational  therapists  who  develop  the
to  discuss  building  the  app  together.information  (Vismara  et  al.,  2012).
consistent,  bringing  together  health  and  information  technology  knowledge,  thus  providing  a  betterFor  the  study,  a  focus  group  was  selected  composed  of  four  occupational  therapists  who
In  this  phase  of  the  study,  the  target  population  were  occupational  therapists  who  helped  to
participants'  perspectives.  Four  debates  were  held  with  the  focus  group,  between  December  2020  and  January  2021,  
with  an  estimated  duration  of  one  hour  and  thirty  minutes  each.  The  information  analyzed  originated  the  sensory  and  
regulatory  strategies  contained  in  the  app.real-time  monitoring  of  these  families,  facilitating  communication  and  sharing  of
transversal.  
focus  group,  for  further  data  analysis.
from  the  Polytechnic  of  Leiria,  so  that,  through  a  multidisciplinary  team,  a  morecharacteristics:  a)  have  at  least  five  years  of  experience  in  intervention  with  children  with  ASD,  in  the  area  of  Early  
Intervention  (0-6  years)  and  their  families;  b)  have  specialized  training  in  the  field  of
As  a  data  collection  instrument,  a  semi-structured  interview  guide  was  prepared  withhaving  been  approved  with  no.  CE/IPLEIRIA/31/2020.
and  Clarified  for  participation  in  research,  in  accordance  with  the  Declaration  of  Helsinki  and  thefamilies  to  regulate  the  children,  for  a  better  participation  in  the  daily  routines  in  the  context  of  the  home.
include  (Fortin,  2009).  Inclusion  criteria  were  established  according  to  the  following
clinical  practice  with  them.Therefore,  there  was  a  need  to  develop  a  mobile  app  for  parents  of  children  with  ASD.
the  app's  content.  Subsequently,  in  Phase  II,  the  target  population  is  intended  to  be  the  parents  of  children  with  ASD,  
aged  between  3-6  years.  In  this  way,  the  use  of  the  app  will  be  intended  for  the  parents  of  theseintervene  with  children  with  ASD,  with  the  aim  of  collecting  information  regarding  their  perspectives,
quality  and  veracity  thereof.  During  the  process,  eight  fortnightly  meetings  were  held,The  present  study  uses  a  qualitative  methodology  and  is  classified  as  a  descriptive  and
Oviedo  Convention  where  authorization  was  requested  for  audio  recording  during  the  course  of  the
For  the  development  of  the  app,  the  collaboration  of  the  Computer  Engineering  course  was  necessary,The  development  of  the  study  was  subject  to  the  evaluation  of  the  Ethics  Committee  of  the  Polytechnic  of  Leiria
Sensory  Integration.  An  Informed,  Free  Consent  was  prepared  and  signed  by  the  participants.
the  objective  of  creating  a  guideline  for  the  sharing  of  ideas  regarding  the  theme,  crossing  the
35  Material  and  methodsMachine Translated by Google

API  27  -  Version  8.1.  The  app  is  in  the  alpha  testing  version,  going  through  a  testing  processFor  the  construction  of  the  app,  the  programs  Android  Studio  4.1.3  and  Google  Android  were  used
through  strategies  appropriate  to  the  child's  sensory  reactivity.
child's  occupationalPEA,  in  order  to  improve  the  regulation  and  participation  of  the  child  in  their  activities  in  the  context  of  the  home,
feedback  space  to  parents  in  order  to  validate  the  implementation  of  strategies  in  performance
evolution.  Regarding  Strategies,  it  is  possible  to  access  the  lists,  select  favorite  strategies,  provide  feedback  and  
access  the  Strategy  Area.  The  Support  Chat  allows  direct  contact  between  parents  and  occupational  therapists.  
The  Forum  represents  a  space  for  sharing  between  the  entire  community
from  the  app.  The  Weekly  Record  makes  it  possible  to  evaluate  the  child's  occupational  performance.  the  folder  of
Favorite  Strategies  brings  together  the  strategies  that  work  best  with  the  child.The  app  -  “Regul-A”  -  intends  to  offer  a  more  specific  answer  to  parents  of  children  with
personal  hygiene,  sanitary  hygiene),  Rest  and  sleep  and  Play  and  play;  it  would  be  important  to  include  a
parameter  for  regulatory  strategies  common  to  the  various  activities;  should  be  provided  a
“Favorite  Strategies”.  The  Profile  contains  information  about  the  child  and  the  dashboard  about  theirprofessionals  intervene.
a  page  referring  to  the  child's  profile;  the  sensorial  strategies  would  be  directed  to  the  Occupation  Areas,  namely,  
ADL's  (dressing/undressing,  bathing,  feeding  and  meal  times,
includes  as  functionalities,  "Profile",  "Strategies",  "Support  Chat  ",  "Forum",  "Weekly  Registration"  andoccupational  groups  who  collaborated  in  the  focus  group  and  the  respective  parents  of  children  with  ASD  with  whom  they
sensory  (olfactory,  gustatory,  visual,  auditory,  tactile,  vestibular  and  proprioceptive);  the  app  should  encompass
information  and  consult  the  profile  of  your  child(ren)  without  logging  out  of  your  account;  the  main  menuconsists  of  testing  the  beta  version  with  real  users,  namely  with  therapists
sensory  reactivity,  namely,  in  hypo-reactive  or  hyper-reactive,  depending  on  each  system
Computer  Engineering:  the  occupational  therapist  uses  the  web  application  to  manage  the  information  available  
to  parents,  namely  the  child's  sensory  reactivity,  and  also  to  adapt  and  specify
strategies  according  to  your  sensory  needs;  parents,  through  the  mobile  app,  access
PEA  has  been  increasingly  a  recurrent  pathology,  leading  parents  to  seek  informationby  the  research  group.  After  this  process,  Phase  II  of  the  study  will  be  developed,  which
Through  the  focus  group  meetings,  the  strategies  to  be  included  in  the  app  and  the
following  criteria:  regarding  the  sensory  profiles  to  be  included,  these  would  be  defined  according  to  the
Based  on  these  criteria,  it  was  possible  to  build  the  app  with  the  team  from  the  Department  of
conclusions
36  ResultsMachine Translated by Google

Cogent  Medicine  7:1-12,  2020.  
Journal  of  Occupational  Therapy,  Schools,  and  Early  Intervention  8:40–55,  2015.  Galiana-Simal  A,  Vela-Romero  M,  Romero-Vela  VM,  Oliver-Tercero  N,  García-Olmo  V,  Benito-Castellanos  PJ,  Muñoz-Martinez  V,  
Beato-Fernandez  L.  Sensory  processing  disorder:  Key  points  of  a  frequent  alteration  in  neurodevelopmental  disorders.
Examining  the  impact  of  sensory  processing  difficulties  on  the  family.  Autism  15:373–389,  2011.  
Sood  D,  Szymanski  M,  Schranz  C.  Enriched  Home  Environment  Program  for  Preschool  Children  with  Autism  Spectrum  Disorders.  Fortin  MF,  Foundations  and  Stages  in  the  Research  Process,  Lusodidacta,  Loures,  2009
Schaaf  RC,  Toth-Cohen  S,  Johnson  SL,  Outten  G,  Benevides  TW.  The  everyday  routines  of  families  of  children  with  autism:  Young  Children  20:84–101,  2007.  Dunn  W.  Supporting  Children  to  Participate  Successfully  in  Everyday  Life  by  Using  Sensory  Processing  Knowledge.  Infants  and  
Schaaf  RC,  Mailloux  Z.  Clinician’s  Guide  for  Implementing  Ayres  Sensory  Integration:  Promoting  Participation  for  Children  With  
Autism.  Bethesda  (MD):  Press  AOTA;  2015.  Dunn  W,  Cox  J,  Foster  L,  Mische-Lawson  L,  Tanquary  J.  Impact  of  a  contextual  intervention  on  child  participation  and  parent  
competence  among  children  with  autism  spectrum  disorders:  A  pretest-posttest  repeated-measures  design.  American  
Journal  of  Occupational  Therapy  66:520–528,  2012.  
Pastor-Cerezuela  G,  Fernández-Andrés  MI,  Sanz-Cervera  P,  Marín-Suelves  D.  The  impact  of  sensory  processing  on  executive  and  
cognitive  functions  in  children  with  autism  spectrum  disorder  in  the  school  context.  Research  in  Developmental  Disabilities  
96:103540,  2020.  
Vismara  LA,  Young  GS,  Rogers  SJ.  Telehealth  for  Expanding  the  Reach  of  Early  Autism  Training  to  Parents.  Autism  Research  and  
Treatment  2012:1–12,  2012  Bonis  S.  Stress  and  Parents  of  Children  with  Autism:  A  Review  of  Literature.  Issues  in  Mental  Health  Nursing  37:153–163,  2016.  
disorder:  A  qualitative  descriptive  study.  The  Indian  Journal  of  Occupational  Therapy  51:107–112,  2019.  Naik  SJ,  Vajaratkar  PV.  Understanding  parents’  difficulties  in  executing  activities  of  daily  living  of  children  with  autism  spectrum  
Thompson  SD,  Rains  KW.  Learning  About  Sensory  Integration  Dysfunction:  Strategies  to  Meet  Young  Children’s  Sensory  Needs  at  
Home.  Young  Exceptional  Children  12:16-26,  2009.  American  Psychiatric  Association,  Diagnostic  and  Statistical  Manual  of  Mental  Disorders  -  DSM  –  5,  Climepsi,  Lisbon,  2014.
Monteiro  RC,  Santos  CB,  Araújo  RCT,  Garros  DSC,  Rocha  ANDC.  Teachers'  perception  of  sensory  processing  in  students  with  
Autism  Spectrum  Disorder.  Brazilian  Journal  of  Special  Education  26:623–638,  2020.
Tavassoli  T,  Miller  LJ,  Schoen  SA,  Jo  Brout  J,  Sullivan  J,  Baron-Cohen  S.  Sensory  reactivity,  empathizing  and  systemizing  in  autism  
spectrum  conditions  and  sensory  processing  disorder.  Developmental  Cognitive  Neuroscience  29:72–77,  2018.  enhance  the  continuity  of  application  to  other  natural  contexts  where  the  child  is  inserted,In  the  future,  it  is  intended  to  carry  out  a  pilot  study,  to  assess  the  usefulness  and  impact  of  theand  ways  of  acting  after  the  child's  diagnosis.  In  these  cases,  it  is  important  to  intervene
and,  consequently,  the  quality  of  life  of  families  of  children  with  ASD.better  participation  in  the  routine.
It  is  believed  that  the  “Regul-A”  app  constitutes  a  potential  tool  to  improve  the  dynamicsthrough  access  to  sensory  strategies  appropriate  to  the  child,  regulation  is  intended  to
namely,  school  and  community.app  in  real  cases.  In  the  same  way,  with  the  development  of  this  research  it  is  intended,directly  with  parents  in  order  to  train  them  in  their  daily  lives  and  in  the  natural  context.  Simultaneously,
Bibliographic  references
37  Machine Translated by Google

2  
3  Center  for  Innovative  Care  and  Health  Technology  (ciTechCare),  Politécnico  de  Leiria,  Leiria,  Portugal1  School  of  Health,  Polytechnic  of  Leiria,  Leiria,  Portugal
4  Research  Center  in  Didactics  and  Technology  in  the  Training  of  Trainers  (CIDTFF),  University  of  Aveiro,Rafael  Rodrigues1 ;  Miguel  Barbosa2 ;  *Jaime  Moreira  Ribeiro1,  3,  4
38  Custom  molded  seating  systems  versus  conventional  cushions  and  backrests  
(multimaterials):  a  comparative  study
Custom-moulded  seating  systems  versus  conventional  cushions  and  (multi  
material)  backrests:  a  comparative  study  
Summary
Introduction:  An  adequate  positioning  is  essential  for  people  who  use  wheelchairs  and  present  musculoskeletal  disorders  or  poor  postural  control.  To  provide  users  
with  the  greatest  comfort  and  functionality,  conventional  and  moulded  positioning  systems  have  been  developed,  built  with  different  materials,  with  the  purpose  of  
accommodating  these  postural  anomalies,  because  an  appropriate  system  will,  consequently,  bring  gains  in  health  and  quality  of  life.  Objective:  To  evaluate  the  
positioning  effectiveness  and  comfort  of  custom  moulded  seating  systems  and  conventional  cushions  and  backrests  (multimaterials).  Material  and  Methods:  
Comparative  quantitative,  non-probabilistic  study  with  a  convenience  sample  of  thirty  wheelchair  users.  Data  will  be  collected,  through  pressure  mapping  to  moulded  
seating  and  conventional  seating  and  the  application  of  the  Braden  scale,  as  well  as  with  a  user  experience  evaluation  questionnaire.  Results:  By  conducting  this  
study  it  is  expected  to  obtain  comparative  data  from  both  positioning  systems.  Conclusion:  Through  this  comparative  study,  it  will  be  possible  to  assess,  based  on  
empirical  data,  the  differences,  characteristics,  and  impact  on  the  participants'  daily  lives,  to  characterise  the  best  positioning  system  according  to  their  needs.  Rafael  Rodrigues:  0000-0001-6072-2054;  Jaime  Ribeiro:  0000-0002-1548-5579
Abstract:  to  assess,  based  on  empirical  data,  the  differences,  characteristics  and  impact  on  the  participants'  daily  life,  in  order  to  characterize  the  best  positioning  system  
according  to  their  needs.
Keywords:  Positioning  Systems;  Wheelchair;  molded  seat;  conventional  seats.Introduction:  Proper  positioning  is  essential  for  people  who  move  in  wheelchairs  and  who  have  musculoskeletal  disorders  or  poor  postural  control.  In  order  to  provide  
users  with  greater  comfort  and  functionality,  conventional  and  molded  positioning  systems  have  been  developed,  built  with  different  materials,  in  order  to  accommodate  
these  postural  anomalies,  since  an  adequate  system  will,  consequently,  bring  gains  in  health  and  quality.  of  life.  Objective:  To  evaluate  the  effectiveness  in  the  
positioning  and  comfort  of  custom-molded  seating  systems  and  conventional  cushions  and  backrests  (multimaterials).  Material  and  Methods:  Comparative  study  of  a  
quantitative  approach,  non-probabilistic  of  a  convenience  sample  of  thirty  wheelchair  users.  Data  will  be  collected  through  the  pressure  map  of  molded  seats  and  
conventional  seats  and  the  application  of  the  Braden  scale,  as  well  as  a  user  experience  assessment  questionnaire.  Results:  With  the  accomplishment  of  this  study  it  
is  expected  to  obtain  comparative  data  from  both  positioning  systems.  Conclusion:  Through  this  study,  it  will  be  possible  to
Keywords:  Positioning  Systems;  wheelchair;  moulded  seat;  conventional  seat.  Portugal  
Morro  do  Lena,  Alto  do  Vieiro  -  Apartment  4137,  2411-901  LeiriaMultiorthos,  Braga,  Portugal  
*Corresponding  author:  jaime.ribeiro@ipleiria.pt;  School  of  Health  of  the  Polytechnic  of  Leiria,  Campus  2  -
ORCID  do  autor:  Machine Translated by Google

Material  and  methodsIntroduction
39  a  correct  alignment  for  carrying  out  various  activities.  Most  chair  users
and  instability,  which  may  condition  the  remaining  key  points  such  as  the  head  and  limbs
such  as  tilting,  reclining,  lifting  the  lower  limbs,  which  allow  pressure  relief  in
  Communicative  skills  that  allow  the  answer  to  the  subjective  evaluation  questionnaire.Proper  positioning  in  a  wheelchair  is  crucial  for  carrying  out  the  activities  of
  Users  of  conventional  positioning  systems.due  to  deformities  or  functional  limitations,  so  it  is  necessary  to  provide  adequate  support  in  the  pelvis
inadequate  medical  care,  nutrition,  microclimate,  perfusion,  comorbidities  and  the  characteristics  of  the
This  is  an  analytical,  non-probabilistic,  quantitative  study  of  a  sample  bythis  may  not  be  the  most  functional  and  comfortable  position  for  the  user.  In  fact,  it  can  be  quite  difficult
a  greater  pressure  or  shear  effect  on  the  individual's  skin,  factors  such  as  equipment
Participants  will  be  selected  according  to  the  following  inclusion  criteria:It  is  essential  to  consider  that  the  positioning  system  must  meet  the  needs  andintegrity  and  stability,  such  as  paralysis,  changes  in  tone  and  contractures,  among  other  changes
blood  (Digiovine  et  al.,  2021).deformities  and  pressure  ulcers,  conditioning  the  quality  and  endangering  the  health  and  life  of  the  person  
(Andreasen  et  al.,  2013;  Nace  et  al.,  2019).
ao  estar  sentado  (Digiovine  et  al.,  2021).wheelchair  users,  present  neurological  and  musculoskeletal  alterations,  which  affect  their
upper,  causing  damage  to  structures  (Digiovine  et  al.,  2021)
areas  of  greater  contact  and  exposure  over  time,  allowing  for  relaxation  and  better  flowdaily  life  (ADL).  A  seating  system  must  ensure  the  person's  comfort,  health,  functionality  and
skin  (Petz  et  al.,  2017).  Therefore,  it  is  important  to  guarantee  conditions  that  prevent  their  appearance,  
associating  smart  materials,  changes  in  positioning  and  wheelchair  functions.
  No  cognitive  impairment  or  mild  cognitive  impairment.and  trunk,  because  without  these  key  points  correctly  positioned,  the  person  will  feel  a  lack  of  supportIt  is  considered  correct  sitting  when  the  knees,  hips  and  elbows  are  at  90º,  however
Pressure  ulcers  usually  occur  over  bony  prominences  and  are  consequences  of
convenience  of  thirty  wheelchair  users.systemic.  A  seat  that  fails  to  provide  proper  positioning  can  lead  to  more
user  preferences,  in  order  to  promote  a  positive  attitude,  not  neglecting  the  personal  image,Machine Translated by Google

evaluates  sensory  perception,  humidity,  activity,  mobility,  nutrition,  friction  and  shear,  in  theData  will  be  collected  through  a  pressure  map  and  the  application  of  the  Braden  scale,  which
positioning  in  the  prevention  of  pressure  ulcers,  comfort  and  stability,  as  well  as  the  perception
different  materials,  such  as  foam  with  different  densities,  air,  viscoelastic,  gel  and  vinyl,  nylon,  polypropylene  
tapes,  foam  and  gel  backrests.  This  system  becomes  expensive  for  the  customer,  provides  comfort  and  some  
support,  being  a  good  option  in  light  cases  that  do  not  require  greatIt  is  expected  that  with  the  data  obtained,  the  performance  of  the
Conventional  positioning  systems  are  composed  of  a  seat  and  backrest,  made  of
and  stability  (Digiovine  et  al.,  2021).
With  this  comparative  study,  it  will  be  possible  to  assess,  based  on  empirical  data(Digiovine  et  al.,  2021).musculoskeletal  deformations,  pain  and  discomfort  and  inherently  poorer  quality  of  life
The  fact  that  the  seat  is  made  of  polyurethane  foam  provides  the  customer  with  greater  comfort.level  of  comfort,  pain,  support  and  satisfaction  with  the  visual  appearance  of  the  system.a  subjective  evaluation  questionnaire  to  the  participants  in  order  to  understand  the  user  experience  to
remain  in  them  for  long  periods  of  time,  which  can  lead  to  pressure  ulcers,
It  provides  greater  support  and  is  less  prone  to  pressure  ulcers,  as  the  forces  will  be  distributed  over  a  larger  
surface,  increasing  comfort  and  preventing  their  emergence.time  and  after  using  each  system  for  a  period  of  eight  hours.  It  will  still  be  possible  to  apply
autonomy  and  independence,  and  it  is  necessary  to  have  a  positioning  system  that  complements  its  effect.  
However,  the  vast  majority  of  people  who  use  wheelchairs,
exact  contours  of  the  person,  may  be  more  suitable  for  those  who  have  deformities,  asymmetries,instruments  will  be  used  in  molded  seats  and  conventional  seats  with  each  user  in  a
Wheelchairs  are  support  products  that  allow  users  to  enhance  their
al.,  2021).  
The  molded  seats,  when  modeled,  through  a  mold  and  a  scanner  according  to  the
themselves  the  best  possible  positioning  system  according  to  their  needs.sitting  position  (Ferreira  et  al.,  2007;  Park  and  Lee,  2017;  Petz  et  al.,  2017).  both  of  you
of  the  user  in  the  experience  of  its  use.
information  to  maintain  a  correct  posture  and  maintain  their  levels  of  functionality  (Digiovine  et  al.
what  are  the  differences,  characteristics  and  impact  on  the  daily  life  of  the  participants,  in  order  to  enableconclusions
40  Results
DiscussionMachine Translated by Google

Bibliographic  references
41  Ferreira  P,  Miguéns  C,  Gouveia  J  and  Furtado  K.  Risk  of  pressure  ulcer  development:  national  implementation  of  the
Park  JS  and  Lee  SH.  Comparing  the  interface  pressure  redistribution  after  applying  three  different  types  of  cushions:  differences  Digiovine  CP,  koontz  AM,  Berner  TF,  Kim  DJ,  Schmeler  M,  Cooper  R  and  Cooper  RA.  14  -  Wheelchairs  and  Seating  Systems,  in  
Braddom's  Physical  Medicine  and  Rehabilitation  (Sixth  Edition)  (Cifu  DX  ed)  pp  261-290.e262,  Elsevier,  Philadelphia,  2021.  
43:382-395,  2019.  Andreasen  J,  Olesen  CG,  Rasmussen  J,  Nielsen  SK,  Nguyen  L  and  Larsen  P.  Is  a  computer-based  measurement  method  superior  to  a  
recommended  manual  method  by  the  ROHO(®)  Group  to  assess  pressure  in  the  sitting  position?  Aust  Occup  Ther  J  
60:350-355,  2013.  
Nace  S,  Tiernan  J  and  A  NA.  Manufacturing  custom-contoured  wheelchair  seating:  A  state-of-the-art  review.  Prosthet  Orthot  Int  
Petz  FFC,  Crozeta  K,  Meier  MJ,  Lenhani  BE,  Kalinke  LP  and  Pott  FS.  Pressure  ulcer  in  an  intensive  care  unit:  an  epidemiological  study.  
Journal  of  Nursing  UFPE  online  11:287-295,  2017.Braden  scale,  Lusodidacta,  2007.
according  to  cushion  type.  J  Phys  Ther  Sci  29:128-132,  2017.  Machine Translated by Google

1  *Carolina  Bicho  Santos1 ;  Raquel  Simões  de  Almeida1
42  Money  Management  and  Shopping  Skills  Training  Programme  Money  Management  and  Shopping  Skills  Training  Program
these  two  areas  promote  self-determination,  autonomy,  social  inclusion  and  community  participation.  in  order  to  work
developed  based  on  the  fact  that  there  is  little  data  regarding  an  Occupational  Therapy  intervention  focused  on  these  two  areas.  capabilities  people  miss  out  on  some  significant  decision-making,  namely  about  what  to  eat  and  what  to  eat.important  since  they  allow  a  greater  degree  of  autonomy  and  participation  in  life  in  society.  Having  said  that,  they  are
program  participants  are  expected  to  improve  their  money  management  and  shopping  skills,  which
society,  as  they  are  present  in  several  acts  and  contexts.  Therefore,  these  two  areas  promote  self-determination,  autonomy,  
Keywords:  Instrumental  Activities  of  Daily  Living  (IADLs);  Money  management;  Shopping;  Autonomy;  Participation;  Decision  Abstract  
participants  will  improve  their  money  management  and  shopping  skills,  which  can  be  verified  through  their  scores  on  the  Introduction:  Money  management  and  shopping  skills,  Instrumental  Activities  of  Daily  Living  (AVDIs),  are
intervention  will  be  carried  out  a  program  based  on  metacognitive  training  and  mindfulness  meditation.  Results:  With  this
they  allow  for  a  greater  degree  of  autonomy  and  participation  in  life  in  society.  These  performance  skills  are  essential  for  living  in  *Corresponding  author:  10170637@ess.ipp.pt;  ESS  –  School  of  Health,  Polytechnic  Institute  of  Porto  (IPP),  Porto,  Portugal,  Rua  Dr.  António  
Bernardino  de  Almeida,  400,  4200-072,  Porto,  Portugal.
there  are  few  data  regarding  an  Occupational  Therapy  intervention  focused  on  these  areas.  Objective:  The
Keywords:  Instrumental  Activities  of  Daily  Living  (AVDIs);  Money  management;  Shopping;  Autonomy;  Participation;
The  following  instruments  will  be  used  to  assess  the  initial  performance  and  final  reassessment:  the  Instrumental  Activities  of  
decision-making  opportunities,  namely  regarding  what  to  eat  and  what  to  wear,  among  other  aspects.  Carolina  Bicho  Santos:  0000-0001-7670-34297;  Raquel  Simões  de  Almeida:  0000-0003-4703-1712
Methods:  To  evaluate  the  initial  performance  and  final  reassessment,  the  following  instruments  will  be  used  -  the  InstrumentalESS  –  School  of  Health,  Polytechnic  Institute  of  Porto  (IPP),  Porto,  Portugal.
these  two  areas,  a  money  management  and  shopping  skills  training  program  was  developed,  as
what  to  wear,  among  other  things.
Objective:  The  program  main  objective  is  the  promotion  of  money  management  and  shopping  skills.  Material  and  Methods:  fundamental  competences  for  living  in  society,  as  they  are  present  in  various  acts  and  contexts.  Therefore,
they  verify  through  the  results  in  the  previously  mentioned  evaluation  instruments.  Conclusion:  In  the  absence  of  these
social  inclusion  and  community  participation.  This  programme,  practice  of  money  management  and  shopping  skills,  was  
making.  Summary
Activities  of  Daily  Living  Scale  (IADLS),  apenas  as  questões  B  e  H,  e  o  Test  of  Grocery  Shopping  Skills  (TOGSS).  Para  a  
Introduction:  Money  management  and  shopping  skills,  which  are  Instrumental  Activities  of  Daily  Living  (IADLs),  are  important  as  
aforementioned  assessment  instruments.  Conclusion:  In  the  absence  of  these  performance  skills,  people  lose  some  significant  ORCID  do  autor:  
program  has  as  main  objectives  the  promotion  of  money  management  skills  and  shopping.  material  and
Decision-making.
Daily  Living  Scale  (IADLS),  only  questions  B  and  H,  and  the  Test  of  Grocery  Shopping  Skills  (TOGSS).  A  programme  based  on  metacognitive  
training  and  mindfulness  meditation  will  be  carried  out  during  the  intervention  phase.  Results:  It  is  expected  that  Machine Translated by Google

Project  rationale
project  innovationand  using  finances  with  short-term  and  long-term  goals  (Marques  and  Trigueiro  2011).  Regarding  the
Schormans,  and  Marquis  2017).  In  the  absence  of  these  capabilities,  people  miss  some  outlets
with  another  more  traditional  occupational  therapy  intervention.  The  formation  of  metacognitive  strategies  is  
an  intervention  that  aims  to  improve  professional  performance,  teaching
A  search  was  carried  out,  in  Portuguese  and  English,  in  Pubmed  and  bi-on,  with  the  terms  “treino”,According  to  the  Occupational  Therapy  Practice  Framework  (EPTO),  financial  management  consists  of
memory  and  perception  (Brown,  Creswell,  and  Ryan  2015).present  in  various  acts  and  contexts  (Cardoso  2015).  Thus,  these  two  areas  promote  the
more  traditional  Occupational  Therapy  intervention  and  mindfulness  meditation.
use  of  external  and  internal  aid  (Karunakaran,  Sugi,  and  Rajendran  2018;  Kim  and  Park  2019;that  allow  a  greater  degree  of  independence  and  participation  in  life  in  society,  as  they  are
As  far  as  the  intervention  of  the  program  is  concerned,  it  is  based  on  metacognitive  training,  on  the
method  to  train  attention  and  the  cognitive  processes  associated  with  it,  namely  thetransportation  of  items;  selection  of  payment  methods  and  carrying  out  the  financial  transaction,
aspects  (O'Neill  and  Gutman  2020).
Processing  strategies  are  used  to  organize  incoming  information  for  acomputers,  mobile  phones  and  tablets  (Marques  and  Trigueiro  2011).
regarding  an  Occupational  Therapy  intervention  focused  on  these  two  areas  was  developedshopping,  consists  of  preparing  shopping  lists  (grocery  and  others);  selection,  acquisition  and
significant  decisions,  namely  what  to  eat  and  what  to  wear,  among  others
explicitly  clients  to  use  processing  strategies  (Giles  2018;  Katz  2011).  At
“AVDIs”,  “money  management”,  “shopping”,  “  mindfulness  meditation”,  and  “occupational  therapy”,  of  43in  the  use  of  fiscal  resources,  as  well  as  alternative  methods  of  financial  transaction,  to  plan
The  analyzed  studies  used  strategic  metacognitive  training,  either  alone  or  in  combination.self-determination,  autonomy,  social  inclusion  and  community  participation  (Wilton,  FudgeMoney  management  and  shopping  skills  were  found  to  be  important  once
this  program,  training  money  management  and  shopping  skills.
Lamash  and  Josman  2019;  O'Neill  and  Gutman  2020).  Mindfulness  meditation ,  combining  the  two  types  
(improving  awareness  through  focused  attention  and  through  open  monitoring  of  sensations  without  reactivity  
to  sensations  or  thoughts  (Lutz  et  al.  2008)),  is  considered  aincluding  Internet  shopping  and  the  use  of  related  electronic  devices  such  as
In  order  to  respond  to  these  difficulties  and  since  there  are  few  data
more  efficient  processing  (Toglia  2011).  Common  processing  strategies  includeMachine Translated by Google

with  a  specific  disturbance  (Karunakaran,  Sugi,  and  Rajendran  2018;  Kim  and  Park  2019;
Sessions  will  consist  of  introduction /  warm-up  (10  min),  main  activity  (30  min)
Each  week  will  have  a  theme /  set  of  skills  to  work  on  (Table  1),  and  the  sheets
Recognize  and  identify  notesfound  a  lot  of  data,  and  most  of  the  documents  found  were  not  intended  for
Recognize  and  identify  coinsassessment  and  reassessment.  The  program  will  last  about  12  weeks,  1  week  of
felt  when  performing  the  activities.  It  will  also  be  at  this  moment,  in  the  last  session  of  each  week,  that
9th  and  10th  Financial  management  training  and  shopping,  in  a  real  context1st  week
Roleplay  of  financial  management  and  shopping,  in  a  therapeutic  contextto  verify  which  programs  already  exist  and  which  investigations  have  already  been  carried  out.  However,  they  were  not
This  program  will  have  a  total  of  20  sessions  of  45  minutes,  twice  a  week,  excluding  the
a  brief  summary  of  the  session,  asking  the  client  what  the  biggest  difficulties  were  felt  and  how  to
Heplanning  of  the  session,  as  well  as  the  explanation  of  the  objectives.  It  will  also  be  at  this  time,  in  the
for  the  consolidation  of  information  through  repetition.
Shopping  list  planning 5.ª  
6.ª  
7.ª  and  8.ªperson  who  has  difficulties  with  money  management  and  shopping  skills.
House.  The  warm-up  will  include  a  guided  mindfulness  meditation  (performed  by  a  therapist  withLamash  and  Josman  2019;  Wilton,  Fudge  Schormans,  and  Marquis  2017).  
and  discussion /  finalization  (5  min).  In  the  introduction  there  will  be  the  reception  of  the  customer,  a  brief  explanation  of  the
homework  exercises  are  always  related  to  that  week's  theme,  in  order  to  contribute
Calculations  with  money  and  association  of  currency  values  to  everyday  products /  
objectsPortuguese  population,  and  was  directed  to  a  specific  population,  for  example  individuals
the  homework  sheet  will  be  provided,  and  the  session  will  be  terminated.
simple  calculationinitial  assessment,  10  weeks  of  intervention  and  1  week  of  reassessment.
formation).  In  the  main  activity,  different  activities  and /  or  exercise  sheets  will  be  carried  out,  depending  on  
the  client's  performance  and  the  intervention  phase.  In  the  discussion /  finalization,  the  therapist  should  make
2nd  
3rd
4thThis  program  is  aimed  at  the  Portuguese  population  in  general,  that  is,  at  any
first  session  of  each  week,  in  which  the  exercise  sheet  will  be  checked/corrected  to
Table  1  -  Theme  to  work  on  each  week
Spending /  finance  planningProject  description  and  organizationTarget  population
44  Machine Translated by Google

Expected  results
Indicators  used
45  Bibliographic  referencesonly  questions  B  (purchasing)  and  H  (ability  to  handle  finances)  will  apply.  The  secondof  money  and  shopping.
(TOGSS)  (Hamera  et  al.  2002).  The  first  assesses  instrumental  activities  of  daily  living,  andWith  this  program,  participants  are  expected  to  improve  their  management  skills
Activities  of  Daily  Living  Scale  (IADLS)  (Lawton  and  Brody  1969)  e  o  Test  of  Grocery  Shopping  Skills  
specifics  at  the  cheapest  price).  Therefore,  the  indicators  are  the  results  of  these  instruments.To  evaluate  the  performance  of  customers,  two  instruments  will  be  applied,  the  Instrumental
assesses  community  shopping  ability  (ability  to  locate  and  select  items
Cardoso,  Ana  Cristina  Oliveira  Novais.  Direct  Teaching  of  Functional  Mathematics:  Case  Study.  Polytechnic  Institute  of  Porto.
Karunakaran,  Madhumala,  S  Sugi,  and  K  Rajendran.  “Effectiveness  of  Cognitive  Orientation  to  Daily  Occupational  Performance  to  Improve  
Shopping  Skills  in  Children  with  Learning  Disability.”  The  Indian  Journal  of  Occupational  Therapy  50(3):  92–  Hamera,  Edna  K.,  Catana  Brown,  Melisa  Rempfer,  and  Nancy  C.  Davis.  “Test  of  Grocery  Shopping  Skills.”  Psychiatric  Rehabilitation  Skills  
6(3):  296–311,  2002.  Brown,  Kirk  Warren,  J.  David  Creswell,  and  Richard  M.  Ryan,  eds.  Handbook  of  Mindfulness:  Theory,  Research,  and  Practice.  The  Guilford  
Press,  2015.  
of  Intervention  in  Occupational  Therapy.  3rd  Ed.  American  Occupational  Therapy  Association,  2011.  Giles,  Gordon  Muir.  “Neurocognitive  Rehabilitation:  Skills  or  Strategies?”  American  Journal  of  Occupational  Therapy  72(6),  2018.  
Katz,  Noomi,  ed.  Cognition,  Occupation,  and  Participation  Across  the  Life  Span:  Neuroscience,  Neurorehabilitation,  and  Models  Higher  School  of  Education,  2015.
97,  2018.  Machine Translated by Google

More  and  more  talk  about  Autism  Spectrum  Disorder  (ASD),  but  understanding
people  with  ASD  and  their  families  report  that  there  is  a  lack  of  knowledge  on  the  subject,  which  
culminates  in  quick  and  unfavorable  judgments  (Broady  et  al.,  2017;  Cage  et  al.,  2018;  Stronach  et  al.,
more  stigma  and  discriminatory  behaviors  (Broady  et  al.,  2017;  Somekia  et  al.,  2018;  Stronach
et  al.,  2018).all  aspects  involving  it  is  still  very  restricted  (Broady  et  al.,  2017;  Griffith  et  al.,  2012).  At
2018).  It  is  also  verified  that  individuals  with  limited  knowledge  about  PEA  are  the  ones  who  showJoana  Lopes;  Vítor  Simões-Silva1,2;  Maria  João  Trigueiro1,2
Introduction
46  Mental  Health  Literacy  in  Autism  Spectrum  Disorder  -  The  Platform  “Bicho  de  7  Mental  Health  Literacy  in  Autism  Spectrum  Disorder  –  A
heads”Platform  “7-Headed  Animal”
Summary
young  population  and,  in  this  way,  empower  society  in  general,  using  these  young  people  as  agents  of  change.
Scale  and  knowledge  through  tests  applied  in  each  session.  Goncalves,  J:  0000-0002-0208-3159;  Simões-Silva,  V:  0000-0003-2831-9729;  Trigueiro,  MJ:  0000-0003-4439-7196
With  the  implementation  of  this  project,  it  is  expected  to  achieve  an  increase  in  knowledge  and,  consequently,  in  empathy,  in  the
well-being.  The  project  "Mental  Health  Literacy  -  7  Headed  Bug"  was  developed,  which  will  have  a  multimodal  approach,  combining  
training,  information  and  contact,  aimed  at  the  young  population.  The  level  of  empathy  will  be  assessed  through  the  Basic  Empathy  ORCID  do  autor:  
multimodal,  reconciling  a  training,  informative  and  contact  aspect,  aimed  at  the  young  population.  The  empathy  level  will  be
assessed  through  the  Basic  Empathy  Scale  and  knowledge  through  tests  applied  in  each  session.
Thus,  this  study  aims  to  combat  the  lack  of  knowledge  about  ASD  and,  consequently,  to  increase  empathy,  thus  increasing  their  2  Psychosocial  Rehabilitation  Laboratory  of  the  Polytechnic  of  Porto,  Porto,  Portugal.1School  of  Health  of  the  Polytechnic  of  Porto,  Porto,  Portugal.
your  well-being.  The  project  “Literacy  in  Mental  Health  -  Bicho  de  7  Cabeças”  was  developed,  which  will  have  an  approach
the  people  around  them.  combat  the  lack  of  knowledge  about  ASD,  and  consequently,  contribute  to  an  increase  in  empathy,  thus  increasing
knowledge  about  Autism  Spectrum  Disorder  (ASD),  causing  an  impact  on  the  life  of  the  person  with  the  disorder  and  the  life  of  
Keywords:  Literacy  in  Mental  Health;  Autism  Spectrum  Disorder;  Stigma.  of  the  person  with  the  disorder,  as  well  as  in  the  lives  of  those  around  them.  Thus,  the  aim  of  this  study  is  to
Abstract  
Mental  Health  Literacy  is  currently  a  concept  still  little  explored  in  the  Portuguese  population,  mainly  regarding  awareness  and  
thus  empower  society  in  general,  using  these  young  people  as  agents  of  change.  concerns  the  awareness  and  knowledge  about  Autism  Spectrum  Disorder  (ASD),  causing  an  impact  on  lifeLiteracy  in  Mental  Health,  currently,  is  a  concept  still  little  explored  in  the  Portuguese  population,  mainly  in  what  concerns
Keywords:  Mental  Health  Literacy;  Autism  Spectrum  Disorder;  Stigma.
With  the  implementation  of  this  project,  we  hope  to  increase  knowledge  and,  consequently,  empathy  in  the  young  population  and  Machine Translated by Google

with  students  with  other  disabilities  (Cappadocia  et  al.,  2012).
As  knowledge  assessment  tools,  knowledge  tests  will  be  used
geographic  and  temporal  barriers;  there  is  the  possibility  to  review  the  contents  when  and  how  many  timesschool,  with  peers  who  do  not  seem  to  understand  their  behaviors  and  reject  them  (Dillenburger
internal  consistency  of  BES-A  reveals  good  values  (alpha=  0.77).consequently,  contribute  to  the  reduction  of  barriers  that  these  people  and  their  families
adoption  of  inclusion  behaviors  in  the  school  environment  and  in  the  community  in  general  (Campos  et  al.
To  assess  the  level  of  empathy,  the  Portuguese  version  of  the  Basic  Empathy  Scale  will  be  used.It  was  found  that  children  and  young  people  with  ASD  have  difficulties  in  integrating  into  a  context
Thus,  the  objective  of  this  study  is  to  combat  the  lack  of  knowledge  about  the  PEA,  and
programs  to  combat  or  stigma  (Campos  et  al.,  2018;  Waqas  et  al.,  2020),  contributing  to
ranging  from  1  (“strongly  disagree”)  to  5  (“strongly  agree”).  The  total  score  ranges  from  5  to  35  points,  with  higher  
scores  indicating  higher  levels  of  empathy.  THEobjective  to  increase  the  SL  levels  of  the  population  on  various  mental  disorders  orrelated  to  health  (HL),  the  greater  the  empathy  and  the  less  negative  attitudes  and  stigma
association,  multiple  choice  and  true  or  false.  These  tests  are  used  to  obtain  the
allows  interactivity  through  the  presentation  of  multimedia  resources  (Clark  and  Mayer,  2016;  ReavleyOccupational  (2013)  recognizes  the  great  impact  of  SL  competencies  for  individuals  and
Although  the  program  is  suitable  for  the  general  population,  children  andNowadays  it  is  known  that  the  higher  and  better  the  level  of  literacy  about  the  aspects
The  Mental  Health  Literacy  program,  called  “O  Bicho  de  Sete  Cabeças”,  aims  to
made  available  by  the  platform  at  the  end  of  each  training  session,  which  include  questions  of
Wish;  allows  rapid  dissemination  of  information;  captivates  and  motivates  the  user,  sinceet  al.,  2017),  thus  presenting  a  higher  probability  of  experiencing  bullying  compared  to
al.,  2018;  Dillenburger  et  al.,  2017;  Waqas  et  al.,  2020).experience,  thus  increasing  their  well-being.
This  program  is  delivered  to  the  public  through  an  online  platform,  which  makes  it  possible  to  overcomepopulations,  and  supports  the  increase  of  these  skills  as  a  means  to  achieve  a  fair  and  inclusive  society,  which  
makes  this  a  topic  of  great  relevance  and  relevance  for  the  profession.
young  people,  from  11  to  18  years  old,  as  it  is  a  sensitive  age  group  and  available  for  the  implementation  of
[BES-A]  (Pechorro  et  al.,  2018).  The  BES-A  consists  of  7  items,  with  a  5-point  Likert  response,towards  people  with  disease  (DGS,  2015;  WHO,  2020).  The  Canadian  Therapy  Association
Neurodevelopment,  which  includes  ASD.
percentage  of  questions  that  the  user  answered  correctly.
and  Jorm,  2011).  
47  methodsMachine Translated by Google

It  also  includes  several  testimonies  that  allow  us  to  perceive,  in  the  first  person,  the  experience  of  the
person  and  those  who  live  with  them,  learn  to  use  strategies,  and  promote  empathy  through
Regarding  the  school  environment,  it  is  expected  that  colleagues  of  people  with  ASD  understand
when  necessary,  interventions  to  improve  SL.  Thus,  this  project  meets  the  philosophy  ofHeads”,  generates  a  greater  impact  on  society,  through  the  use  of  positive  messages,  helping
integrate  SL  into  their  practice,  namely  through  increasing  awareness  of  SL  in  the  population,and  risk  factors,  early  signs,  diagnosis,  prognosis,  prevalence  and  main  interventions.  Per
who  come  into  contact  with  them  and,  in  this  way,  make  more  informed  decisions  and  better  manage
society  in  general,  which  had  led  to  a  reduction  in  the  existing  stigma  towards  people  with  ASD,  allowing  them  
more  opportunities  to  participate  in  society.The  interactive  graphic  language  of  the  platform,  using  together  the  expression  “Bicho  de  7
disorder,  the  central  symptomatology,  understand  the  neurological  basis  of  behaviors  and  associated  
comorbidities.  In  the  second  session,  content  related  to  the  etiology  of
provided  to  deal  with  the  pathology,  either  by  people  with  ASD  or  by  those
According  to  Levasseur  and  Carrier  (2012)  Occupational  Therapy  can  use  different  forms  ofThe  contents  aimed  at  PEA  are  exposed  over  three  sessions,  with  an  average  duration
to  these  people.  It  is  hoped  that  these  young  people  can  function  as  agents  of  change,
customers.in  an  interactive  and  appealing  way,  through  the  use  of  an  audiovisual  component.
users  are  expected  to  be  able  to  recognize  and  understand  the  typical  behaviors  of  thedisturbance,  creating  greater  empathy  with  the  observer  (Waqas  et  al.,  2020).
viewing  testimonies  of  people  with  ASD  or  their  family  members.
the  impact  that  the  disturbance  can  have  on  the  life  of  the  person  who  has  it,  increases  the  level  of  empathy
profession  since  its  intervention  also  considers  the  context  and  its  interaction  with  theto  demystify  beliefs  associated  with  mental  health  and  reduce  the  stigma  associated  with  these  people.
of  the  disturbance.
of  material  development  to  satisfy  the  needs  at  LS  level  and  providing,Finally,  in  the  third  session,  it  is  intended  that  the  trainees  understand  the  impact  of  PEA  in  the  day  to  day  of  theRegarding  the  first  session,  it  is  intended  that  the  trainees  understand  the  concept  of
PEA,  how  the  diagnosis  is  performed,  the  interventions  available  and  that  use  the  strategiesfrom  30  to  40  minutes.  The  contents  of  each  session  are  made  available  on  a  theoretical-practical  basis,
With  the  implementation  of  the  program  it  is  expected  that  the  levels  of  LS  on  the  PEA  will  increase,
disseminating  and  encouraging  others  to  better  understand  the  PEA.  Thus,  the  objective  will  be  to  train
48  ConclusionExpected  resultsMachine Translated by Google

49  Bibliographic  references
Learning,  John  Wiley  &  Sons,  2016.  Broady  T,  Stoyles  G  and  Morse  C.  Understanding  carers'  lived  experience  of  stigma:  the  voice  of  families  with  a  child  on  the  autism  
spectrum.  Health  and  Social  Care  in  the  Community  25:224-233,  2017.  
Stronach  S,  Wiegand  S  and  Mentz  E.  Brief  Report:  Autism  Knowledge  and  Stigma  in  University  and  Community  Samples.  Clark  R  and  Mayer  R.  E-Learning  and  the  Science  of  Instruction:  Proven  Guidelines  for  Consumers  and  Designers  of  Multimedia  
Somekia  F,  Toriib  M,  Brooks  PJ,  Koedae  T  and  Gillespie-Lynch  K.  Stigma  associated  with  autism  among  college  students  in  Japan  and  
the  United  States:  An  online  training  study.  Research  in  Developmental  Disabilities  76:88-98,  2018  Journal  Autism  Developmental  Disorders  42:266-277,  2012.  
journal  of  occupational  therapy  19:305-314,  2012.  
Reavley  N  and  Jorm  A.  The  quality  of  mental  disorder  information  websites:  A  review.  Patient  Education  and  Counseling.  Patient  Education  
and  Counseling  85:16-25,  2011.  Cappadocia  M,  Weiss  J  and  Pepler  D.  Bullying  Experiences  Among  Children  and  Youth  With  Autism  Spectrum  Disorders.  
populations.  Journal  of  Intellectual  Disability  Research,  2017.  Canadian  Association  of  Occupational  Therapy.  Position  Statement:  Enabling  Health  Literacy  in  Occupational  Therapy  2013  Effectiveness  of  a  School-Based  Mental  Health  Literacy  Promotion  Program.  Environmental  Research  and  Public  Health  15,  
2018.  
Levasseur  M  and  Carrier  A.  Integrating  health  literacy  into  occupational  therapy:  findings  from  a  scoping  review.  Scandinavian  Campos  L,  Dias  P,  Duarte  A,  Veiga  E,  Dias  C  and  Palha  F.  Is  It  Possible  to  “Find  Space  for  Mental  Health”  in  Young  People?  
Griffith  G,  Totsika  V,  Nash  S  and  Hastings  R.  "I  just  don't  fit  anywhere":  Support  experiences  and  future  support  needs  of  individuals  
with  Asperger  syndrome  in  middle  adulthood.  Autism  16:532-546,  2012.  
Waqas  A,  Malik  S,  Fida  A,  Abbas  N,  Mian  N,  Miryala  S,  Amray  A,  Shah  Z  and  Naveed  S.  Interventions  to  Reduce  Stigma  Related  to  Mental  
Illnesses  in  Educational  Institutes:  a  Systematic  Review.  Psychiatric  Quarterly,  2020.  
WHO.  ePORTUGUESe  -  Mission  and  Objectives  2020.Cage  E,  Monaco  J  and  Newell  V.  Experiences  of  Autism  Acceptance  and  Mental  Health  in  Autistic  Adults.  Journal  of  Autism  and  
Developmental  Disorders  48:473-484,  2018.  
DGS.  National  Health  Plan  -  Review  and  Extension  to  2020,  General  Directorate  of  Health,  2015.
Dillenburger  K,  Jordan  J,  McKerr  L,  Lloyd  K  and  Schubotz  D.  Autism  awareness  in  children  and  young  people:  surveys  of  two  
Journal  of  Autism  and  Developmental  Disorders  49:1298-1302,  2018.  Machine Translated by Google

2  Inês  Coelho1,  
Almeida1,2;  Maria  João  Trigueiro1,  2
50  ,  Tiago  Coelho1,2;
António  Marques1,2;  Sandra  Nascimento1 ;  Vitor  Simões-Silva1,2;  Raquel  Simões  deTatiana  Quitério,  Humberta  Amorim1 ,  *Filipa  Cunha1Social  entrepreneurship  Project  -  Sem-ImprovisoSocial  entrepreneurship  project  –  Sem-Improviso
way  and  thus  empower  these  women,  making  them  agents  of  change  to  captivate  and  train  future  users.  Results:  It  is  expected  even  bigger.  Thus,  the  identified  problem  focuses  on  the  lack  of  menstrual  hygiene  of  homeless  women.
Conclusion:  This  project  aims  to  improve  the  quality  of  life  and  well-being  of  women  in  SSA,  particularly*Corresponding  author:  10180631@ess.ipp.pt;  Higher  School  of  Health  of  the  Polytechnic  of  Porto
women  in  SSA  in  Porto,  recruited  by  convenience  from  the  indication  of  associations  that  work  with  this  population.  The  Introduction:  Since  menstruation  is  a  physiological  and  natural  process,  which  occurs  from  menarche  to  menopause,  which  has
in  order  to  captivate  and  train  future  users.  Results:  Women  in  SSA  are  expected  to  increase  their  literacy  level
homelessness  (SSA).  Objective:  Therefore,  this  study  aims  to  promote  the  creation  of  a  space  for  the  hygiene  of  women  in  SSA,  
Keywords:  Women;  menstruation;  homeless;  public  health;  menstrual  products  who  work  with  this  population.  The  instruments  include  counting  women  who  adhere  to  the  initiative,  questionnaires  of
Introduction:  Since  menstruation  is  a  physiological  and  natural  process,  which  occurs  from  menarche  to  menopause,  and  has  a  
that  women  in  SSA  will  increase  their  level  of  literacy  on  the  topic  and  that  at  least  75%  of  them  will  adhere  to  the  use  of  spaces  1School  of  Health  of  the  Polytechnic  of  Porto,  Porto,  Portugal
Summary
health  literacy  in  an  understandable  and  accessible  way  and,  in  this  way,  empower  these  women,  making  them  agents  of  change
more  significant  challenge.  Thus,  the  identified  problem  focuses  on  the  lack  of  menstrual  hygiene  in  women  experiencing  Inês  Coelho:  0000-0001-9461-2494;  Filipa  Cunha:  0000-0002-6845-4346;  Tatiana  Quitério:  0000-0002-9794-6278;  humberta
SSA,  the  distribution  of  menstrual  hygiene  products  and  the  increase  in  the  literacy  of  this  population.  Material  and  Methods:  The  sample
Keywords:  Women;  menstruation;  homeless;  public  health;  menstrual  products
with  the  service  and  measurement  of  stigma.  The  project  intends  to  promote  health  literacy  in  an  understandable  and  accessible  Birth:  0000-0003-0238-5103;  Vitor  Simões-Silva:  0000-0003-2831-9729;  Raquel  Simões  de  Almeida:  0000-0003-4703-ORCID  do  autor:  
(SSA).  The  objective  of  this  study  is,  then,  to  promote  the  creation  of  a  space  destined  to  the  accomplishment  of  the  hygiene  of  the  women  in
during  the  menstrual  period.
instruments  include  a  count  of  women  joining  the  initiative,  questionnaires  measuring  the  level  of  knowledge  acquired,  satisfaction  
particularly  during  the  menstrual  period.  Psychosocial  Rehabilitation  Laboratory  of  the  Polytechnic  of  Porto,  Porto,  Portugal
direct  impact  on  the  physical,  mental  and  social  well-being  of  women,  while  homeless,  the  menstrual  period  becomes  a  challenge
on  the  subject  and  that  at  least  75%  of  them  adhere  to  the  use  of  spaces  and  products  intended  for  menstrual  hygiene.
the  distribution  of  menstrual  hygiene  products,  and  the  increase  of  literacy  of  this  population.  Methods:  The  sample  will  consist  of  1712;  Maria  João  Trigueiro:  0000-0003-4439-7196
direct  impact  on  women's  physical,  mental  and  social  well-being,  as  homeless  women,  the  menstrual  period  becomes  an  even  measuring  the  level  of  knowledge  acquired,  satisfaction  with  the  service  and  measuring  stigma.  The  project  intends  to  promote
and  products  for  menstrual  hygiene.  Conclusion:  This  project  aims  to  improve  women's  quality  of  life  and  well-being  in  SSA,  Amorim:  0000-0003-0519-6084;  Tiago  Coelho:  0000-0001-7847-2401;  António  Marques:  0000-0002-8656-5023;  Sandra
will  be  made  up  of  women  in  SSA  in  the  city  of  Porto,  recruited  for  convenience  based  on  the  indication  of  the  associations
Abstract  Machine Translated by Google

public,  housed  in  an  emergency  shelter,  with  whereabouts  in  a  precarious  place  or  without  a  home,
related  to  the  differences  between  the  sexes,  thus  leading  to  the  neglect  of  the  problem
it  is  also  intended  to  alleviate  some  factors  underlying  the  lack  of  hygiene,  such  as
women,  making  them  agents  of  change  in  order  to  captivate  and  train  future  users.A  homeless  person  (SSA)  is  one  who,  regardless  of
basic  hygiene  care  (ENIPSSA,  2019;  Associação  Segunda  Chance,  nd).  Nonetheless,
It  was  considered  essential  to  implement  an  initiative  in  the  field  of  menstrual  hygiene,  given  that
and  education  provided  corresponds  to  the  individual  characteristics  of  that  person  (Americanoccupations,  the  project  promoters  intend  to  promote  the  health  of  these  women  inIntroduction
in  the  social  integration  of  people  in  SSA  and  in  the  fight  against  hunger,  reintegration  into  society  and
potentially  insecure  from  a  pathological  point  of  view,  to  manage  their  period  (Vora,  2020).
use  of  health  literacy  promotion  approaches,  ensuring  that  informationin  Homelessness,  2017).  According  to  data  from  the  National  Strategy  for
In  effect,  these  women  do  not  have  the  financial  capacity  to  purchase  products
mental.  One  of  the  key  principles  of  Occupational  Therapy  is  to  increase  participation
51  and  Porto  and  of  which  20%  were  women  (ENIPSSA,  2019).
their  intimate  hygiene,  nor  do  they  have  access  to  medical  and  health  care  (Leibler  et  al.,  2017).  It  isbeing  in  temporary  accommodation  (National  Strategy  for  the  Integration  of  People
central  found  –  the  lack  of  menstrual  hygiene  of  women  in  SSA  (Lopes,  2017).  With
public  health,  women's  empowerment  and  improvement  of  physical  and
Thus,  the  objective  of  this  work  is  to  promote  the  creation  of  a  space  destined  to  the  realization  ofsocioeconomic  condition  and  physical  and  mental  health,  is  homeless,  living  in  space
that,  in  addition  to  advocating  in  favor  of  equal  rights  between  citizens,these  supports  focus  on  the  provision  of  basic  needs,  not  taking  into  account
Occupational  Therapy  Association,  2011).  Furthermore,  they  intend  to  enable  theseSome  initiatives  have  been  implemented  to  respond  to  the  problem,  focusing  on
This  situation  means  that  women  in  SSA  resort  to  alternative  methods  and  sometimes
SSA  (Smith  &  Gutman,  2011),  enabling  the  right  to  equality  and  justice,  throughIntegration  of  Homeless  People  (ENIPSSA),  in  December  2019,  there  were  7107  people  in  SSA  in  
Portugal,  72%  in  the  Metropolitan  Areas  of  Lisbon
hygienic,  they  do  not  have  clean,  safe  and  private  spaces  for  carrying  out  the
social  welfare,  promoting  health,  well-being  and  community  inclusion.  as  therapistsMachine Translated by Google

The  target  population  is  women  in  SSA  in  the  city  of  Porto,  recruited  for  convenience
in  SSA  and  for  the  rest  of  the  population  according  to  each  impact  indicator.
Volunteering  NPISA  Porto,  the  Associação  de  Solidariedade  Coração  na  Rua,  the  Associação  de  Solidariedade  Coração  na  Rua,  the  Associação  de  Solidariedade
aesthetics,  aimed  at  promoting  self-esteem  and  empowerment.literacy  on  the  topic.
stigma  and  self-stigma  through  a  questionnaire  created  for  this  purpose;  and  the  reduction  of
to  women  in  SSA,  in  the  city  of  Porto.  Through  emails,  it  was  possible  to  contact
equally  with  key  partnerships,  monthly  workshops  will  be  offered,  wheremenstrual  cycle,  obtained  through  partnerships  with  key  stakeholders ,  as  well  as  carrying  outof  women's  hygiene  in  SSA,  distribute  menstrual  hygiene  products  and  increase
menstrual  cycle,  by  counting  women  who  seek  these  resources;  the  reduction  of
The  Sem-Improviso  Association  is  a  social  entrepreneurship  initiative  aimed  at
any  Oporto  citizen  concerned  with  these  issues.  Finally,  and  countingIn  order  for  the  impact  to  be  quantified  and  monitored,  it  is  necessary  to  promote  measurement
namely,  counting  the  number  of  women  participating  in  the
creation  of  a  space  dedicated  to  women's  hygiene,  in  SSA,  located  in  a  central  arealiteracy  on  the  subject  in  the  target  population,  through  questionnaires  applied  after  the
counting  the  number  of  people  (from  the  community)  who  adhere  to  the  campaigns  promoted  by  thefrom  the  indication  of  the  associations  that  work  with  this  population.
In  addition,  it  is  considered  important  to  evaluate  the  outputs  produced  by  the  project,  through
Second  Chance  and  the  Homeless  Support  Center  (CASA).  The  envisaged  solution  is
52  Material  and  methods
numerous  stakeholders,  who  were  willing  to  join  the  cause,  such  as  thesocial  isolation  of  women  in  SSA,  through  questionnaires  created  for  women
women  in  SSA  can  receive  personal  care  such  as  hairdressing  andtraining  sessions;  the  rate  of  use  of  spaces  and  products  intended  for  hygiene
Association  Without  Improvisation.
health  education  lectures,  aimed  not  only  at  the  target  population,  but  also  atof  the  outcomes  achieved.  Thus,  as  impact  indicators,  the  following  will  be  measured:  the  increase  in
workshops/lectures,  the  response  to  the  satisfaction  questionnaire  with  the  services  provided  and  the
from  the  city  of  Porto.  Free  distribution  of  hygiene  products  is  also  planned.Machine Translated by Google

With  this  project,  it  is  expected  to  increase  the  level  of  literacy  on  the  subject  in  theResults
access,  free  of  charge  and  promote  behavioral  changes  that  promote  their
53  of  this,  it  is  expected  to  increase  the  number  of  menstrual  hygiene  products  that  women  havewell-being  of  women  in  SSA,  particularly  during  the  menstrual  period.  Beyond
consequently,  reintegration  into  society.
Bibliographic  referencesThe  main  impact  objective  of  this  project  will  be  to  improve  the  quality  of  life  andConclusion
personal,  may  translate  into  the  possibility  of  entering  the  job  market  and,achieve  a  reduction  in  women's  self-stigma  and  social  isolation  in  SSA.
inclusion,  accompanied  by  an  increase  in  hygiene  and  careuse  of  spaces  and  products  intended  for  menstrual  hygiene.  In  addition  to  this,  it  is  expected
reducing  their  situation  of  social  exclusion.  In  the  long  term,  the  increase  in  the  support  network  and  thewomen  who  join  the  project  as  well  as  achieve  a  membership  of  at  least  75%  of
health.  With  the  activities  carried  out  in  groups,  such  as  workshops  and  lectures,  it  is  expected  that
also  the  promotion  of  social  interaction  and  the  increase  of  the  network  of  contacts  of  these  women,
2017.  Available  at:  
http://www.enipssa.pt/documents/10180/12352/Estrat%C3%A9gia+Nacional+para+a+Integra%C3%A7%C3%A3o+das
Lopes,  Jr.  The  invisibility  of  homeless  women:  The  neutrality  of  policies  and  social  responses  on+People+Homeless+2009-2015+ (ENIPSA+2009-2015)/ d6d206ba-112a-42ef- a034-39af8afec5fb  
National  Strategy  for  the  Integration  of  Homeless  People  -  ENIPSSA.  Survey  Characterization  of
integration  of  the  transversal  perspective  of  gender  in  Portugal.  Master's  Thesis  in  Sociology.  Coimbra  Faculty  of  
Economics,  2017.American  Occupational  Therapy  Association.  AOTA's  Societal  Statement  on  Health  Literacy.  American  Journal  of  Occupational  
Therapy  65:S78-S79,  2011.  
Vora,  S.  The  Realities  of  Period  Poverty:  How  Homelessness  Shapes  Women's  Lived  Experiences  of  Menstruation.  In:  Bobel  C.,  
Winkler  I.T.,  Fahs  B.,  Hasson  K.A.,  Kissling  E.A.,  Roberts  TA.  (eds)  The  Palgrave  Handbook  of  Critical  Menstruation  
Studies,  Palgrave  Macmillan,  Singapore,  2020.  Homeless  People.  2019.  Available  at:  http://www.enipssa.pt/
documents/10180/11746/Inqu%C3%A9rito+Caracteriza%C3%A7%C3%A3o+das+Pessoas+em+
Smith  L  and  Gutman  A.  Health  Literacy  in  Occupational  Therapy  Practice  and  Research.  American  Journal  of  Occupational  
Therapy  65:367-369,  2011.  Second  Chance  Association.  What  is  Second  Chance?  Available  at:  https://segundachance.pt/ sobre-nos/  National  
Strategy  for  the  Integration  of  Homeless  People  -  ENIPSSA.  Homeless  Person  Concept.
Situa%C3%A7%C3%A3o+de+Sem- Abrigo+-+31+de+dezembro+2019/6391b896-7d6d-47e9- a604-2d8a8f4b222f  
Leibler  JH,  Nguyen  DD,  León  C,  Gaeta  JM,  Perez  D.  Personal  Hygiene  Practices  among  Urban  Homeless  Persons  in  Boston,  
MA.  Int  J  Environ  Res  Public  Health  14(8):928,  2017.  Machine Translated by Google

IoT  devices  as  Ambient  Assisted  Living  tools  for  people  with  Duchenne  Muscular  IoT  devices  as  Ambient  Assisted  Living  tools  for  people  with
Duchenne  Muscular  Dystrophy
Dystrophy  
WHOQOL-Bref  instrument  will  be  applied  to  the  participant  and  caregivers,  and  MOHOST  will  be  added  to  the  individual  and  the  ORCID  do  autor:  
Keywords:  Motor  impairment;  Internet  of  Things;  Duchenne  Muscular  Dystrophy;  Environmental  Control  Unit;(ECU),  controlling  other  devices  in  the  Internet  of  Things  (IoT)  network.  Objective:  This  investigation  aims  to  analyze
to  analyse  potential  variations  in  the  participation  and  performance  of  an  individual  with  DMD,  in  caregivers'  burden,  and  also  the  Leiria,  Portugal
general.  The  artificial  intelligence  programmed  into  these  conversational  devices  makes  room  for  the  creation  of  interventions
stakeholders'  lives.  Conclusion:  IoT  devices  are  low-cost,  quick-to-implement  and
conversational  devices  opens  space  for  the  creation  of  interventions  applicable  in  a  smart  home  context  and  present  potential  to  and  the  WHOQOL-Bref  instrument  to  the  participant  and  caregivers,  to  which  the  MOHOST  to  the  individual  and  QASCI  to  the
loss  causes  changes  in  the  occupational  profile  and  situations  of  deprivation,  highlighting  the  need  for  support  from  others.  Portugal  &  Center  for  Innovative  Care  and  Health  Technology  (ciTechCare),  School  of  Health,  Polytechnic  of  Leiria,
speakers  (SS),  such  as  Amazon  Echo  and  Google  Nest,  are  established  in  the  world  market  and  available  to  the  population.
and  opportunities  for  participation,  reducing  demands  on  the  caregiver  and  their  burden,  influencing  the  quality  of  care1Polytechnic  of  Porto,  Porto,  Portugal;  Department  of  Health  Sciences  and  Technologies,  School  of  Health,  Polytechnic
Summary
of  SS  as  an  ECU,  through  the  integration  of  SS-controlled  IoT  devices  in  the  home  environment.  material  and
Abstract  
Google  Nest,  are  established  worldwide  and  available  to  the  general  population.  The  artificial  intelligence  programmed  into  these  
Methods:  This  case  study  research  consists  of  an  exploratory-descriptive  study,  in  which  semi-structured  interviews  and  the  2Polytechnic  of  Porto,  Porto,  Portugal;
Gradual  muscle  mass  causes  changes  in  the  occupational  profile  and  situations  of  deprivation,  evidencing  the  need  for  support  from*Rafael  Tavares1 ;  Helena  Sousa2 ;  Jaime  Ribeiro3
Rafael  Tavares:  0000-0002-1128-290X;  Helena  Sousa:  0000-0002-0461-1883;  Jaime  Ribeiro:  0000-0002-1548-5579
potential  variations  in  the  participation  and  performance  of  an  individual  with  DMD,  in  the  burden  of  caregivers,  and  also  the  potential
caregivers.
potential  of  SS  as  an  ECU,  through  the  integration  of  IoT  devices  controlled  by  SS  in  the  home  environment.  Material  and  *Corresponding  author:  Rafael  Tavares:  rafael.tavares@ipleiria.pt
applicable  in  a  smart  home  context  and  have  the  potential  to  be  used  as  an  environmental  control  unit
customizable,  and  with  user-friendly  settings,  having  the  potential  to  act  as  an  ECU.
be  used  as  an  environmental  control  unit  (ECU),  controlling  other  Internet  of  Things  (IoT)  devices.  Objective:  This  research  aims  3Research  Center  on  Didactics  and  Technology  in  the  Training  of  Trainers  (CIDTFF),  University  of  Aveiro,  Aveiro,
the  3rd.  Caregivers  are  required  for  the  most  varied  tasks  and  are  often  overloaded.  The  smart  ones
caregivers.  Results:  It  is  expected  that  the  implementation  of  IoT  devices  will  show  an  increase  in  the  control  of  the  environment
Caregivers  are  called  upon  for  a  variety  of  tasks  and  are  often  overwhelmed.  Smart  speakers  (SS),  such  as  the  Amazon  Echo  and  from  Leiria,  Leiria,  Portugal;
Introduction:  Duchenne  Muscular  Dystrophy  (DMD)  is  a  genetic  disease  with  severe  muscle  involvement.  The  lost
Methods:  This  case  study  consists  of  an  exploratory-descriptive  study,  in  which  semi-structured  interviews  will  be  applied
Introduction:  Duchenne  Muscular  Dystrophy  (DMD)  is  a  genetic  disease  with  severe  muscle  involvement.  The  gradual  muscle  
54  Machine Translated by Google

settings,  and  have  the  potential  to  act  as  ECU.  environment  and  the  opportunities  for  participation,  reducing  the  caregiver's  demands  and  burden,  and  influencing  the  quality  of  
Keywords:  Motor  Impairment;  Internet  of  Things;  Duchenne  Muscular  Dystrophy;  Environment  Control  Units;  Caregivers.  life  of  those  involved.  Conclusion:  IoT  devices  are  low-cost  solutions  with  a  quick  and  customizable  implementation,  user-friendly  QASCI  to  the  caregivers.  Results:  It  is  expected  that  the  implementation  of  IoT  devices  will  increase  the  control  over  the  
Introduction
55  musculoskeletal,  respiratory,  gastrointestinal  and  cardiac  functioning,  to  which  are  added
DMD  in  different  areas  of  occupation.
for  leisure  purposes  such  as  work  or  education,  regulate  ambient  lighting  and  temperature,  openmanifesting  itself  essentially  in  the  male  gender  (Sun  et  al.,  2020).  It  has  as  a  consequence  the  global  
muscular  deterioration  and  several  consequent  systemic  implications,  namely  in  the
This  identifies  the  need  to  increase  the  independent  participation  of  people  with
need  to  use  broad  movements  for  activation  (Noda,  2018).  populations  with
accentuated  mobility  impairment  can  thus  control  multimedia  devices,  bothfunctional  dystrophin,  protein  produced  through  the  translation  of  code  present  on  the  X  chromosome,
depression  (Landfeldt  et  al.,  2016).quality  of  life  of  caregivers,  and  a  risk  factor  for  the  development  of  anxiety  and
Alexa  be  used  as  Environmental  Control  Units  (ECU)  through  voice,  overriding  theDuchenne  Muscular  Dystrophy  (DMD)  is  a  genetic  disease  caused  by  a  lack  of
overloaded  (Landfeldt  et  al.,  2016).  This  overload  constitutes  a  cause  for  the  reduction  of
environments  with  personalized  interfaces,  and  smart  speakers  (SS)  such  as  Google  Nest  or
develop  the  autonomy  of  the  person  with  functional  diversity,  is  inherently  being  reduced  to
overload  of  informal  caregivers.from  third  parties  (Vorster  et  al.,  2019).  Thus,  individuals  with  DMD  are  highly  dependent  on  caregivers  
to  carry  out  the  daily  routine,  who  in  turn  tend  to  be
The  commercialization  of  devices  included  in  the  IoT  concept  creates  opportunities  for  adapting
implementation  of  SS-controlled  IoT  devices  in  the  autonomy  of  a  person  with
disability  in  the  housing  context?  In  answering  this  question,  it  is  assumed  that  theoccupational,  even  reaching  situations  of  deprivation  of  carrying  out  activities,  without  the  support
Internet  of  Things  (IoT)  and  revolutionized  the  possibilities  of  adapting  environments,  improving  the
accessibility  and  automation  of  tasks,  in  order  to  facilitate  processes  (Mazhelis  et  al.,  2012).
In  this  context,  the  study  aims  to  answer  the  research  question:  What  are  the  effects  ofdisplacement  of  the  body  as  a  whole  and  isolated  body  segments,  changes  in  the  profile  are  associatedpotential  changes  in  psychosocial  behavior  (Birnkrant  et  al.,  2018).  The  gradual  
muscle  loss  and  resulting  impairment  of  motor  skills  for
The  development  of  everyday  device  connectivity  to  the  Internet  created  the  concept
blinds,  activate  electrical  devices  connected  to  smart  sockets,  among  others  (Noda,  2018).Machine Translated by Google

methods
56  Resultscaregiver  burden.
pre-existing,  namely  Internet  and  multimedia  devices  not  framed  in  the  IoT  concept.
Model  of  Human  Occupation  Screening  Tool  (MOHOST).  Caregiver  burden  will  be  assessed  using  the  
Informal  Caregiver  Burden  Assessment  Questionnaire  (QASCI).
activities  and  task  execution  across  devices.  Additionally,  it  is  expected  that  theThe  aim  is  to  explore  possible  variations  in  the  participation  and  performance  of  a  young  adult  with
same.  It  is  equated  that  the  domain  of  IoT  devices  will  provide,  at  the  theoretical  level,  anamely  having  a  diagnosis  of  DMD,  aged  between  18  and  23  years,  with  activities
stakeholders  will  be  measured  using  the  World  Health  Organization  Quality  of  Life  version  –  versionThe  individual  under  study  was  selected  for  convenience,  meeting  the  defined  criteria,
unstructured  information  relating  to  personal  perceptions  of  the  context.  The  quality  of  life  for  all
accessibility,  activity  and  participation  and,  consequently,  the  empowerment  and  use  ofspeech,  thus  ensuring  effective  interaction  with  the  SS.methodological  approach  to  better  understand  this  unexplored  context.  Although  clinical  trials
WebQDA  3.0  software.  Quantitative  data  will  be  analyzed  in  an  excel  spreadsheet  and/or  inopaque,  particularly  when  the  causal  pathways  between  "intervention"  and  "effect"  are  long  and
environmental).To  achieve  these  objectives,  the  case  study  is  considered  as  the  best  design
The  individual  does  not  have  the  need  for  continuous  use  of  a  ventilator  or  articulatory  disturbances
Qualitative  data  will  be  imported,  analyzed  and  encoded  for  content  analysis  in
increased  independence  in  activities  related  to  electronic  devices  is  reflected  in  thework  or  educational  activities  carried  out  mostly  in  a  home  environment,  with
abbreviated  (WHOQOL-Bref).  The  occupational  functioning  of  the  individual  will  be  characterized  through  the
increased  control  of  the  smart  home  environment  and  opportunities  for  participation  inDMD  diagnosis  by  integrating  SS-controlled  IoT  devices  into  your  home  environment.  It  is  also  sought  to  
observe  the  potential  of  the  SS  as  an  ECU,  and  also  to  analyze  the
potentially  non-linear:  case  study  investigation  plays  a  key  role  in  providing  detailed  observational  evidence  
for  causal  claims  (Paparini  et  al.,  2020).
Semi-structured  interviews  will  be  applied  to  the  individual  and  caregivers  in  order  to  obtain  data
It  is  intended  to  obtain  data  from  the  implementation  of  IoT  devices  with  regard  to  therandomized  trials  reduce  many  threats  to  internal  validity,  effect  mechanisms  remain
An  evaluation  protocol  will  be  carried  out  before  and  after  the  intervention  (adaptation
software  Statistical  Package  for  the  Social  Sciences  (SPSS).  Machine Translated by Google

of  home  automation  created  specifically  for  these  market  niches,  and  will  be  able  to  avoid  the  needThe  market  affirmation  of  IoT  products  provides  opportunities  for  the  development  of  customized  
systems  tailored  to  individual  needs.  It  is  therefore  pertinent
acquisition  of  the  latter,  providing  a  quick,  affordable  solution  with  user-friendly  configurations.the  production  of  evidence  that  explores  the  application  of  these  generic  devices  in  people  withreduction  of  requests  to  the  caregiver,  which  can  reduce  their  burden  and  influence  the  quality  of  care.
cases  of  high  motor  dependency,  often  subject  to  performing  tasks  bylives  of  both  actors.
replacement.  These  devices  constitute  low  cost  solutions  when  compared  to  systems
57  Bibliographic  referencesconclusions
Sun  C,  Shen  L,  Zhang  Z  and  Xie  X.  Therapeutic  Strategies  for  Duchenne  Muscular  Dystrophy:  An  Update.  Genes  11:837-837,  Mazhelis  O,  Luoma  E  and  Warma  H.  Defining  an  Internet-of-Things  Ecosystem.3-4,  2012.  
2020.  Noda  K.  Google  Home:  smart  speaker  as  environmental  control  unit.  Disability  and  rehabilitation  Assistive  technology  13:674-  
Vorster  N,  Evans  K,  Murphy  N,  Kava  M,  Cairns  A,  Clarke  D,  Ryan  MM,  Siafarikas  A,  Rowe  PW,  Parkinson  S,  Gaynor  O,  Chiu  L,  Anderson  J,  
Bayley  K,  Jacoby  P,  Cross  D  and  Downs  J.  Powered  standing  wheelchairs  promote  independence,  health  and  community  involvement  
in  adolescents  with  Duchenne  muscular  dystrophy.  Neuromuscular  Disorders  675,  2018.  Birnkrant  DJ,  Bushby  K,  Bann  CM,  Apkon  SD,  Blackwell  A,  Brumbaugh  D,  Case  LE,  Clemens  PR,  Hadjiyannakis  S,  Pandya  S,  Street  N,  
Tomezsko  J,  Wagner  KR,  Ward  LM  and  Weber  DR.  Diagnosis  and  management  of  Duchenne  muscular  dystrophy,  part  1:  diagnosis,  
and  neuromuscular,  rehabilitation,  endocrine,  and  gastrointestinal  and  nutritional  management.  The  Lancet  Neurology  17:251-267,  
2018.  
29:221-230,  2019.  Paparini  S,  Green  J,  Papoutsi  C,  Murdoch  J,  Petticrew  M,  Greenhalgh  T,  Hanckel  B  and  Shaw  S.  Case  study  research  for  better  evaluations  
of  complex  interventions:  rationale  and  challenges.  BMC  Medicine  18:301,  2020.  Landfeldt  E,  Lindgren  P,  Bell  CF,  Guglieri  M  and  Bushby  K.  Quantifying  the  burden  of  caregiving  in  Duchenne  muscular  dystrophy.906-915,  
2016.  Machine Translated by Google

Translation  and  cultural  adaptation  of  The  Mayers'  Life-style  Questionnaire  (2)  to  
the  Portuguese  version
Translation  and  cultural  adaptation  of  The  Mayers'  Life-style  Questionnaire  (2)  
for  the  portuguese  version  
*Susana  Pestana1,2;  Ana  Paula  Martins1,3;  Ana  Santana4 ;  Ana  Fialho5 ;  Catarina  Abreu6 ;  Ruth
58  Mendes7
ORCID  do  autor:  
Abstract  among  the  experts  who  carried  out  the  evaluation  of  the  synthesis  of  the  translations,  which  was  carried  out  twice.  For  verification  of7  Portuguese  Red  Cross  Humanitarian  Center  in  Tavira,  Faro,  Portugal.
Portuguese,  synthesis  of  translated  versions,  evaluation  of  the  synthesis  by  experts,  pre-test,  back-translation,  synthesis  of  back-translations
Keywords:  Cultural  Adaptation;  Translation;  Mental  Disorder;  The  Mayers'  Life-style  Questionnaire  (2) ;
back-translations’  synthesis,  and  submission  and  sending  of  the  instrument  to  the  author’s  original  version.  Statistical  analysis  was  difficulties,  as  some  of  the  questions  did  not  apply  to  their  lifestyles.  Conclusion:  The  difficulties  of
values,  Finances,  Choices  and  Activities  you  enjoy  doing).  Objective:  To  translate  and  culturally  adapt  The  Mayers'  Life-style  6  Student  of  the  Degree  in  Occupational  Therapy  at  the  Polytechnic  Institute  of  Beja,  Beja,  Portugal.
Mayers'  Life-style  Questionnaire  (2).  Material  and  Methods:  The  methodology  used  involves  several  phases:  translation  into  the
subjective  and  depends  on  individual  experiences.2  CIE  –  Center  for  Research  in  Education,  ISPA  –  University  Institute  –  Psychological,  Social  and  Life  Sciences,  Lisbon,  Portugal.
Summary
changes  to  the  scale,  suggested  by  the  panel  of  experts,  an  analysis  of  inter-judge  agreement  was  performed.  Taking  into  account  the  coefficient
designed  for  people  with  mental  disorder.  It  is  a  self-completion  instrument  which  assesses  life-styles  in  nine  dimensions  (Looking  
translation  into  the  new  language,  synthesis  of  the  translated  versions,  synthesis’  assessment  by  experts,  pre-test,  back-translation,  4  Santa  Casa  da  Misericórdia  de  Ferreira  do  Alentejo,  Beja,  Portugal.
(Taking  care  of  yourself,  Life  situation,  Caring  for  others,  Being  with  others,  Professional/educational  situation,  Beliefs  and  values,1  IPBeja  –  Polytechnic  Institute  of  Beja,  School  of  Health,  Department  of  Health,  Beja,  Portugal.
Susana  Pestana:  0000-0001-6102-4725;  Ana  Paula  Martins:  0000-0003-1394-4038
reproducibility,  inter  and  intra-observer,  the  scale  was  applied  to  seven  people  with  mental  disorders.  Results:  Made  the
Introduction:  This  study  is  based  on  the  translation  and  cultural  adaptation  of  The  Mayers'  Life-style  Questionnaire  (2),  which  was  *Corresponding  author:  susana.pestana@ipbeja.pt;  Department  of  Health,  School  of  Health  of  the  Polytechnic  Institute  of  Beja  (IPBeja),  R.  Dr.  
José  Correia  Maltez  7,  7800-111  Beja,  Portugal.
and  sending  the  instrument  to  the  author  of  the  original  version.  Statistical  analysis  was  performed  to  obtain  the  level  of  agreement
Lifestyles.5  Parish  and  Social  Center  of  Salvador  de  Beja,  Beja,  Portugal.
finances,  Choices  and  Activities  you  enjoy  doing).  Objective:  To  translate  and  culturally  adapt  to  Portuguese  the  The
fulfillment  may  be  associated  with  the  fact  that  lifestyles  are  personal,  and  quality  of  life  is  a  concept
Questionnaire  (2)  into  Portuguese  language.  Material  and  Methods:  The  methodology  used  focuses  on  several  phases:  the  3  Garcia  de  Orta  Hospital,  Almada,  Portugal.
Introduction:  This  study  is  based  on  the  translation  and  cultural  adaptation  of  The  Mayers'  Life-style  Questionnaire  (2),  aimed  at  people  with  
mental  disorders.  It  is  a  self-completion  instrument  that  assesses  lifestyles  in  nine  dimensions
kappa,  for  values  where  ÿ  ÿ0.75,  an  excellent  agreement  was  obtained.  Some  people  with  mental  disorders  have  felt
after  yourself,  Living  situation,  Looking  after  others,  Being  with  others,  Being  in  or  out  of  work /  Attending  college,  Beliefs  and  Machine Translated by Google

found  it  difficult,  as  some  of  their  questions  did  not  apply  to  their  life-styles.  Conclusion:  Difficulties  in  filling  out  the  instrument  
experiences.  twice.  To  check  for  inter  and  intra-observer  reproducibility,  the  scale  was  applied  to  seven  people  with  mental  disorder.  Results:  
may  be  associated  with  the  fact  that  lifestyles  are  personal,  and  quality  of  life  is  a  subjective  concept  and  depends  on  individual  
Keywords:  Cultural  Adaptation;  Translation;  Mental  Disorder;  The  Mayers’  Life-style  Questionnaire  (2);  Lifestyles.  After  the  changes  to  the  scale  suggested  by  the  panel  of  experts,  the  interrater  agreement  analysis  was  performed.  Considering  
the  kappa  coefficient,  for  values  where  ÿ  ÿ0.75,  an  excellent  agreement  was  obtained.  Some  of  the  people  with  the  mental  disorder  carried  out  to  obtain  the  level  of  agreement  between  the  experts  who  assessed  the  translations’  synthesis,  which  was  performed  
Assessment  is  the  first  stage  of  the  process  in  Occupational  Therapy  (OT)  and  focuses  on  the
about  their  occupational  performance  (AOTA,  2014),  and  it  is  also  important  to  have
change  can  be  measured  (Bullock,  2014).  It  comprises,  therefore,  specific  methodologies  thatIntroduction
namely  the  identification  of  customer  needs,  problems  and  concerns
Evaluation  takes  place,  both  formally  and  informally,  in  all  interventions  with  the
client  (Marques  and  Trigueiro,  2011)  and  establishes  a  baseline  through  which  the
59  In  this  way,  the  assessment  consists,  on  the  one  hand,  of  defining  the  occupational  profile,(AOTA,  2014).
occupational  health,  as  well  as  identifying  what  results  are  expected  to  be  achieved  (AOTA,  2014).
Trigueiro,  2011).established  with  the  client,  and  its  specificity  depends  on  the  context  of  the  practice
information  that  will  allow  specifying  the  factors  that  facilitate  or  inhibit  this  performance
aspects  that  support  or  hinder  the  client's  occupational  performance  (Marques  and2014].  Occurs  during  the  initial  interaction  and  in  all  subsequent  interactions  that  are
comprises  the  analysis  of  occupational  performance,  through  the  collection  and  interpretation  of
2014).  The  collection  and  interpretation  of  information,  through  the  application  of
evaluation  developed  to  observe,  measure  and  question,  will  allow  to  know,  in  this  way,  thehealth,  well-being  and  participation  [American  Occupational  Therapy  Association  (AOTA),
Occupational  Therapy,  available  resources,  personal  support  systems  and  social  networks,
as  well  as  the  reason  for  referencing  (Bullock,  2014).  On  the  other  hand,  the  evaluation
performance  scales  or  occupation-  or  activity-focused  questionnaires  (Bullock,do  and  what  it  has  already  done,  as  well  as  in  identifying  all  aspects  that  support  or  limitdiscovery  about  what  the  customer  wants  and  needs  to  do,  what  the  customer  is  capable  of
taking  into  account  that  at  this  stage  individual  goals  and  expectations  about  the
focus  on  functionality  and  involve  activity  or  occupation,  namely  checklists,Machine Translated by Google

mental.  Bearing  in  mind  the  aforementioned  aspects,  it  was  considered  relevant  to
involvement  in  meaningful  activities  that  the  person  uses  to  their  full  potential  to
multidisciplinary  knowledge  that  encompasses,  in  addition  to  various  forms  of  science  and
being  instrumental,  interpersonal  relationships  established  at  the  family  and  social  level,  worklack  of  assessment  instruments  in  OT,  translated  and  adapted  for  the  population
significant  and  that  is  affecting  their  quality  of  life,  at  the  beginning  of  the  therapeutic  process  in
A  new  version,  resulting  from  some  adjustments,  was  published  in  August  2018.
considering  its  more  holistic  view,  privileging  the  definition  of  this  concept  through  the  authors  
Niemi  et  al.  (1988).  It  is  thus  consensual  that  quality  of  life  refers  tomore  concrete  level  (Almeida  et  al.,  2012).  Since  the  concept  of  quality  of  life  is  quiteAfter  some  research  within  the  object  of  study  of  this  investigation,  the
person-centered  and  that  allows  them  to  identify  and  prioritize  what  they  consider
what  do  you  like  to  do.  The  first  study  of  the  instrument  was  published  in  2004,  and  the
2000,  2003),  refers  to  his  preference  for  the  concept  of  lifestyle  and  not  quality  of  life,Questionnaire  (2).  
nine  dimensions  that  allow  assessing  lifestyles  (Mayers,  2003),  namely
perspective,  therefore,  deals  with  countless  elements  of  the  person's  daily  life,
60  at  the  School  of  Health  Sciences  at  York  Saint  John  University  in  England  and  is
unemployed /  attending  an  educational  establishment/ course  and/or  training  programtranslation  and  cultural  adaptation  of  The  Mayers'  Life-style  instrument
increase  their  quality  of  life  (Mayers,  2000).  The  instrument  has  a  structure  of
popular  knowledge,  concepts  that  privilege  people's  lives  as  a  whole.  In  this
and  other  activities  performed  in  the  community,  personal  development  and  feelingPortuguese,  that  measure  the  concept  of  quality  of  life/lifestyles,  in  the  area  of  health
The  universe  of  knowledge  in  quality  of  life  is  expressed  as  an  areaTO  (Mayers,  2003).  Occupation  is  central  to  the  philosophy  and  practice  of  OT,  so  it  is  through  the
subjective  well-being  and  personal  life  satisfaction,  including  physical  and  mental  health,aimed  at  people  with  mental  disorders,  allowing  them  to  know  and  assess  their  ability  to  have  
insight  into  their  lifestyle.  It  is  a  self-completion  questionnaire,
vocational  training /  volunteering,  beliefs  and  values,  finances,  choices  and  activities
comprehensive,  its  definitions  and  underlying  theoretical  frameworks  are  numerous.  Mayers  (1995,This  instrument  is  authored  by  Occupational  Therapist  Chris  Mayers,  professor
taking  care  of  oneself,  life  situation,  taking  care  of  others,  being  with  others,  is  employed /
considering  not  only  their  subjective  perception  and  expectations,  but  also  questions  to  aMachine Translated by Google

choices  for  each  person.
adaptation  to  change,  overcoming  crises,  affective  losses  and  emotional  conflicts,
physical,  intellectual  challenge,  spiritual  experiences,  of  timelessness  and  meaning,
characterized  by  clinically  significant  disturbance  of  cognition,  regulation  ofMadeira  et  al.  (2018)  define  lifestyle  as  a  set  of  behaviors
and  social  and  not  just  the  absence  of  disease  (WHO,  2014).  According  to  the  Directorate  General  of
of  people  should  provide  meaning  and  purpose,  in  addition  to  representing  a  context
The  Diagnostic  and  Statistical  Manual  of  Mental  Disorders,  DSM-5  (Americanthat  challenges  the  underlying  assumptions  of  the  conceptual  framework  of  mental  health  and  leads,of  personal  filling,  in  addition  to  performing  recreational  activities.  On  the  other  hand,
emphasized  in  the  definition  of  health  as  a  state  of  complete  physical,  psychological  and
do,  is  based  on  the  premise  that,  in  order  to  enjoy  health  and  well-being,  occupations
emotional,  social  and  cognitive  behavior.It  becomes  important  to  define  this  concept  of  mental  health  as  “A  state  of  well-being  in  the
also  of  humour,  creativity  and  the  ability  to  dream,  establish  satisfying  relationships,  have
result  of  people  striving  to  reach  their  potential  through  what  they  do.  Per
psychological,  biological,  or  developmental  factors  underlying  mental  functioning.  Atcan  work  productively  and  fruitfully  and  is  able  to  contribute  to  the  community  where
well-being  can  be  seen  as  an  essentially  occupational  phenomenon,  in  which  health  isBearing  in  mind  that  the  instrument  is  aimed  at  people  with  mental  disorders,
ability  to  recognize  limits  and  signs  of  discomfort,  critical  sense  and  reality,  but
emotional,  individual  and  social,  effort  and  relaxation,  translating  well-being  as  the
emotion,  or  the  behavior  of  the  subject  that  reflects  a  dysfunction  of  theconstructed  by  each  person  and,  therefore,  individually  modifiable,  according  to  the
for  self-esteem  and  socialization.  A  person's  range  of  occupations  should  include  activityHealth  (DGS)  mental  health  is  the  basis  of  general  well-being,  considering  the  ability  to
Psychiatric  Association,  2013),  defines  mental  disorder  as  “a  syndromefits  in." (World  Health  Organization  [WHO],  2014),  and  its  positive  dimension  is
a  resource  for  living  and  not  an  end  in  itself.  It  also  suggests  that  well-being,  through
inevitably,  in  the  most  serious  cases,  to  profound  changes  in  the  functioning  andwhich  the  individual  realizes  his  or  her  own  potential,  can  cope  with  the  normal  stresses  of  life,
life  projects  and  discover  a  meaning  for  life  (DGS,  nd).  According  to  Wilcock  (2006)  the
On  the  other  hand,  it  is  also  important  to  define  the  concept  of  mental  disorder,  since
61  Machine Translated by Google

life  of  a  person,  namely  changes  in  participation  and  performance
community  integration  compared  to  isolation  in  segregated  environments,  and  the
how  each  person  organizes  their  performance  and  how  occupations  are
research  was  carried  out  in  order  to  understand  which  procedures  to  adopt,  sincesocial,  occupational,  or  other  important  activities” (p.  22).
with  family,  having  friends  and  having  intimate  relationships.  Psychiatric  rehabilitation  thus  emphasizes  the
enable  and  make  possible  the  involvement  and  participation  in  positive  and
Material  and  methodspromote  or  restrict  occupational  performance  (Marques  and  Trigueiro,  2011).mental  disorders  are  usually  associated  with  significant  malaise  or  deficits
live  independently,  attend  school,  have  competitive  jobs,  socialize
are  concerned  not  only  with  occupations,  but  also  with  the  complicity  of  factors  that
Questionnaire  (2)  for  Portuguese  language  and  culture.psychiatric.  This  type  of  rehabilitation  includes  a  wide  range  of  interventions  that  aim  to  facilitate,
provision  of  care  in  psychiatry  and  mental  health,  and  therapists  also
person  thus  relate  to  the  habits,  routines,  roles  and  rituals  used  in  the  process  ofenabling  them  to  acquire  the  skills  and  support  they  need  to  succeed
able  to  engage  in  occupations  and  activities  that  allow  participation,  desired  oroccupational  diseases,  it  is  essential  to  create  differentiating  responses,  such  as  rehabilitation
preferences  of  the  person  with  mental  disorder  rather  than  professional  goals  (Saraiva  and  Cerejeira,  
2015).  The  importance  that  rehabilitation  assumes,  therefore,  in  the
integrated  into  your  life  in  a  competent  way.  The  performance  standards  of  a
62  Taking  into  account  all  the  repercussions  that  the  mental  disorder  can  impose  on  the
health  promoters  (Willard  et  al.,  2009).  The  Occupational  Therapist  will  consider  the  formindependence,  as  opposed  to  dependence  on  health  professionals,  the
The  present  study  was  approved  by  the  Ethics  Committee  of  the  Polytechnic  Institute  of  Beja.  
It  is  a  methodological  study  (Fortin  et  al.,  2009)  and  considering  its  scope,  it  wasin  the  performance  of  social  roles,  in  their  environment.  Usual  normative  roles  include
needed,  at  home,  at  school,  in  the  workplace  and  in  the  community.  Therefore,
The  aim  of  the  present  study  is  to  translate  and  adapt  the  instrument  The  Mayers'  Life-stylepeople  with  mental  disorders,  to  improve  their  functioning  and  quality  of  life,
Occupations  recognize  that  health  is  promoted  and  maintained  when  customers  are
involvement  in  occupations  or  activities,  develop  over  time,  and  mayMachine Translated by Google

of  the  original  instrument  (June  2019).
from  the  original  instrument  to  the  new  language;  2)  synthesis  of  translated  versions;  3)  evaluation  of
In  phase  2,  all  items  of  the  two  translations  were  analyzed,  culminating  in  the  synthesis  of
populations  and  whether  the  expressions  are  appropriate  for  the  target  audience  of  the  instrument.complex  process  (Borsa  et  al.,  2012).  Thus,  the  first  step  of  this  process
2005).  
enlightened  and  informed.  The  assessment  instrument  was  later  sent  to
study  and  free,  informed  and  informed  consent,  via  email.  The  goal  isclinical  practice  of  Psychiatry  and  Mental  Health.  Criteria  were  established  in  order  to
63  the  process  that  involves  the  translation  and  cultural  adaptation  of  an  assessment  instrument  is  a
evaluates  the  construct  from  the  same  theoretical  and  methodological  perspective  (Hambleton  et  al.,
a  translator,  by  sending  a  study  presentation  letter  and  free  consent,
a  prior  telephone  contact  has  been  established,  followed  by  the  sending  of  a  letter  of  introduction  from  theand  its  adaptation  involves  cultural,  idiomatic,  linguistic  and  contextual  aspects
7)  presentation  and  submission  of  the  instrument  to  the  author  of  the  original  instrument.
In  phase  3,  criteria  were  established  for  the  choice  of  the  group  of  experts,  namely
study  presentation  letter  and  free,  informed  and  informed  consent,  requestingenables  the  comparison  of  data  obtained  in  different  samples,  from  different  contexts,
of  origin  of  the  instrument  and  native  speakers  of  the  new  language,  allowing  a  greater  matching  of  theThe  translation  of  an  instrument  is  the  first  step  in  the  adaptation  process,
synthesis  by  a  group  of  experts;  4)  pre-test;  5)  back  translation;  6)  synthesis  of  back-translations;
both  and  obtaining  the  first  version  of  the  instrument  translated  into  Portuguese.
Contacts  were  established  with  the  three  Occupational  Therapists  by  sendingAccording  to  Borsa  et  al.  (2012),  seven  consecutive  phases  were  carried  out:  1)  translation
translation,  in  its  entirety,  with  the  two  independent  translations  having  been  received.ensured  that  official  authorization  was  obtained  for  the  translation  and  cultural  adaptation  by  the  author
consider  whether  the  terms  or  expressions  can  be  generalized  to  different  contexts  andallowing  greater  equity  in  the  evaluation,  since  it  is  the  same  measure,  which
translation  process.  Contacts  were  established  with  an  Occupational  Therapist  and  with
have  more  than  5  years  of  professional  experience  in  this  area,  and  for  this  purpose  it  wasrelated  to  translation  (Hambleton  et  al.,  2005).  On  the  other  hand,  the  adaptation  process  of
In  phase  1,  the  translation  was  performed  by  two  independent  translators,  fluent  in  the  language
o  be  three  Occupational  Therapists,  to  exercise  their  professional  activity  in  the  area  of
their  contribution  to  the  cultural  adaptation  of  the  instrument.  It  was  thus  developed  aMachine Translated by Google

agreement  between  judges,  the  instrument  as  a  whole  (115  items),  the  questionnaire  (93
its  meaning  is  understood  by  the  participants.  However,  given  the  current  circumstances
were  female,  aged  between  30  and  65  years,  with
independent  back-translations.able  to  evaluate  each  item  of  the  instrument,  express  their  opinion  and  suggest  possible
sample  characteristics,  namely  seven  people  with  mental  disorders.  Intended
of  exclusion,  since  the  objective  was  to  be  able  to  assess  the  understanding  of  the  content  and
study  and  free,  informed  and  informed  consent.  It  was  later  sentwho  performed  the  translation  in  phase  1),  with  the  objective  of  obtaining  two  translations  in  the  language  of
64  document  for  assessing  the  level  of  agreement  between  judges  with  the  aim  of  experts
In  phase  4,  the  instrument  was  applied  to  a  small  population  that  reflected  the
even  if  in  a  transitory  phase,  but  the  pandemic  scenario  did  not  allow  us  to  have  this  criterion
Occupational  Therapist  and  with  a  translator,  by  sending  a  cover  letter  from  thein  the  Statistical  Package  for  the  Social  Sciences  (SPSS),  namely  through  the  coefficient
were  in  internment.  The  inclusion  criteria  were:
(n=1)  and  substance-related  disorder  (n=1)  and  all  in  an  inpatient  setting.
of  both.  This  back-translation  summary  covered  all  adjustment  proceduresinterpreted  as  follows:  ÿ  <0.4  is  poor;  0.4ÿ  ÿ  ÿ0.75  is  satisfactory  to  good;  ÿ  ÿ0.75
exclusion  criteria  Intellectual  Development  Disorder  and  Disorderitems)  and  guidelines  for  filling  it  out  (22  items).  This  analysis  was  carried  out
related  to  COVID-19,  it  was  only  possible  to  apply  it  to  people  who
diagnosis  of  schizophrenia  (n=3),  bipolar  disorder  (n=2),  schizoaffective  disorder
In  phase  6,  all  items  of  the  two  back-translations  were  analyzed,  culminating  in  the  synthesischanges.  In  this  phase,  the  statistical  analysis  of  the  data  was  carried  out  to  obtain  the  degree  of
meaning  of  the  items  and  instructions  for  completing  the  instrument.  Of  the  7  participants,  allverify  if  the  items,  instructions  and  the  choice  of  answer  were  adjusted  and  if  the
assessment  instrument  for  translation,  in  its  entirety,  having  received  bothis  excellent  (Fleiss  et  al.,  2003).
neurocognitive.  Another  of  the  exclusion  criteria  would  be  the  fact  that  people  are  hospitalized,
origin,  based  on  the  Portuguese  language  version.  Contacts  were  made  with  aof  Fleiss'  Kappa.  Kappa  coefficient  values  range  between  0  and  1,  and  can  be
diagnosis  of  mental  disorder  and  age  between  18  and  65  years  and  how
In  phase  5,  the  back-translation  was  performed  by  two  independent  translators  (different  from  the
semantic  and  idiomatic,  obtaining  the  first  version  of  the  instrument  in  the  source  language.Machine Translated by Google

Results
second  version  and  having  been  sent  to  the  three  experts.  Once  again,  the  degree  of
difficulty  in  filling  in  some  of  the  items  of  the  instrument,  mainly  due  to  the  fact  that
suggested  minor  changes:  “You  are  able  to”  to  “Are  you  able  to”  in  dimensions  1with  the  objective  of  validating  if  the  items  present  the  same  essence  and  conceptual  idea,  as  well  as
(23%).  In  view  of  these  results,  there  was  a  need  to  make  changes  to  the  version
is  excellent  (Fleiss  et  al.,  2003).
organized.  The  Portuguese  version  of  the  instrument  was  also  sent.  The  original  author  ofsending  the  final  version  of  the  back-translation  and  some  arguments  that  could  support  theIn  phase  7,  the  final  version  of  the  back-translation  was  sent  to  the  original  author  of  the  instrument,
questionnaire  (93  items),  ÿ=.20  (20%);  regarding  the  guidelines  (22  items),  ÿ=.23
(91%).  Taking  into  account  the  kappa  coefficient,  for  values  where  ÿ  ÿ0.75,  its  classification
Portugal,  as  well  as  the  way  in  which  Psychiatry  and  Mental  Health  services  aredata  statistics  (SPSS)  to  obtain  the  degree  of  agreement  between  judges  of  the  instrument
instrument  as  a  whole,  the  questionnaire  and  guidelines  for  its
have  been  hospitalized  for  a  significant  period  in  terms  of  duration.
phrases  in  subparagraphs  A  and  B  and  in  subparagraphs  B  and  C  “identical”  to  “similar”  of  dimension  6;  “livingfilling  (22  items),  through  the  Fleiss  kappa  coefficient.  In  a  first  analysis
increase  in  the  degree  of  agreement  between  judges:  overall  instrument  (115  items),  ÿ=.91of  agreement  between  judges  and  their  differences  were  also  evaluated  in  terms  ofAfter  successfully  passing  phases  1  and  2,  in  phase  3,  the  analysis
some  of  its  dimensions  do  not  suit  their  lifestyles,  since  they
and  8;  “adequate”  to  “appropriate”  in  item  A  of  dimension  1;  put  “do  you”  at  the  beginning  ofas  they  reflect  the  same  content  as  the  original  version  of  the  instrument.
With  regard  to  phase  4,  in  general,  the  participants  felt  someinitial  assessment  of  the  level  of  agreement  between  judges,  thus  building  a
instrument  validated  the  translation  and  back-translation  of  the  instrument  in  July  2020,  after  thestatistics,  for  the  entire  instrument  (115  items),  ÿ=.66  (66%);  for  the  items  of
(91%);  questionnaire  items  (93  items),  ÿ=.95  (95%);  guidelines  (22  items),  ÿ=.90
choice  of  certain  designations,  taking  into  account  the  reality  of  the  mental  disorder  inin  its  entirety  (115  items),  the  questionnaire  (93  items)  and  the  guidelines  for  its
fill.  The  statistical  analysis  allowed  to  arrive  at  new  results,  namely  the
Phases  5  and  6  were  successfully  passed,  and  in  phase  7  the
65  Machine Translated by Google

In  the  present  study,  the  translation  and  cultural  adaptation  of  the  instrument  The
instrument  to  be  completed.  It  was  considered  that  the  lack  of  response  in  some  of  the  items
validation,  you  can  invest  in  this  inferential  analysis.  In  this  way,  the  evaluation  of  the  properties
driving];  4.  Being  with  others  [h)  feels  that  he/she  gives  you  the  support  he/she  needs];  5.  isdimension  8.
The  failure  to  obtain  results  can  be  explained  by  the  fact  that  the  sample  is  small
since  this  is  an  instrument  that  undergoes  changes  over  time,  each  group
j)  gardening  in  a  way  that  satisfies  you  (if  you  have  a  garden  and  enjoy  gardening);filling  in  some  of  the  items.  It  was  possible  to  verify  that  the  seven  people  withyour  life  feeling  that  you  control  it“  para  “live  feeling  that  you  control  your  life”  na  alínea  A  da  
it  was  not  possible  to  carry  out  an  exploratory  analysis  of  the  questionnaire.
perception  that  each  person  has  in  relation  to  them.  On  the  other  hand,  he  also  mentioned
dimensions/areas:  1.  Taking  care  of  yourself  [e)  shopping  for  food;All  the  phases  that  preceded  the  accomplishment  of  the  pre-test  (phase  4)  were  reached  with
mental  disorder  (all  participants  were  in  the  hospital).
An  analysis  was  made  of  the  characteristics  of  the  population  that  filled  out  the  questionnaires,
vocational  training  program /  doing  volunteer  work  [a)  has  a  paid  job;  B)questionnaires,  inserting  all  the  data  and  answers  in  the  database  built  for  the
statistical  analysis  to  validate  the  questionnaire  for  the  English  population,  justifying  this  decisionis  related  to  the  fact  that  they  do  not  suit  the  lifestyles  of  people  withMayers’  Life-style  Questionnaire  (2).  
psychometric  measures  of  the  questionnaire  is  currently  being  pursued.
employed /  unemployed /  attending  an  educational  establishment/ course  and/orDiscussion
of  work  that  is  involved  in  the  process  of  translation,  cultural  adaptation  and  contribution  to  the(seven  people  with  mental  disorders),  as  well  as  the  fact  that  there  are  some  items  in  the
n)  use  public  transport  alone;  o)  drive  a  car,  if  you  have  a  driver's  licenseIt  is  made.  The  statistical  treatment  of  the  data  allowed  us  to  verify  that  due  to  the  absence  of  results,
decision  by  the  fact  that  each  person's  lifestyles  are  personal  and  subjective  and  by  the
mental  disturbance  showed  difficulty  in  filling  in  some  of  the  items  of  some  of  thesuccess.  Statistical  analysis  was  carried  out,  through  SPSS,  of  the  information  collected  from  the  seven
The  author  of  the  original  instrument,  Chris  Mayers,  did  not  undergo  any  treatment
with  the  objective  of  trying  to  find  out  the  reasons  that  could  explain  the  absence  of
66  Machine Translated by Google

of  vocational  training,  is  able  to  work/study];  last  question  of  the  questionnaire  -
moment,  assess  the  psychometric  properties  of  the  questionnaire  and  make  a  contribution  to
Occupational  Therapist,  recognize  what  is  meaningful  to  you  and  which  areas
psychometric  measurements  will  be  fundamental,  insofar  as  if  statistical  results  are  obtainedis  able  to  regularly  attend  the  educational  establishment/ course  and/or  training  program
instrument  measures  what  it  purports  to  measure.
in  the  person,  insofar  as  the  person  identifies  and  prioritizes  what  is  meaningful  to  him,  in  the
Occupational  Therapist  about  the  people  you  care  for  and  will  allow  you  to  createcontribute  to  a  greater  critical  awareness  of  the  person  with  mental  disorderhave  a  protected  job;  c)  does  some  type  of  voluntary  work;  e)  if  you  are  a  student,
agreement  between  judges,  for  ÿ  ÿ0.75  (Fleiss  et  al.,  2003),  which  allows  us  to  state  that  the
The  Mayers'  Life-style  Questionnaire  (2)  allows  for  a  focused  assessment
introduced  at  the  level  of  the  therapeutic  process.  On  the  other  hand,  it  can  broaden  the  perception  of  thepeople  who  have  been  in  hospital  for  a  significant  period  of  their  lives,  which
time  to  be  carried  out,  so  it  is  expected  that  the  results  of  the  statistical  analysis  may
of  questionnaires  that  allow  assessing  the  capacity  for  insight  of  the  person  with  a  disorder
67  day,  in  terms  of  occupational  participation.
Mental  em  Portugal.  Having  completed  this  questionnaire,  please  go  back  and  mark  with  “x”  the  areas  that  most  concern  you.  
It  is  important  to  reflect  that  this  assessment  instrument  is  not  suitable  for
its  validation  for  the  Portuguese  population.  However,  this  study  is  in  this
are  affecting  your  quality  of  life.  The  relevance  of  this  study  is  related  to  the  absence
robust,  will  be  able  to  integrate  the  clinical  practice  of  the  Occupational  Therapist,  in  the  domain  ofprofessional;  f)  if  you  are  employed  by  or  in  an  educational  establishment/ course  and/or  program
beginning  of  the  therapeutic  process.  These  elements  will  allow  both  the  person  and  theOne  of  the  limitations  of  the  study  is  related  to  the  fact  that  it  was  not  possible,  until  the
intervention  differentiating  responses.  The  study  of  its  propertiesOn  the  other  hand,  the  study  obtained  excellent  results  in  assessing  the  level  of
Conclusion
regarding  the  different  dimensions  that  are  evaluated  and  what  changes  could  bewill  have  led  to  a  poor  adjustment  of  the  instrument's  items  to  the  organization  of  his  life
anticipate  that  this  could  be  an  instrument  to  be  used  in  the  Psychiatry  and  Health  Services
mental  health  about  their  lifestyles.  In  this  way,  it  is  an  instrument  that  canMachine Translated by Google

and  guide  some  decision-making  in  intervention  planning,  together  with  the
person  and  what  you  consider  meaningful  to  you.
68  Bibliographic  references
Almeida  M,  Gutierrez  G,  Marques  R.  Quality  of  Life.  EACH  Editions,  São  Paulo,  2012.
Directorate-General  for  Health .  (nd).  Why  talk  about  mental  health?  Available  at:  https://www.dgs.pt/paginas-de-sistema/8aúde
Health  Mayers  C.  Quality  of  life:  Priorities  for  people  with  enduring  mental  health  problems.  British  Journal  of  Occupational  Therapy  Bullock  A.  Assessment  and  outcome  measurement.  In:  Creek’s  occupational  therapy  and  mental  health,  Creek  J,  Lougher,  L  
Marques  A,  Trigueiro  M.  Occupational  Therapy  Practice  Framework:  Domain  and  Process.  Livpsic,  Porto,  2011.
Willard  H,  Crepeau  E,  Cohn  E,  Schel  B.  Willard  and  Spackman's  Occupational  Therapy.  Guanabara  Koogan  LTDA,  Rio  de  Janeiro,
in:Niemi  ML,  Laaksonen  R,  Kotila  M,  Waltimo  O.  Quality  of  life  4  years  after  stroke.  Stroke  19:  1101-1107,  1988.
of  Paideia  22:423-432,  2012.
Madeira  F,  Filgueira  D,  Bosi  M,  Nogueira  J.  Lifestyles,  habitus  and  health  promotion:  some  approaches.  Health  and  Society  27:106-115,  2018.
Wilcock  A.  An  occupacional  perspective  of  health.  Slack  Incorporated,  Thorofare,  NJ,  2006.  American  Journal  of  Occupational  Therapy  68  (Suppl.  1):S1–  S48,  2014.  
Fleiss  J,  Levin  B,  Paik  M.  Statistical  methods  for  rates  and  proportions.  John  Wiley  &  Sons,  New  Jersey,  2003.  
Mayers  C.  The  development  and  evaluation  of  the  Mayers's  life-style  questionnaire.  British  Journal  of  Occupational  Therapy  
World  a  Lisbon,  2013.
Hambleton  R,  Merenda  P,  Spielberger  C.  Adapting  educational  and  psychological  tests  for  cross-Cultural  assessment.  Lawrence  American  Occupational  Therapy  Association.  Occupational  therapy  practice  framework:  Domain  and  process  3rd  Edition.  
de-aaz/programa-nacional-paraa-aude-mental/questions  
andresponses.aspx? fbclid=IwAR1uO54vyLit2jjJEkmhkvvjvDRjYwGGx2RS- y6corQ_VE3bW2wNi_Ulhg,  consulted  on  13-05-2020.
63:591-597,  2000.  
Organization.  health:  state  well-being.  http://origin.who.int/features/factfiles/mental_health/
en/,  consultado  em  13-05-2020,  2014.  (ed).  Churchill  Livingstone  Elsevier,  London,  72-85:2014.  
Mayers  C.  Defining  and  assessing  quality  of  life.  British  Journal  of  Occupational  Therapy  58:146-150,  1995.  
2011.  Borsa  J,  Damásio  B,  Bandeira  D.  Adaptation  and  validation  of  psychological  instruments  across  cultures:  Some  considerations.
Erlbaum  Associates,  New  Jersey,  2005.  
Saraiva  C,  Cerejeira  J.  Fundamental  Psychiatry.  Lidel,  Lisbon,  2015.
AvailableAmerican  Psychiatric  Association.  DSM-5.  Manual  of  diagnosis  and  statistics  of  mental  disorders.  Climepsi  Editors,
Fortin  MF,  Côté  J,  Filion,  F.  Foundations  and  stages  of  the  investigation  process.  Lusodidate,  Loures,  2009.
66:388-395,  2003.  
Mental  Machine Translated by Google

2  
Introduction
course  and  prognosis  of  the  disease  (Caldas  De  Almeida  et  al.,  2013;  World  Health  Organization.,  
69*Maria  Oliveira  Silva1,2;  António  Marques1,2;  RaquelSimões  de  Almeida1,2
Mental  health  is  a  determining  factor  for  the  effective  functioning  of  the  population.  THE
mental  illness,  time  between  detection,  initiation  of  treatment  and  its  adequacy,  influence  theMental  health  literacy  program:  misophonia
Mental  health  literacy  program:  misophonia  
1School  of  Health  of  the  Polytechnic  of  Porto,  Porto,  Portugal
associated  with  the  prevention  and  treatment  of  mental  disorders.  Thus,  the  misophonia  literacy  promotion  program
assimilation  and  implementation  of  the  information  provided.  Results:  Expected  to  increase  literacy  and  awareness  of  misophonia,  occupational.Summary
misophonia,  reduced  stigma  and  increased  effectiveness  in  seeking  help.  Conclusion:  The  empowerment  of  the  population  will  allow
and  self-management  of  misophonia  and  improves  attitudes  towards  the  condition.  Material  and  Methods:  The  proposed  e  disorders  prevention  and  treatment.  Thus,  misophonia  literacy  promotion  programs  rise  as  a  key  point  in  education  and  awareness  António  Marques:  0000-0002-8656-5023;  Raquel  Simões  de  Almeida:  0000-0003-4703-1712
implementation  of  the  information  provided.  Results:  An  increase  in  literacy  and  awareness  of
sustainable  and  scalable  approach  to  literacy  programs.  Objective:  The  aim  is  the  empowerment  of  participants  for  the  recognition  Psychosocial  Rehabilitation  Laboratory  of  the  Polytechnic  of  Porto,  Porto,  Portugal
coupled  with  low  levels  of  literacy,  exacerbate  the  need  for  a  new  sustainable  and  scalable  approach  in
Abstract  
impact  of  misophonia  and  allow  access  to  specialized  health  care  such  as  occupational  therapy  intervention.  Bernardino  de  Almeida,  400,  4200-072  Porto,  Portugal
misophonia  and  the  improvement  of  attitudes  towards  the  condition.  Material  and  Methods:  The  literacy  promotion  e-learning  programit  is  a  key  point  in  education  and  awareness  of  the  condition.  The  estimated  prevalence  of  this  disorder,
Keywords:  Mental  health  literacy;  misophonia;  mental  health  promotion;  e-learning
reduce  stigma  and  increase  the  effectiveness  in  seeking  help.  Conclusion:  The  empowerment  of  the  population  will  reduce  the  Introduction:  Literacy  levels  are  a  determining  factor  in  the  existence  of  adequate  knowledge  and  beliefs,
lessening  the  impact  of  misophonia  and  enabling  access  to  specialized  health  care  such  as  therapy  intervention
learning  program  to  promote  misophonia  literacy,  uses  an  innovative,  positive,  and  interactive  approach,  enhancing  the  ORCID  do  autor:  
of  misophonia  that  we  propose  to  implement,  uses  an  innovative,  positive  and  interactive  approach,  enhancing  the  assimilation  and
of  the  condition.  The  estimated  prevalence  of  this  disorder,  combined  with  low  levels  of  literacy,  enhances  the  need  for  a  new  *Corresponding  author:  Maria  Oliveira  Silva:  maria.silva1901@hotmail.com;  P.Porto  School  of  Health,  Rua  Dr.  Anthony
literacy  programs.  Objective:  The  objective  is  to  empower  participants  to  recognize  and  self-manage  the
Introduction:  Literacy  levels  are  a  determining  factor  in  the  existence  of  adequate  knowledge  and  beliefs  associated  with  mental  
Keywords:  Literacy  in  mental  health;  misophonia;  promoting  mental  health;  e-learning  Machine Translated by Google

(Gulliver  et  al.,  2010;  Wei  et  al.,  2015).
significantly  improve  the  quality  of  life  that  those  who  experience  it.
Dealing  with  the  condition  generates  performance  changes,  such  as  changing  the
Innovation:  Literacy  levels  are  far  from  desirable.  At  the  national  level,  theadequate  knowledge  and  beliefs  are  associated  with  a  greater  ability  to  prevent,
Considering  the  impact  of  mental  health  problems  and  low  levels  of  literacy,
affected  in  relation  to  reported  cases  (Brout  et  al.,  2018;  Potgieter  et  al.,  2019;  Schröder
and  decrease  the  impact  of  misophonia  on  quality  of  life.and  to  enhance  access  to  specialized  care.  With  the  intervention  of  therapy2018).  These  factors  are  influenced  by  literacy  levels,  since  the  existence  of
(Kutcher  et  al.,  2016a;  Kutcher  et  al.,  2016b).
classification  as  a  new  psychiatric  condition  and  it  is  estimated  that  a  greater  number  of  people
of  sound,  reorganization  of  context  and  routine,  allowing  to  get  involved  in  activitieshow  to  obtain  and  maintain  good  mental  health;  2)  understand  mental  disorders  and
specific  stimuli  (e.g.  chewing  and  sniffing)  (Potgieter  et  al.,  2019).  The  reaction
significant  activities  and  social  isolation  (Frank  et  al.,  2020;  Potgieter  et  al.,  2019).  At  the
2014).  There  are  no  validated  resources  on  misophonia  written  in  Portuguese.  So,  theeffectiveness  in  seeking  help,  through  the  knowledge  of  where,  when  and  how  to  get
neurophysiological  (tachycardia,  sweating,  muscle  tension  and  physical  pain)  and  aThe  concept  of  mental  health  literacy  includes  four  components:  1)  understanding
Misophonia  is  a  condition  defined  by  a  typically  exaggerated  negative  reaction  to
concentration,  and  adoption  of  non-adapted  strategies  and  mechanisms,  such  as  abandoning
implemented  programs  have  restricted  content  and  target  population  (Loureiro  et  al.,recognition  and  management  of  problems,  with  the  consequent  seeking  of  timely  help
et  al.,  2013;  Siepsiak  et  al.,  2019;  Taylor,  2017).it  becomes  pertinent  to  address  misophonia,  a  poorly  studied  condition  that  influences
Material  and  methodsadequate  health  care  and  develop  necessary  skills  for  self-care
behavioral  and  emotional  (irritation,  anger,  disgust)(Potgieter  et  al.,  2019).  It  is  suggested  to
occupational,  people  will  be  able  to  implement  new  strategies,  such  as  the  use  of  blockerstheir  treatments;  3)  reduce  stigma  related  to  mental  disorders;  4)  improve  the
typical,  a  consequence  of  activation  of  the  sympathetic  nervous  system,  includes  a
In  order  to  reverse  the  damage  caused  by  this  condition,  it  is  urgent  to  inform  the  population  about
70  Machine Translated by Google

costs  on  the  part  of  the  participant,  with  a  wide  variety  of  validated  and
schematic,  easy  to  interpret  and  assimilate,  featuring  an  interactive  graphic  design
structure:  a)  learning  objectives;  b)  audiovisual  resource;  c)  synthesis  of  contents;  d)
Indicators  used:  Literacy  levels  will  be  measured  by  applying  aerroneous  facts  and  without  scientific  validation.
addressed  for  clarification  and  consolidation,  respecting  different  rhythms  of
Harbor.  It  will  be  all  the  more  impactful  the  greater  the  contact  with  the  experience  of  misophonia.
The  training  will  be  online,  being  possible  to  contact  the  team  for  clarification  of  doubts.  It  is  created  
by  the  first  author  of  the  poster  and  the  advisory  role  is  carried  out  by  the  remaining“Living  with  misophonia”  –  impact  on  functionality  and  strategies.  In  the  sessions  aresolution  is  to  seek  information  and  support  in  mutual  aid  groups,  where  they  are
individual  for  the  assimilation  of  contents,  allowing  to  go  back  and  consult  the
Target  population:  Initially,  the  target  audience  will  be  the  population  of  the  metropolitan  area  of
informative.information  available,  minimizing  implementation  costs.  interventions  with
The  proposed  program  arises  from  the  need  to  fill  the  aforementioned  gaps  and
estimated  duration  of  35  minutes:  “Misophonia:  what  is  it?”  –  introduction  to  condition  and  diagnosis
method  allows  the  description  of  the  condition  and  exploration  of  knowledge.  With  regard  to  themental  (Jorm,  2012;  Phillips  et  al.,  2019).  
with  people  with  misophonia;  3)  formative,  through  face-to-face  and  online  training  (Bonabiadapted  to  the  population,  expands  its  reach.  This  maximizes  the  quantity  and  quality  of  the
e  jovial.  
practical  exercises;  e)  complementary  resources.  It  is  divided  into  three  sessions,  with
vignette  questionnaire  on  misophonia  literacy  developed  for  this  program.  This  oneThe  use  of  a  digital  platform,  either  for  the  ease  of  access  or  for  the  absence  of
Project  description  and  organization:  The  training  consists  of  sessions  with  the  followinglearning.  Simple  and  accessible  language  is  used,  with  audiovisual  resources
authors.The  asynchronous  typology  enables  autonomous  learning,  making  the
et  al.,  2016;  Kutcher  et  al.,  2016b;  Ojio  et  al.,  2020).
testimonies  of  people  with  misophonia  will  be  presented  and  a  digital  kit  will  be  made  availableThe  use  of  technologies  and  the  internet  have  shown  positive  effects  on  health  literacy
includes  three  strategies:  1)  informative,  through  the  provision  of  content;  2)  contact
differential;  “How  to  deal  with  misophonia”  –  pharmacological  and  non-pharmacological  treatment;
71  Machine Translated by Google

stigma,  the  Portuguese  version  of  the  affective  and  cognitive  empathy  questionnaire  will  be  used
understanding  of  the  problems,  leading  to  an  optimization  of  the  search  for  help,  adherence  to  the(QCAE)(Queirós  et  al.,  2018).  A  pre-post  methodology  and  a  six-month  follow-up  are  adopted.
Bibliographic  referencesawareness  and  reduction  of  stigma.  In  the  population  with  misophonia,  it  is  intended  to  generate
quality  of  life.of  literacy  on  misophonia,  generating  an  improvement  in  attitudes,  resulting  from  the
participants,  increasing  the  credibility  of  the  impact  of  misophonia.  occupational  therapy
provides  involvement  in  meaningful  activities  lessening  the  impact  of  misophonia  onAs  expected  results,  we  intend  to  train  the  population  with  an  increaseResults
This  program  could  increase  literacy  and  condition  recognition  byapplication  of  satisfaction  questionnaires  to  the  participants.
Conclusionviews,  registrations,  dropouts  and  participants  who  complete  the  training,  in  addition  to  the
of  change.knowledge  learned  and  apply  it  in  their  daily  lives,  becoming  agents  that  promotetreatment  and  improved  management  of  the  condition  and  reduced  impact  (Kelly  et  al.,  2007;  
Kutcher  et  al.,  2016b;  Stuart,  2006).  Participants  are  expected  to  generalize  theafter  completion  of  training.  Indicators  such  as  the  number  of  hits  and
72  systematic  review.  BMC  Psychiatry,  10,  2010.  
Loureiro  LMJ,  Jorm  AF,  Rodrigues  MA,  dos  Santos  JCP,  Oliveira  RA,  Abrantes  ARD,  Sousa  CSF,  Gomes  SP  da  S,  Rosa  AG
dos  S,  Barroso  T,  Mendes  AMOC,  Ferreira  RO,  Apostolo  JLA,  Cardoso  DFB.  Mental  Health  Literacy:  empowering  people  
and  communities  to  act.  2014.Gulliver  A,  Griffiths  KM,  Christensen  H.  Perceived  barriers  and  facilitators  to  mental  health  help-seeking  in  young  people:  A  Journal  of  Clinical  and  Experimental  Neuropsychology,  42(1),  66–75,  2020.  
European  Child  and  Adolescent  Psychiatry,  25(6),  567–569,  2016b.  Frank  B,  Roszyk  M,  Hurley  L,  Drejaj  L,  McKay  D.  Inattention  in  misophonia:  Difficulties  achieving  and  maintaining  alertness.  
Kutcher  S,  Wei  Y,  Costa  S,  Gusmão  R,  Skokauskas  N,  Sourander  A.  Enhancing  mental  health  literacy  in  young  people.  Silva  J.  National  Epidemiological  Study  of  Mental  Health  1st  Report.  2013.
3,  pp.  154–158).  SAGE  Publications  Inc.  2016a.  Caldas  De  Almeida  M,  Xavier  M,  De  Investigation  -José  E,  Cardoso  G,  Pereira  MG,  Gusmão  R,  Corrêa  B,  Gago  J,  Talina  M,
187(7),  1–5,  2007.  
Kutcher  S,  Wei  Y,  Coniglio  C.  Mental  health  literacy:  Past,  present,  and  future.  In  Canadian  Journal  of  Psychiatry  (Vol.  61,  Issue  Brout  JJ,  Edelstein  M,  Erfanian  M,  Mannino  M,  Miller  LJ,  Rouw  R,  Kumar  S,  Rosenthal  MZ.  Investigating  misophonia:  A  review  of  the  
empirical  literature,  clinical  implications,  and  a  research  agenda.  In  Frontiers  in  Neuroscience  (Vol.  12,  Issue  FEB).  
Frontiers  Media  S.A.,  2018.  help-seeking,  and  perceived  need  as  predictors  of  mental  health  service  use:  A  longitudinal  study.  Journal  of  Nervous  and  
Mental  Disease,  204(4),  321–324,  2016.  
Kelly  CM,  Jorm  AF,  Wright  A.  Improving  mental  health  literacy  as  a  strategy  to  facilitate  early  intervention  for  mental  disorders.  Bonabi  H,  Müller  M,  Ajdacic-Gross  V,  Eisele  J,  Rodgers  S,  Seifritz  E,  Rössler  W,  Rüsch  N.  Mental  health  literacy,  attitudes  to
Jorm  AF.  Mental  health  literacy;  empowering  the  community  to  take  action  for  better  mental  health.  American  Psychologist,  67(3),  
231–243,  2012.  Machine Translated by Google

Ojio  Y,  Mori  R,  Matsumoto  K,  Nemoto  T,  Sumiyoshi  T,  Fujita  H,  Morimoto  T,  Nishizono-Maher  A,  Fuji  C,  Mizuno  M.  An
innovative  approach  to  adolescent  mental  health  in  Japan:  School-based  education  about  mental  health  literacy.  Early  Intervention  in  
Psychiatry.  2020.  
Siepsiak  M,  Dragan  W.  Misophonia  -  A  review  of  research  results  and  theoretical  concepts.  Psychiatria  Polska,  53(2),  447–458,  Schröder  A,  Vulink  N,  Denys  D.  Misophonia:  Diagnostic  Criteria  for  a  New  Psychiatric  Disorder.  PLoS  ONE,  8(1),  2013.  
room/fact-sheets/detail/mental-health-strengthening-our-response,  consultado  em  19-05-2021,  2018  Queirós  A,  Fernandes  E,  Reniers  R,  Sampaio  A,  Coutinho  J,  Seara-Cardoso  A.  Psychometric  properties  of  the  questionnaire  of  cognitive  and  
affective  empathy  in  a  Portuguese  sample.  PLoS  ONE,  13(6),  1–14,  2018.  
scoping  review.  In  BMC  Psychiatry  (Vol.  15,  Issue  1).  BioMed  Central  Ltd.  2015.  
World  Health  Organization.  Mental  health:  strengthening  our  response.  Fact  Sheet.  Disponível  em:  https://www.who.int/news  Potgieter  I,  MacDonald  C,  Partridge  L,  Cima  R,  Sheldrake  J,  Hoare  DJ.  Misophonia:  A  scoping  review  of  research.  In  Journal  of  Clinical  Psychology  
(Vol.  75,  Issue  7,  pp.  1203–1218).  John  Wiley  and  Sons  Inc.  2019.  576,  2019.  
Wei  Y,  McGrath  PJ,  Hayden  J,  Kutcher  S.  Mental  health  literacy  measures  evaluating  knowledge,  attitudes,  and  help-seeking:  A  Phillips  EA,  Gordeev  VS,  Schreyögg  J.  Effectiveness  of  occupational  e-mental  health  interventions:  A  systematic  review  and  meta-analysis  of  
randomized  controlled  trials.  Scandinavian  Journal  of  Work,  Environment  and  Health,  45(6),  560–  
Taylor  S.  Misophonia:  A  new  mental  disorder?  Medical  Hypotheses,  103,  109–117,  2017.  educational  interventions  in  UK  secondary  schools.  British  Journal  of  Psychiatry,  182,  342–346,  2003.  
Psychiatry,  51(10),  647–653,  2006.  Stuart  H.  Reaching  out  to  high  school  youth:  The  effectiveness  of  a  video-based  antistigma  program.  Canadian  Journal  of  Old  VP,  Toulmin  H,  T  GRAT,  Huxley  P,  Farmer  P,  Aham  TGR.  Reducing  psychiatric  stigma  and  discrimination :  evaluation  of  
2019.  
73  Machine Translated by Google

2  *Ana  Luisa  Lopes1 ;  *Aline  Patriota  Araújo1 ;  António  Marques1,2;  Paula  Portugal1,2;
74  Leonor  Miranda1 ;  Filipa  Campos1,2;  RaquelSimões  de  Almeida1,2;  Sara  Sousa1,  2;  Vitor
Simões-Silva1,2Lifestyle  Redefining  Programme  for  Women  Recently  Diagnosed  with  Breast  Lifestyle  Redefining  Program  for  Diagnosed  Women
Cancer  Recent  Breast  Cancer
Ana  Luisa  Lopes:  0000-0003-1929-1867;  Aline  Patriota  Araújo:  0000-0002-2703-816X;  António  Marques:  0000-0002-8656-5023;
Keywords:  Breast  cancer,  lifestyles,  well-being,  quality  of  life,  Occupational  Therapyparticipant,  through  holistic  and  psychoeducational  approaches,  the  creation  of  a  mutual  help  group,  the  application  of  the
occupational  therapists,  and  assessment  instruments  validated  for  the  Portuguese  population.  Results:  It  is  expected  that  after  *Corresponding  author:  Ana  Luísa  Lopes:  10170088@ess.ipp.pt,  Aline  Patriota  Araújo:  10200982@ess.ipp.pt,  Escola  Superior  de  
Saúde  do  Politécnico  do  Porto
pilot  is  intended  to  provide  essential  tools  to  improve  the  perception  of  well-being  and  quality  of  life.  material  and
dimensions  of  lifestyles  in  this  population.  In  this  way,  after  evaluating  its  impact,  it  is  possible  to  change  and
a  mutual-help  group,  the  implementation  of  the  programme,  the  multidisciplinary  team  and  the  invitation  of  professionals  a  healthy  and  personalized  lifestyle,  as  well  as  involvement  and  participation  in  meaningful  and  fulfilling  activities
needs  in  each  dimension  of  lifestyles  is  important.  Objective:  This  pilot  programme  aims  to  provide  essential  tools  to  improve  Psychosocial  Rehabilitation  Laboratory  of  the  Polytechnic  of  Porto,  Porto,  Portugal
An  intervention  focused  on  their  needs  in  each  dimension  of  life  styles  is  important.  Purpose:  With  this  program
Conclusion:  The  present  program  is  a  pilot  program  since  there  is  no  program  in  Portugal  that  intervenes  in  allSimões  de  Almeida:  0000-0003-4703-1712;  Sara  Sousa:  0000-0002-3639-8634;  Vitor  Simões-Silva:  0000-0003-2831-9729
The  same  is  carried  out  through  questionnaires,  created  by  the  founding  occupational  therapists,  and  through  assessment  instruments.
Introduction:  In  Portugal,  breast  cancer  is  the  most  prevalent  cancer  disease  in  women  and  is  associated  with  changes  in  their  
intervention,  prioritising  the  needs  and  each  participant,  through  the  holistic  and  psycho-educational  approaches,  the  creation  of  1School  of  Health  of  the  Polytechnic  of  Porto,  Porto,  Portugal
Introduction:  In  Portugal,  breast  cancer  is  the  most  prevalent  oncological  disease  in  women,  being  associated  withPaula  Portugal:  0000-0001-9689-4050;  Leonor  Miranda:  0000-0003-2882-0919;  Filipa  Campos:  0000-0001-6550-7660;  Raquel
program,  the  multidisciplinary  team  and  the  invitation  of  professionals  specialized  in  different  areas.  The  evaluation  of  the  impact  of
Abstract  
the  programme,  awareness  of  the  importance  of  a  healthy  and  personalised  lifestyle,  as  well  as  engagement  and  participation  in  
meaningful  and  satisfying  activities  will  be  increased  through  the  integration  and  automation  of  behavioural  changes  into  each  ORCID  do  autor:  
Methods:  The  program  is  based  on  an  individualized  and  group  intervention,  prioritizing  the  needs  of  each  individual.
adaptation  of  its  interventions  to  increase  the  benefits  and  reduce  the  risks  of  its  implementation.
specialised  in  different  areas.  The  evaluation  of  its  impact  is  carried  out  through  questionnaires,  created  by  the  founding  in  their  lifestyles.  The  report  of  decreased  quality  of  life  and  well-being  is  common  in  this  population,  being  therefore
perceptions  of  well-being  and  quality  of  life.  Material  and  Methods:  The  programme  is  based  on  individualised  and  group  be  increased,  through  the  integration  and  automation  of  behavioral  changes  in  the  daily  life  of  each  participant.Summary
validated  for  the  Portuguese  population.  Results:  It  is  expected  that  after  the  program,  awareness  of  the  importance  of
lifestyles.  The  report  of  decreased  quality  of  life  and  well-being  is  common  in  this  population,  so  an  intervention  focused  on  their  Machine Translated by Google

increase  the  benefits  and  reduce  the  risks  of  its  implementation.  participant's  daily  life.  Conclusion:  This  is  a  pilot  programme  since  there  is  no  programme  in  Portugal  that  intervenes  in  all  
Keywords:  Breast  cancer,  lifestyles,  well-being,  quality  of  life,  Occupational  Therapy  dimensions  of  lifestyles  in  this  population.  Thus,  after  assessing  its  impact,  it  is  possible  to  change  and  adapt  its  interventions  to  
2016).  These  diseases  have  a  multidimensional  impact  on  the  physical,  social,
treatment  goals  are  to  eradicate  the  tumor  from  the  breast  and  lymph  nodes,  and  to  preventand  1,864  deaths  from  it  (World  Health  Organization,  2020).  According  to  the  LeagueIt  is  estimated  that  the  number  of  diagnosed  cases  and  associated  deaths  will  increase
Pirayesh  Islamian,  2017;  Tosello  et  al.,  2018).  In  Portugal,  breast  cancer  is  also  the
lobes  that  supply  milk  to  the  ducts  (Sharma  et  al.,  2010).  The  diagnosis  of  breast  cancersex,  estrogen  levels,  genetic  mutations,  an  unhealthy  lifestyle,  among
a  number  of  side  effects  that  can  affect  women's  quality  of  life.  THEOrganization,  2020).  Oncological  diseases  are  the  main  causes  of  death  in  the  world,
of  all  types  of  diagnosed  oncological  diseases  (Akram  et  al.,  2017;  Shamsi  and
breasts,  being  more  common  to  appear  in  the  inner  lining  of  the  milk  ducts  orOncological  diseases  are  characterized  by  the  abnormal  growth  of  cells  that
disease  (Berntsen  et  al.,  2017;  Miguel  et  al.,  2020).
only  1%  of  all  cases  (Liga  Portuguesa  Contra  o  Cancro,  2021).
prolong  life  and  alleviate  symptoms  (Waks  and  Winer,  2019).mortality  in  women  worldwide.  It  is  estimated  that  annually,  they  are  diagnosedreaches,  annually,  high  numbers  of  new  cases  (Roy  and  Saikia,  2016).  In  Portugal,Introduction
emotional,  psychological  and  biological  aspects  associated  with  the  diagnosis,  treatment  and  progression  of
Portuguese  Against  Cancer,  breast  cancer  in  males  represents
its  occurrence.  In  the  case  of  metastatic  breast  cancer,  treatment  goals  areexponentially,  according  to  population  growth  and  aging  (Torre  et  al.,
more  prevalent  in  women,  and  in  2020  there  was  an  increase  of  7,041  new  cases
can  be  non-metastatic  or  metastatic.  In  non-metastatic  breast  cancer,  the  mainin  2020,  there  was  an  increase  of  60,467  new  cases  and  1,864  deaths  (World  Health
1.67  million  new  cases  of  breast  cancer  worldwide,  thus  representing  25%
others  (Sun  et  al.,  2017;  Winters  et  al.,  2017).  This  type  of  cancer  originates  in  the  tissues
75  form  a  tumor  in  an  organ  or  body  structure,  being  a  type  of  chronic  disease  that
Breast  cancer  is  the  most  frequent  oncological  disease  and  the  main  cause  of
The  risk  factors  associated  with  the  onset  of  breast  cancer  are  age,
With  regard  to  treatments,  both  surgery  and  chemotherapy  causeMachine Translated by Google

Spiegel,  2009;  Helms  et  al.,  2008;  Moreira  and  Canavarro,  2010;  Ogden  and  Lindridge,  2008).
preventive  measures  may  be  useful,  such  as  a  balanced  diet,  physical  activity  and
and  Charak,  2019;  Lo  Martire  et  al.,  2020;  Peng  et  al.,  2021).  This  substantially  affects
and  Pereira,  2018).  hormonal  fluctuations.  Surgery  can  cause  scarring  and  disfigurement,  which  can  lead  to
Recent  literature  shows  that  90%  to  95%  of  breast  cancer  cases  are
2008;  Li  et  al.,  2012;  Stagl  et  al.,  2015a;  Stagl  et  al.,  2015b).
disease  adaptation,  reduction  of  negative  emotional  states,  promotion  of  reflection  andparticipation,  it  is  important  to  have  an  intervention  focused  on  occupation  (Ho  and  Siu,  2018;chemotherapy  can  contribute  to  the  early  onset  of  menopause,  hair  loss,  fatigue  and
Klassen  et  al.,  2017;  Rangel  et  al.,  2019).
negative  mood,  promoting  relaxation  (Antoni  and  Dhabhar,  2019;  Jacobsen  and  Jim,
treatment  process,  has  a  positive  impact  on  physical  health,  acceptance  andpeople  with  breast  cancer  are  fatigue,  cognitive  deficits,  sexual  dysfunction,
avoided  with  a  good  lifestyle  (Ortega  et  al.,  2020).
Rogers  et  al.,  2017;  Soucise  et  al.,  2017).
daily  life,  body  image  dissatisfaction  and  sexual  problems  related  to  activity  andstiffness,  heaviness,  swelling,  pain,  sensory  and  functional  changes  and  chronic  complications  occur
in  terms  of  quality  of  life,  and  when  in  excess,  it  can  influence  the  onset,  progression  and  metastasis  
of  the  tumor  (Antoni  and  Dhabhar,  2019;  Huang  and  Shi,  2016).  IT  ISAs  for  the  side  effects  of  the  treatments,  the  most  frequently  reported  by  the
of  weight.  There  are  experts  who  argue  that  1  in  4  cases  of  breast  cancer  can  be
clinical  condition  and  may  be  associated  with  a  higher  mortality  rate  (Holding  et  al.,  2020;
Their  quality  of  life  is  negatively  affected  by  aspects  such  as  the  loss  of  routinediminished  perceptions  of  physical  attractiveness,  femininity,  and  overall  body  image  (Fobair  and
Stress  can  also  affect  several  dimensions,  such  as  sleep  (Benhamrelated  to  lifestyle  and  environmental  factors,  which  may  indicate  that,
redefining  the  personal  situation  (Da  Silva,  2020;  Dias  et  al.,  2017;  Goyal  et  al.,  2019;  Paredesof  treatment,  such  as  movement  limitation  and  muscle  dysfunction  (Gursen  et  al.,  2021;
Good  stress  management  is  important  in  order  to  reduce  pain,  depression,  anxiety  and
Tester  and  Foss,  2017).  The  presence  of  spirituality  and  social  relationships  throughout  thedepression,  anxiety  and  distress  (Brandenbarg  et  al.,  2019).  In  addition  to  these,  you  can
With  a  breast  cancer  diagnosis,  stress  can  have  a  negative  impact.
Based  on  the  fact  that  sleep  is  a  restorative  occupation  and  has  an  impact  on
76  Machine Translated by Google

food  combined  with  the  practice  of  physical  activity,  has  multiple  benefits,  both  to  the
and  Duker,  2016;  Wallis  et  al.,  2020).
application  of  the  above-mentioned  standardized  assessment  instruments,  questionnaires
founders,  which  includes  informative  content  on  different  topics  and  activitiesaffected  in  sexuality  are  hormonal  changes,  which  can  be  influenced
of  the  function,  compensation  of  activities  and  adaptation  of  the  environment,  considering  the  interaction
2010)  to  assess  quality  of  life  and  the  Subjective  Well-Being  Scale  (Albuquerque  and
different  strategic  options  were  used:time  and  occupation,  spirituality  and  social  relationships,  sexuality,  food  andsexual  functioning,  such  as  lubrication,  orgasm,  arousal,  desire  and  pleasure.  One  of  the  factors
facilitate  activity,  promote  independence  and  quality  of  life  through  restoration
program,  several  assessment  instruments  such  as  the  WHOQOL-BREF  (Canavarro  et  al.,
In  order  to  achieve  significant  changes  in  each  of  the  dimensions,Montagnese  et  al.,  2021).
The  target  population  is  women  in  SSA  in  the  city  of  Porto,  recruited  for  convenience
The  program  includes  two  types  of  intervention,  one  being  individualized  and  the  other  in  a  group.
77  barriers  and  limitations  in  involvement  and  participation  in  the  various  areas  of  occupation,  through
In  the  initial  phase  of  the  program,  an  individual  evaluation  will  be  carried  out,  where  it  will  be  appliedlevel  of  prevention  and  symptom  control  (Carayol  et  al.,  2019;  McTiernan,  2018;
Material  and  methods
prepared  by  the  team  and  filling  out  checklists.
recommended  to  do  at  home.positively  by  adopting  a  healthy  diet  (de  Roon  et  al.,  2018).  A  good  one
Tróccoli,  2004)  to  assess  well-being.  The  evaluation  is  carried  out  through  three  methods:of  these  factors  (Baxter  et  al.,  2017;  Pergolotti  et  al.,  2016;  Petruseviciene  et  al.,  2018;  Sleight
  Use  of  an  application,  previously  built  by  occupational  therapistsof  a  holistic  approach.  This  intervention  aims  to  restructure  the  occupations,
a  semi-structured  motivational  interview.  They  will  also  be  applied,  at  the  beginning  and  at  the  end  of  the
physical  activity.During  the  intervention,  the  main  role  of  the  occupational  therapist  is  to  manage  the
from  the  indication  of  the  associations  that  work  with  this  population.
(Loyola  et  al.,  2017),  focused  on  each  of  the  seven  dimensions,  namely,  stress,  sleep,Machine Translated by Google

Liamputtong,  2016).
corresponds  to  the  evaluation  of  the  impact  provided  in  the  program,  with  a  duration  of  two
satisfactorily  for  them;  feel  satisfied  with  their  sexuality;  adopt
78  (Guarino  et  al.,  2020;  Izydorczyk  et  al.,  2018;  Loh  and  Musa,  2015;  WU  et  al.,  2018).
duration  eleven  months.  Then  the  third  phase  consists  of  consolidation,  monitoring  and
each  one;  are  able  to  manage  their  daily  routine  in  order  to  achieve  and  maintain  a
assessment  of  the  impact  of  the  same,  it  is  possible  to  change  and  adapt  the  interventions  of  theConclusion  Use  of  a  psychoeducational  approach  to  the  themes  of  the  program
complete,  the  sensitization  and  behavioral  change  phase  begins,  with  the
sleep,  adopting  sleep  hygiene  practices  appropriate  to  the  needs  and  characteristics  of
intervene  in  all  dimensions  of  lifestyles  in  this  population.  In  this  way,  afterSpecialized  professionals.
with  the  relationship  between  the  different  dimensions  of  lifestyles  in  breast  cancer.
existing  nutritional  recommendations  and  include  physical  activity  in  their  daily  routine,  taking  intoconsists  of  presenting  the  program  and  carrying  out  an  individual  assessment  of  the
Participants  are  expected  to  adopt  strategies  and  tools  for  better  management  Support  from  a  multidisciplinary  team  with  the  participation  of  guests  such  as
weeks.  The  planning  was  carried  out  in  a  sequence  of  activities  that  is  in  accordance
a  healthy  and  diversified  diet  suited  to  their  needs,  according  to  the  Creation  of  a  social  support  network  among  the  participants  (Suwankhong  and
satisfactory  occupational  balance;  maintain  involvement  in  a  supportive  social  network,automation  of  acquired  behaviors,  lasting  three  months.  the  last  phase
even  to  increase  the  benefits  and  reduce  the  risks  of  its  implementation.needs  of  each  participant,  with  a  duration  of  two  weeks.  As  soon  as  the  evaluation
stress,  suitable  for  different  situations;  acquire  a  better  quantity  and  quality  of
The  present  program  is  a  pilot  program  since  there  is  no  program  in  Portugal  thatThe  program  lasts  15  months  and  is  divided  into  four  phases.  the  first  phase
Results
taking  into  account  their  current  clinical  condition  and  the  stage  of  treatment  they  are  in.Machine Translated by Google

Bibliographic  references
79  2004  
Canavarro  M,  Vaz  Serra  A,  Pereira  M,  Simões  M,  Quartilho  M,  Rijo  D  and  Paredes  T.  WHOQOL  available  for  Portugal:
Goyal  NG,  Ip  EH,  Salsman  JM  and  Avis  NE.  Spirituality  and  physical  health  status:  a  longitudinal  examination  of  reciprocal  effects  in  breast  
cancer  survivors.  Support  Care  Cancer  27:2229-2235,  2019  
activity:  An  investigation  into  bidirectionality  using  longitudinal  time-use  data.  Proceedings  of  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences  
117:21209-21217,  2020  
2012  
Biobehav  Rev  117:65-77,  2020  
Miguel  I,  Freire  J  and  Capelas  ML.  Quality  of  life  and  burden  of  the  main  informal  caregiver  of  cancer  patients  at  different  stages  of  treatment.  
Portuguese  Journal  of  Oncology  3:13-20,  2020
Cavalcanti  E,  Thomas  G,  Cianniello  D,  Pinto  M,  De  Laurentiis  M,  Pacilio  C,  Rinaldo  M,  #039,  Aiuto  M,  Serraino  D,Akram  M,  Iqbal  M,  Daniyal  M  and  Khan  AU.  Awareness  and  current  knowledge  of  breast  cancer.  Biol  Res  50:33,  2017  
Ho  ECM  and  Siu  AMH.  Occupational  Therapy  Practice  in  Sleep  Management:  A  Review  of  Conceptual  Models  and  Research  BMC  Cancer  17,  2017  
Research  Journal:  Care  is  Fundamental  Online  9,  2017
patients  receiving  different  treatment  regimes.  J  Cachexia  Sarcopenia  Muscle  8:305-316,  2017  
Nursing  26,  2017Helms  RL,  O'Hea  EL  and  Corso  M.  Body  image  issues  in  women  with  breast  cancer.  Psychology,  Health  and  medicine  13:313-  
Jacobsen  PB  and  Jim  HS.  Psychosocial  interventions  for  anxiety  and  depression  in  adult  cancer  patients:  achievements  and  
Loh  SY  and  Musa  AN.  Methods  to  improve  rehabilitation  of  patients  following  breast  cancer  surgery:  a  review  of  systematic  
Massarut  S,  Caggiari  L,  Evangelista  C,  Steffan  A,  Catalano  F,  Banna  GL,  Scandurra  G,  Ferraù  F,  Rossello  R,Berntsen  S,  Aaronson  NK,  Buffart  L,  Börjeson  S,  Demmelmaier  I,  Hellbom  M,  Hojman  P,  Igelström  H,  Johansson  B,  Pingel  R,  Raastad  T,  
Velikova  G,  Åsenlöf  P  and  Nordin  K.  Design  of  a  randomized  controlled  trial  of  physical  training  and  cancer  (Phys-Can)  –  the  impact  
of  exercise  intensity  on  cancer  related  fatigue,  quality  of  life  and  disease  outcome.  
experience  of  everyday  activities  Woman  with  mastectomy  for  breast  cancer:  experience  of  everyday  activities.
Evidence.  Occupational  Therapy  International  2018:1-12,  2018  cancer.  Cancer  125:1417-1431,  2019  
Carayol  M,  Ninot  G,  Senesse  P,  Bleuse  JP,  Gourgou  S,  Sancho-Garnier  H,  Sari  C,  Romieu  I,  Romieu  G  and  Jacot  W.  Short  and  long-term  
impact  of  adapted  physical  activity  and  diet  counseling  during  adjuvant  breast  cancer  therapy:  the  "APAD1"  randomized  controlled  
trial.  BMC  Cancer  19:737,  2019  
women  with  breast  cancer:  A  systematic  review  and  meta-analysis.  Journal  of  clinical  medicine  9:209,  2020  
protocol  for  a  randomized  controlled  trial.  Trials  17,  2016  
Klassen  O,  Schmidt  ME,  Ulrich  CM,  Schneeweiss  A,  Potthoff  K,  Steindorf  K  and  Wiskemann  J.  Muscle  strength  in  breast  cancer
Lo  Martire  V,  Caruso  D,  Palagini  L,  Zoccoli  G  and  Bastianini  S.  Stress  &  sleep:  A  relationship  lasting  a  lifetime.  NeurosciAm  J  Occup  Ther  71:7103090010P7103090011-7103090010P7103090017,  2017  
de  Roon  M,  May  AM,  McTiernan  A,  Scholten  RJ,  Peeters  PH,  Friedenreich  CM  and  Monninkhof  EM.  Effect  of  exercise  and/or  reduced  calorie  
dietary  interventions  on  breast  cancer-related  endogenous  sex  hormones  in  healthy  postmenopausal  women.  Breast  Cancer  Research  
20:1-16,  2018  
Cubisino  S,  Poletto  L,  Martinuzzo  V,  Coluccia  S,  Esindi  N,  Nocerino  F,  Minopoli  A,  Grilli  B,  Fiorillo  PC,  Cuomo  M,Antoni  MH  and  Dhabhar  FS.  The  impact  of  psychosocial  stress  and  stress  management  on  immune  responses  in  patients  with  
Development  of  the  World  Health  Organization's  quality  of  life  assessment  instruments  (WHOQOL  100  and  WHOQOL-BREF).  Quality  
of  life  and  health:  An  approach  from  the  perspective  of  the  World  Health  Organization:171-190,  2010
Guarino  A,  Polini  C,  Forte  G,  Favieri  F,  Boncompagni  I  and  Casagrande  M.  The  effectiveness  of  psychological  treatments  in  
Huang  J  and  Shi  L.  The  effectiveness  of  mindfulness-based  stress  reduction  (MBSR)  for  survivors  of  breast  cancer:  study  
Portuguese  League  Against  Cancer.  Portuguese  League  Against  Cancer,  2021
Loyola  EACd,  Borges  ML,  Magalhães  PAPd,  Areco  FdS,  Yochimochi  LTB  and  Panobianco  MS.  REHABILITATION  GROUP:  BENEFITS  AND  
BARRIERS  IN  THE  PERSPECTIVE  OF  WOMEN  WITH  BREAST  CANCER.  Texto  &  Contexto  -  
Montagnese  C,  Porciello  G,  Vitale  S,  Palumbo  E,  Crispo  A,  Grimaldi  M,  Calabrese  I,  Pica  R,  Prete  M,  Falzone  L,  Libra  M,Albuquerque  AS  and  Troccoli  BT.  Development  of  a  subjective  well-being  scale.  Psychology:  Theory  and  Research  20:153-164,
Fobair  P  and  Spiegel  D.  Concerns  about  sexuality  after  breast  cancer.  The  Cancer  Journal  15:19-26,  2009  Brandenbarg  D,  Maass  SWMC,  Geerse  OP,  Stegmann  ME,  Handberg  C,  Schroevers  MJ  and  Duijts  SFA.  A  systematic  review  on  the  prevalence  
of  symptoms  of  depression,  anxiety  and  distress  in  longÿterm  cancer  survivors:  Implications  for  primary  care.  European  Journal  of  
Cancer  Care  28:e13086,  2019  
Holding  BC,  Sundelin  T,  Schiller  H,  Åkerstedt  T,  Kecklund  G  and  Axelsson  J.  Sleepiness,  sleep  duration,  and  human  social  
Li  M,  Fitzgerald  P  and  Rodin  G.  Evidence-based  treatment  of  depression  in  patients  with  cancer.  J  Clin  Oncol  30:1187-1196,  Benham  G  and  Charak  R.  Stress  and  sleep  remain  significant  predictors  of  health  after  controlling  for  negative  affect.  Stress  Health  35:59-68,  
2019  
Dias  LV,  Muniz  RM,  Viegas  ADC,  Cardoso  DH,  Amaral  DEDd  and  Pinto  BK.  Mastectomized  woman  in  breast  cancer:  
325,  2008  
challenges.  CA:  a  cancer  journal  for  clinicians  58:214-230,  2008  
reviews.  Breast  Cancer:  Targets  and  Therapy  7:81,  2015  
McTiernan  A.  Weight,  physical  activity  and  breast  cancer  survival.  Proceedings  of  the  Nutrition  Society  77:403-411,  2018  
Antonelli  G,  Guerra  G,  Farina  A,  Messina  F,  Riccardi  G,  Gatti  D,  Jenkins  DJA,  Celentano  E,  Botti  G  and  AugustinBaxter  MF,  Newman  R,  Longpre  SM  and  Polo  KM.  Occupational  Therapy's  Role  in  Cancer  Survivorship  as  a  Chronic  Condition.  
Da  Silva  DA.  The  cancer  patient  and  spirituality:  integrative  review.  Cuidarte  Magazine  11,  2020
Gursen  C,  Dylke  ES,  Moloney  N,  Meeus  M,  De  Vrieze  T,  Devoogdt  N  and  De  Groef  A.  Selfÿreported  signs  and  symptoms  of  secondary  upper  
limb  lymphoedema  related  to  breast  cancer  treatment:  Systematic  review.  European  Journal  of  Cancer  Care:e13440,  2021  
Izydorczyk  B,  Kwapniewska  A,  Lizinczyk  S  and  Sitnik-Warchulska  K.  Psychological  resilience  as  a  protective  factor  for  the  body  image  in  post-
mastectomy  women  with  breast  cancer.  International  journal  of  environmental  research  and  public  health  15:1181,  2018  Machine Translated by Google

Ogden  J  and  Lindridge  L.  The  impact  of  breast  scarring  on  perceptions  of  attractiveness:  an  experimental  study.  Journal  of  
Petruseviciene  D,  Surmaitiene  D,  Baltaduoniene  D  and  Lendraitiene  E.  Effect  of  Community-Based  Occupational  Therapy  on  
Rev  Cent  East  Eur  20:45-48,  2017  
Tester  NJ  and  Foss  JJ.  Sleep  as  an  Occupational  Need.  American  Journal  of  Occupational  Therapy  
Sci  151:1-32,  2017  Nutrients  13:136,  2021  
Pergolotti  M,  Williams  GR,  Campbell  C,  Munoz  LA  and  Muss  HB.  Occupational  Therapy  for  Adults  With  Cancer:  Why  It  Matters.  
Roy  PS  and  Saikia  BJ.  Cancer  and  cure:  A  critical  analysis.  Indian  J  Cancer  53:441-442,  2016  
Sun  YS,  Zhao  Z,  Yang  ZN,  Xu  F,  Lu  HJ,  Zhu  ZY,  Shi  W,  Jiang  J,  Yao  PP  and  Zhu  HP.  Risk  Factors  and  Preventions  of  Breast  Cancer.  
Int  J  Biol  Sci  13:1387-1397,  2017  
journal  67:172-194,  2020  164:169-178,  2017  
Rev  3:CD011276,  2018  LSA.  Quality  of  Life  in  Women  Diagnosed  with  Breast  Cancer  after  a  12-Month  Treatment  of  Lifestyle  Modifications.  
After  Primary  Therapy:  A  Structural  Equation  Model.  J  Nurs  Res  29:e144,  2021  
Rogers  LQ,  Courneya  KS,  Oster  RA,  Anton  PM,  Robbs  RS,  Forero  A  and  McAuley  E.  Physical  Activity  and  Sleep  Quality  in  Breast  
Cancer  Survivors.  Medicine  &  Science  in  Sports  &  Exercise  49:2009-2015,  2017  
Stagl  JM,  Bouchard  LC,  Lechner  SC,  Blomberg  BB,  Gudenkauf  LM,  Jutagir  DR,  Glueck  S,  Derhagopian  RP,  Carver  CS  and  Antoni  
MH.  Longÿterm  psychological  benefits  of  cognitiveÿbehavioral  stress  management  for  women  with  breast  cancer:  11ÿ
year  followÿup  of  a  randomized  controlled  trial.  Cancer  121:1873-1881,  2015b  Ortega  MA,  Friar-Martinez  O,  Garcia-Montero  C,  Pekarek  L,  Pebble  LG,  Castellanos  AJ,  Sanchez-Trujillo  L,  Garcia
Health-Related  Quality  of  Life  and  Engagement  in  Meaningful  Activities  of  Women  with  Breast  Cancer.  Occup  Ther  Int  
Sleight  AG  and  Duker  LIS.  Toward  a  broader  role  for  occupational  therapy  in  supportive  oncology  care.  American  Journal  of  
Occupational  Therapy  70:7004360030p7004360031-7004360030p7004360038,  2016  
Torre  LA,  Siegel  RL,  Ward  EM  and  Jemal  A.  Global  Cancer  Incidence  and  Mortality  Rates  and  Trends--An  Update.  Cancer  
Epidemiol  Biomarkers  Prev  25:16-27,  2016  
Wallis  A,  Meredith  P  and  Stanley  M.  Cancer  care  and  occupational  therapy:  A  scoping  review.  Australian  occupational  therapy  Paredes  AC  and  Pereira  MG.  Spirituality,  Distress  and  Posttraumatic  Growth  in  Breast  Cancer  Patients.  J  Relig  Health  57:1606-  
Rangel  J,  Tomas  MT  and  Fernandes  B.  Physical  activity  and  physiotherapy:  perception  of  women  breast  cancer  survivors.  
WU  P-H,  CHEN  S-W,  HUANG  W-T,  CHANG  S-C  and  HSU  M-C.  Effects  of  a  Psychoeducational  Intervention  in  Patients  With  Breast  
Cancer  Undergoing  Chemotherapy.  Journal  of  Nursing  Research  26:266-279,  2018  Health  Psychology  13:303-310,  2008  
1617,  2018  
Sharma  GN,  Dave  R,  Sanadya  J,  Sharma  P  and  Sharma  KK.  Various  types  and  management  of  breast  cancer:  an  overview.  J  Adv  
Pharm  Technol  Res  1:109-126,  2010  
72:7201347010p7201347011-7201347010p7201347014,  2017
World  Health  Organization.  Globocan  Portugal,  2020  Moreira  H  and  Canavarro  MC.  A  longitudinal  study  about  the  body  image  and  psychosocial  adjustment  of  breast  cancer  patients  during  
the  course  of  the  disease.  European  journal  of  oncology  nursing  14:263-270,  2010  
Shamsi  M  and  Pirayesh  Islamian  J.  Breast  cancer:  early  diagnosis  and  effective  treatment  by  drug  delivery  tracing.  Nucl  Med  The  Oncologist  21:314-319,  2016  
Suwankhong  D  and  Liamputtong  P.  Social  Support  and  Women  Living  With  Breast  Cancer  in  the  South  of  Thailand.  J  Nurs  
Scholarsh  48:39-47,  2016  
Winters  S,  Martin  C,  Murphy  D  and  Shokar  NK.  Breast  Cancer  Epidemiology,  Prevention,  and  Screening.  Prog  Mol  Biol  Transl  Peng  HL,  Hsueh  HW,  Chang  YH  and  Li  RH.  The  Mediation  and  Suppression  Effect  of  Demoralization  in  Breast  Cancer  Patients  
Breast  Cancer  26:333-338,  2019  
Stagl  JM,  Antoni  MH,  Lechner  SC,  Bouchard  LC,  Blomberg  BB,  Glück  S,  Derhagopian  RP  and  Carver  CS.  Randomized  
controlled  trial  of  cognitive  behavioral  stress  management  in  breast  cancer:  A  brief  report  of  effects  on  5-year  
depressive  symptoms.  Health  psychology  34:176,  2015a  
Waks  AG  and  Winer  EP.  Breast  cancer  treatment:  a  review.  Jama  321:288-300,  2019  Honduvilla  N,  Álvarez-Mon  M,  Buján  J,  Zapico  Á,  Lahera  G  and  Álvarez-Mon  MA.  Physical  Activity  as  an  Imperative  Support  
in  Breast  Cancer  Management.  Cancers  (Basel)  13,  2020
2018:6798697,  2018  
Soucise  A,  Vaughn  C,  Thompson  CL,  Millen  AE,  Freudenheim  JL,  Wactawski-Wende  J,  Phipps  AI,  Hale  L,  Qi  L  and  Ochs  Balcom  
HM.  Sleep  quality,  duration,  and  breast  cancer  aggressiveness.  Breast  Cancer  Research  and  Treatment  
Tosello  G,  Torloni  MR,  Mota  BS,  Neeman  T  and  Riera  R.  Breast  surgery  for  metastatic  breast  cancer.  Cochrane  Database  Syst  
80  Machine Translated by Google

The  MOHOST  in  the  characterisation  of  the  client  of  Occupational  Therapy  in  The  MOHOST  in  the  characterization  of  the  Occupational  Therapy  in  Health  client
Mental  at  Centro  Hospitalar  do  Baixo  Vouga-Portugal
Mental  Health  in  the  Baixo  Vouga-Portugal  Hospital  Center
Filomena  Santos3,  ,  Mariana  Cura3 Pleasures  Brave  3
81  ,  *Elisabete  Roldão1,2;  Ana  Simões1 ;  Beatriz  Pereira1 ;  Catarina  Filipe1 ;  Joana  Fabião1 ;
Jaime  Moreira  Ribeiro1,2;
1School  of  Health,  Polytechnic  of  Leiria,  Leiria,  Portugal
Abstract  
Health  area,  as  it  indicates  the  psychopathological  interference  in  the  patient's  roles,  routines,  habits,  participation  and  usefulness  of  MOHOST  in  delineating  the  profile  of  users  of  the  Day  Hospital  (HD)  in  the  Department  of  Psychiatry  and  Mental  HealthIntroduction:  Currently,  there  is  little  information  regarding  the  practice  of  occupational  therapists  and  the  use  of  the  “Model
occupational  health  of  the  user,  which  enhances  the  intervention  of  the  occupational  therapist.
user.  One  highlights  the  identification  of  the  participants'  limitations  and  potentialities  through  the  MOHOST  assessment,  which  psychiatric.  We  highlight  the  identification  of  limitations  and  potential  of  the  participants  through  the  evaluation  of  MOHOST,
of  the  Baixo  Vouga  Hospital  Centre  (DPSM-CHBV).  Material  and  Methods:  An  exploratory-descriptive  analysis  was  carried  out  Summary
of  Psychiatry  and  Mental  Health,  which  indicates  psychopathological  interference  in  roles,  routines,  habits,  participation  and  performance
Package  for  the  Social  Sciences" (SPSS).  Results:  The  results  obtained  made  it  possible  to  outline  the  profile  of  the  psychiatric  3Department  of  Psychiatry  and  Mental  Health,  Centro  Hospitalar  do  Baixo  Vouga  (DPSM-CHBV)
from  238  clinical  files  of  the  MOHOST  assessment  results.  A  statistical  analysis  was  performed  with  the  software
Occupation  Screening  Tool" (MOHOST)  in  the  assessment  of  psychiatric  patients  in  Portugal.  Objectives:  To  understand  the  
Keywords:  Occupational  Therapy;  Psychiatry;  Mental  Health;  Mental  Disorders  ORCID  do  autor:  2Center  for  Innovative  Care  and  Health  Technology  (ciTechCare),  Politécnico  de  Leiria,  Leiria,  Portugal
from  the  Centro  Hospitalar  do  Baixo  Vouga  (DPSM-CHBV).  Material  and  Methods:  An  exploratory-descriptive  survey  was  carried  out
Introduction:  Currently,  there  is  little  information  on  the  practice  of  occupational  therapists  and  the  use  of  the  "Model  of  Human  
occupational  performance,  which  enhances  the  occupational  therapist's  intervention.  of  Human  Occupation  Screening  Tool” (MOHOST)  in  the  evaluation  of  psychiatric  patients  in  Portugal.  Objectives:  Understand  the
Keywords:  Occupational  Therapy;  Psychiatry;  Mental  health;  Mental  disease
is  consistent  with  previous  studies.  Conclusions:  The  applicability  of  this  instrument  is  useful  in  the  Psychiatry  and  Mental  Elisabete  Roldão:  0000-0002-5317-985;  Jaime  Ribeiro:  0000-0002-1548-5579;
from  238  clinical  files  of  the  results  of  the  MOHOST  evaluation.  A  statistical  analysis  was  performed  with  the  software  "Statistical  consistent  with  previous  studies.  Conclusions:  It  appears  that  the  applicability  of  this  instrument  is  useful  in  the  area*Corresponding  author:  elisabete.roldao@ipleiria.pt;  Higher  School  of  Health  of  the  Polytechnic  of  Leiria,  Campus  2  -  Morro  do  Lena,  Alto  do  Vieiro  -  
Apartment  4137,  2411-901  Leiria
“Statistical  Package  for  the  Social  Sciences” (SPSS).  Results:  The  results  obtained  made  it  possible  to  outline  the  profile  of  the  user
usefulness  of  MOHOST  in  delineating  the  profile  of  Day  Hospital  (DH)  users  in  the  Department  of  Psychiatry  and  Mental  Health  Machine Translated by Google

(Kielhofner,  2008).  The  scarcity  of  use  of  standardized  assessment  instruments  to  support  and  guide  the
by  the  therapist  through  direct  observation  of  the  client's  occupational  performance  and  participationa  holistic,  occupation-centered,  client-centered  practice  based  on  scientific  evidence  to  plan  and  implement  
the  intervention.  The  MOH,  developed  by  Gary  Kielhofner  in  1980,  considers  Man  in  a  holistic  way  and  
studies  the  way  occupation  is  motivated,  standardized  and  performed.
regarding  the  client  and  the  environmental  factors  that  influence  their  occupational  participation.  It  addresses  
six  parameters,  which  are  subdivided  into  four  items,  making  a  total  of  24  (Chart  1).  is  filledHuman  Occupation” (MOH)  to  guide  their  professional  practice  and  stress  the  importance  of  adopting
by  the  same  authors,  is  often  used  by  occupational  therapists  in  the  field  of  health
mental.  The  MOHOST  is  based  on  the  assumptions  of  the  MOH,  and  is  designed  to  obtain  informationLee  et  al.  (2008)  mention  that  many  Occupational  Therapists  (OTs)  use  the  “Model  of
Ferreira  and  Gonçalves,  2005).  After  the  validation  process  for  the  Portuguese  population,  carried  outin  Occupational  Therapy  (OT)  (Peuker  et  al.,  2009).occupational  participation  and  performance,  as  well  as  monitoring  and  adapting  the  intervention  process
final  work  of  Degree  in  OT  developed  at  Escola  Superior  de  Saúde  do  Alcoitão  (Gravato,and  Mental  Health  (Rouleau  et  al.,  2015).  The  use  of  standardized  instruments  is  essential  for  comparing  
the  results  of  the  assessment  and  reassessment  of  psychiatric  clients,  in  order  to  assess  their
and  exists  in  19  languages  (Cruz  et  al,  2019).  It  was  translated  into  Portuguese  in  2005,  as  part  of  a
occupational  participation  and  Problem  (1)  -  Prevents  occupational  participation)  (Pan  et  al.,  2011).professional  practice  in  specific  contexts,  compromises  its  efficiency,  in  particular,  in  Psychiatry
Screening  Tool  (MOHOST)  widely  used  in  mental  health,  in  OT  services  in  the  UKThis  model  has  as  an  associated  evaluation  instrument  the  Model  of  Human  Occupation
(Kielhofner  et  al.,  2010).  It  allows  documenting  and  guiding  the  OT  intervention  according  to  the  four-point  
classification  criteria  defined  in  the  manual:  Strength  (4)  -  Supports  occupational  participation;  Difficulty  (3)  
–  It  interferes  little  with  occupational  participation;  Weakness  (2)  -  It  interferes  a  lot  with  the
Interest
It  includes  the  person's  habits,  roles,  and  flexibility  to  adapt  
to  routine  responsibilities.Motivation  for  OccupationSuccess  ExpectationCapacity  Assessment
It  corresponds  to  habituation.Items
It  corresponds  to  volition  and  includes  the  person's  interests  
and  values.Concept
papersparameters
ResponsibilityAdaptabilityRoutineCommitment
Occupation  StandardIntroduction
82  Table  1.  MOHOST  Parameters  and  Items  according  to  Gravato  and  Gonçalves  (2005).Machine Translated by Google

They  correspond  to  performance  competencies  related  
to  the  way  a  person  interacts  and  communicates  with  
peers.
Ability  to  judge,  solve  a  problem  and  adapt  to  task  performance.
Problem  solvingOrganization
Occupational  RequirementsEnvironmentplanning
Physical  resources
Social  GroupsIt  corresponds  to  the  contexts  and  requirements  imposed  by  
daily  occupations  (work,  leisure  and  self-care).KnowledgeInterpersonal  Relations
Physical  spaceMotor  Skillsvocal  expression
EnergyThey  correspond  to  the  posture,  mobility,  coordination,  strength  and  
endurance  of  the  person.Conversation
strength  and  effortThey  correspond  to  knowledge,  activity  sequencing,  ability  to  
organize  and  solve  problems.Process  CompetenciesNon-Verbal  Skills
Posture  and  Mobility
CoordinationCommunication  and  Interaction  
Skills
In  the  study  carried  out  by  Parkinson  et  al.  (2008),  some  OTs  refer  that  the  parameters  presented  in  the  
MOHOST  help  to  guide  clinical  reasoning,  as  it  is  necessary  to  evaluate  all  the
exploratory-descriptive.The  present  investigation  was  carried  out  at  the  DPSM-CHBV  in  Portugal,  using  a  surveyIt  is  difficult  to  document  the  effectiveness  of  OT  services  in  your  daily  practice  (Fuller,  2011).  At  the  moment,aspects  of  the  occupational  participation  of  the  clients.
Psychiatry  and  Mental  Health  in  Portugal.information  regarding  the  use  of  standardized  instruments  by  occupational  therapists  in
inclusion  criteria,  they  had  to  have  attended  the  OT  service  in  the  HD  of  the  DPSM-CHBV  in  the  periodThe  aim  of  this  study  is  to  define  the  profile  of  the  psychiatric  client  of  the  Day  Hospital  (HD)  of  the  DPSM-
CHBV,  correlating  it  with  the  parameters  of  the  MOHOST.  It  is  intended  to  minimize  the  lack  of
The  population  of  the  present  study  are  the  clients  followed  in  the  HD  of  the  DPSM-CHBV.  Asrequested  from  customers  (Rouleau  et  al.,  2015).It  is  common  to  use  non-standard  methods  such  as  interviews  and  task-based  observation
Population  and  Samplethere  is  a  greater  use  of  standardized  instruments  in  psychiatric  clients,  but  it  is
A  quantitative  approach  was  used  to  assess  and  relate  data  from  clinical  processes,  recorded  on  the  “SClinic”  
platform,  at  a  demographic  level,  as  well  as  evaluation  and  reassessment  through  the  classification  summary  
using  SPSS®  software.Material  and  methods
83  Machine Translated by Google

PROFILE  OF  THE  PSYCHIATRIC  CLIENT  OF  THE  DAY  HOSPITAL  OF  THE  DEPARTMENT  OF  PSYCHIATRY  AND  MENTAL  HEALTH  -  CENTRO
BAIXO  VOUGA  HOSPITALTable  2.  DPSM-CHBV  HD  Psychiatric  Client  Profile
Schizophrenia  Spectrum  Disorders  and  Other  Disorders
18.9%  Higher  education
41.6%  Outpatient  Service  -  Outpatient  ConsultationAge  (average  45  years)Gender
21.8%  Secondary  education26.9%  35  to  44  years  old
29.8%  3rd  cycle40%  Male
7.1%  Personality  Disorders
Literary  abilities
provenance60%  Female
16  %  Bipolar  Disorders  and  Related  Disorders31.5%  Depressive  DisordersDiagnosis  (DSM-5)  (APA,  2014)Results Variables
37,8  %  
19.7%  Ambulatory  Service  -  Emergencypsychotics
29.4%  Inpatient  Unitadmission  and  discharge  date.  A  sample  of  238  participants  was  obtained  (n=238).from  January  2015  to  December  2019  having  been  evaluated  with  MOHOST  to  date
in  each  MOHOST  parameter.  A  null  significance  was  obtained  in  all  parameters  of  thisWilcoxon's  nonparametric  test  was  used  to  compare  the  initial  assessment  and  the  final  assessment.The  MOHOST  classification  made  it  possible  to  characterize  the  clients  in  terms  of  participation  and  occupational  performance,  
namely  motivation  for  the  occupation,  occupation  pattern,  communication  and  interaction  skills,  process  skills,  motor  skills  and  
environment.
Data  processing  and  statistical  analysis  allowed  characterizing  the  Customer  Profile
Psychiatric  (a)  HD  of  the  DPSM-CHBV  (Table  2).additives,  number  of  sessions,  reason  for  discharge  and  results  obtained  by  MOHOST.  the  summary  ofcohabitation,  marital  status,  medication  at  admission  and  discharge,  substance  abuse
Authorization  was  obtained  from  the  CHBV  Ethics  Committee  for  the  development  of  this  investigation.qualifications,  origin  (service  from  which  he  is  referred  to  the  HD),  professional  situation,A  database  was  built  in  Excel®  with  the  variables:  gender,  age,  diagnosis,
Formal  and  ethical  proceduresData  Collection  Methods
instrument,  verifying  that  there  are  significant  differences  between  the  results  of  the  evaluation  and  the
revaluation  obtained  by  MOHOST.
84  ResultsMachine Translated by Google

38.7%  Parents  or  relatives
Marital  status
13.4%  Antipsychotics  and  benzodiazepines22.6%  Employee  (15.5%  -  sick  leave) employment  status
Medication  at  HD  discharge  date
OT  sessions Average  of  28  sessions;  Min=1;  Max=8539.5%  Unemployed
27.3%  Antidepressants,  antipsychotics  and  benzodiazepines
14,3  %  
Consumption  of  addictive  substances20.6%  No  cohabitant
Antidepressants,  benzodiazepines,  antipsychotics,  and  mood  stabilizers
8  %  42.9%  Single
Antidepressants,  benzodiazepines,  antipsychotics,  and  mood  stabilizers20.6%  Spouse  and  children
16.8%  Antipsychotics  and  benzodiazepines
84.9%  No  consumption17.6%  Medical  Certificate  of  Disability  Multipurpose
18,1  %  Cohabitation
Reason  for  discharge39.9%  Married  or  de  facto  union
Medication  at  the  time  of  admission  to  HD
81.9%  Clinical  discharge13.4%  Spouse
28.2%  Antidepressants,  antipsychotics  and  benzodiazepines
Cannabis  
heroin.  With  regard  to  alcoholic  beverages,  consumption  is  similar  for  both  sexes.masculine.male  (60%)  between  15  and  34  years  old  (42.6%)  compared  to  females  (40%),  between  35  and  64  years  old  
(72.2%).  In  Anxiety  Disorders  60%  of  the  participants  are  of  the  gender
(84.9%).  Cannabis  consumption  has  the  highest  prevalence  (8%),  followed  by  alcoholic  beverages  (5.5%)  andSchizophrenia  Spectrum  Disorders  and  other  Psychotic  Disorders  are  in  the  majority  in  the  gender
and  other  Psychotic  Disorders.  Most  participants  do  not  consume  addictive  substancesyears  (50%),  while  in  males  there  is  a  higher  prevalence  (21.1%)  from  35  to  64  years  (86.7%).  At
unemployed,  of  which  45.7%  are  diagnosed  with  Schizophrenia  Spectrum  DisordersBipolar  and  Related  There  is  a  predominance  of  females  (78.9%),  between  35  and  44
20.6%  live  with  their  spouse  and  children,  with  53.1%  diagnosed  with  Depressive  Disorders.
Comparing  psychiatric  disorders  with  the  professional  situation,  39.5%  areof  age  (37.5%)  and  in  males  they  are  between  45  and  64  years  old  (73.6%).  In  the  DisturbancesIn  females,  Depressive  Disorders  are  observed,  more  prevalent  in  35  to  54  year  olds
20.6%  with  Schizophrenia  Spectrum  Disorders  and  other  Psychotic  Disorders.  Aboutwith  Schizophrenia  Spectrum  Disorders  and  other  Psychotic  Disorders.  cohabit  aloneOf  the  participants,  38.7%  live  with  their  parents  and/or  relatives,  with  56.5%  diagnosed
of  the  combination  of  both  (1.3%).  Of  the  male  gender,  4.6%  use  cannabis  and  0.4%  cocaine  and
85  Machine Translated by Google

Regarding  motor  skills,  all  items  show  maximum  classification,  except  for  the
The  MOHOST  classification  process  makes  it  possible  to  establish  the  profile  and  identify  the  deficits  and  
potentialities  that  affect  the  occupational  participation  of  the  clients.  Thus,  therapistsoccupational  activity  in  the  parameters:  motivation  for  the  occupation,  occupation  pattern  and  competences  of
interpersonal”),  motor  skills  (specifically  the  item  “energy”)  and  process  skills76.2%  of  the  items.  In  only  8.3%  of  the  items,  namely  “capacity  assessment”  and  “routine”,  are
energy,  memory,  concentration  and  social  relationship  in  the  clients  and,  consequently,  their
interpersonal  and  cognitive,  physical  and  psychosocial  levels  (Kielhofner  et  al.,  2010).Upon  admission,  the  participants  show  a  greater  deficit  in  performance  and  participation
evaluation  and  reassessment,  it  appears  that  the  participants  maintained  the  classification  assigned  in
Several  studies  agree  that  these  Psychiatric  Disorders  affect  productivity,  mood,
communication  and  interaction  skills  (specifically  the  item  “conversation”  and  “relationspredisposition  to  Depressive  Disorders,  in  agreement  with  what  was  identified  by  Greenoccupational  participation  and  occupational  performance  in  most  parameters.  the  participants
the  participants  with  lower  occupational  participation  and,  consequently,  lower  classificationof  process.  The  items  related  to  the  parameter  of  communication  skills,  interaction  and  skills
Psychotics  are  mostly  in  males  and  in  younger  people,  data  that  corroborate  theitem  “energy”  with  two  (weakness)  as  a  rating.  In  the  reassessment,  there  is  an  improvement  in  the
Regarding  the  profile  of  the  psychiatric  client,  the  female  gender  presents  a  greater
Occupational  professionals  can  apply  the  MOHOST  in  order  to  design  an  intervention  according  to  the  needs  and  
priorities  of  psychiatric  clients  (Kielhofner  et  al.,  2009).  It  is  expected  thatprocess.  They  show  less  deficit  in  communication  and  interaction  skills  and  in  the  environment.
performance  in  different  occupations  (Connell  et  al.,  2012).achieved  improvements  in  occupational  performance  and  participation.
(specifically  the  item  “troubleshooting”).  These  difficulties  compromise  performance  andmotor  skills,  remain  low,  although  the  item  “energy”  has  improved  from  two  (weakness)  to  three  (difficulty).  
Regarding  the  items  of  the  environment  parameter,  they  maintain  the  classification  three  (difficulty),  continuing  as  
the  parameter  with  the  lowest  deficit.  Comparing  the  results  of
presented  by  the  same  authors.
Similar  to  what  other  authors  show,  it  is  possible  to  identify  that  the  parameters  with  the  greatest  deficit  in  
psychiatric  clients  are:  motivation  for  the  occupation,  occupation  pattern,maintain  a  greater  deficit  in  the  parameters  motivation  for  the  occupation,  occupation  pattern  and  skills
et  al.  (2019).  In  our  study,  Schizophrenia  Spectrum  Disorders  and  other
demonstrate  changes  in  the  performance  of  activities  of  daily  living,  in  personal  relationships  andDiscussion
86  Machine Translated by Google

address  in  the  intervention  (Smith  and  Mairs,  2014).occupational  participation  and,  therefore,  indicate  which  items  the  occupational  therapist  has  to
According  to  the  results,  it  is  concluded  that  the  use  of  MOHOST  in  OT,  in  the  area  of  Psychiatry  and  Mental  
Health,  allows  drawing  a  detailed  profile  of  the  potential  and  limitations  of  the  client.  With
promote  health  and  quality  of  life  (Lima,  2006;  Ribeiro  and  Machado,  2008).constituting  an  asset  for  their  rehabilitation  and  reintegration  into  society,  contributing  toal.,  2006).  
Mental  Health,  since  your  training  enables  you  to  intervene  with  clients  who  have
changes  in  their  roles,  routines,  personal  relationships,  cognitive  and  motor  skills,team,  in  order  to  guide  and  outline  the  most  appropriate  and  centered  intervention  (Parkinson  et  al.evidence-based  (Parkinson  et  al.,  2008),  for  further  discussion  with  the  client  and  the
only  to  the  intervention  of  the  TO.  The  occupational  therapist  plays  a  key  role  inand  Holder,  2010).  MOHOST  also  enables  occupational  therapists  to  support  the  practice
Through  this  study,  it  is  not  possible  to  state  that  the  improvements  in  the  MOHOST  items  are  due  to  thebroadly  the  aspects  of  occupational  participation,  guides  and  supports  the  intervention  of  OT  (Hawes
psychiatric.
use  of  MOHOST  in  the  Portuguese  population  in  the  area  of  Psychiatry  and  Mental  Health,  including  the
own  perspective.  It  is  considered  relevant  to  replicate  this  study  for  clients  who  attend  the  DPSM-CHBV  inpatient  
treatment  and  also  to  understand  whether  the  profile  of  the  psychiatric  client  of  the  DPSM-CHBV  HD  is  transversal  
to  other  Psychiatry  units.  and  Mental  Health  in  Portugal.This  evidence-based  instrument  holistically  considers  the  client,  analyzes
noting  the  gains  obtained  in  health,  namely  in  the  occupational  participation  of  the  clientsthe  MOHOST  the  results  obtained  in  the  evaluation  can  be  compared  with  those  of  the  reevaluation,
It  is  suggested  that  future  studies  be  carried  out  to  create  more  scientific  evidence  on  the
87  conclusions
References
Climepsi  Publishers,  2014.American  Psychiatric  Association.  DSM-5–Diagnostic  and  Statistical  Manual  of  Mental  Disorders.  5th  Edition.  Lisbon:
Banerjee  S,  Chatterji  P  and  Lahiri  K.  Effects  of  Psychiatric  Disorders  on  Labor  Market  Outcomes:  A  Latent  
Cardoso  L  and  Galera  SAF.  Adherence  to  psychopharmacological  treatment.  Paulista  Nursing  Act  19:343-348,  2006.Rouleau  S,  Dion  K  and  Korner-Bitensky  N.  Assessment  practices  of  Canadian  occupational  therapists  working  adults  with  mental  
disorders.  Canadian  Journal  of  Occupational  Therapy  82:181-193,  2015.  
12,  2019.  Disorders.  Current  Psychiatry  Reports  20,  2018.  
Approach  Using  Multiple  Clinical  Indicators.  Health  Econ  26:184-205,  2017.  Bennabi  D,  Charpeaud  T,  Yrondi  A,  Genty  JB,  
Destouches  S,  Lancrenon  S,  Alaïli  N,  Bellivier  F,  Bougerol  T,  Camus  V,  Dorey  JM,  Doumy  O,  Haesebaert  F,  Holtzmann  J,  Lançon  C,  Lefebvre  M,  Moliere  F,  Nieto  I,  
Rabu  C,  Richieri  R,  Schmitt  L,  Stephan  F,  Vaiva  G,  Walter  M,  Leboyer  M,  El-Hage  W,  Llorca  PM,  Courtet  P,  Aouizerate  B  and  Haffen  
E.  Clinical  guidelines  for  the  management  of  treatment-resistant  depression:  French  recommendations  from  experts,  the  French  
Association  for  Biological  Psychiatry  and  Neuropsychopharmacology  and  the  fondation  FondaMental.  BMC  Psychiatry  19:1-  Ashare  RL  and  Wetherill  RR.  The  Intersection  of  Sex  Differences,  Tobacco  Use,  and  Inflammation:  Implications  for  Psychiatric  with  
Variable  Machine Translated by Google

Fuller  K.  The  effectiveness  of  occupational  performance  outcome  measures  within  mental  health  practice.  
Kielhofner  G.  Model  of  Human  Occupation:  Theory  and  Application,  Lippincott  Williams  &  Wilkins,  Estados  Unidos  da  América,  
2016.  
Psychology  in  Study  14:439-445,  2009.Cruz  DMCD,  Parkinson  S,  Rodrigues  DDS,  Carrijo  DCDM,  Costa  JD,  Fachin-Martins  E,  and  Pfeifer  LI.  Cross-cultural  adaptation,  face  validity  and  
reliability  of  the  Occupational  Participation  Identification  Instrument  of  the  Human  Occupation  Model  into  Brazilian  Portuguese.  Brazilian  
Notebooks  of  Occupational  Therapy,  27:691-702,  2019.
Hawes  D  and  Houlder  D.  Reflections  on  using  the  Model  of  Human  Occupation  Screening  Tool  in  a  joint  learning  disability  
client  change.  Occupational  Therapy  in  Mental  Health  25:181-191,  2009.  
Parkinson  S,  Forsyth  K  and  Kielhofner  G.  A  User's  Manual  for  the  Model  of  Human  Occupation  Screening  Tool  (MOHOST),(Version  
2.0),  Model  of  Human  Occupation  Clearinghouse,  Department  of  Occupational  Therapy,  2006.  
Wook  Lee  S,  Kielhofner  G,  Morley  M,  Heasman  D,  Garnham  M,  Willis  S,  Parkinson  S,  Forsyth  K,  Melton  J  and  Taylor  R.  Pan  AW,  Fan  CW,  Chung  L,  Chen  TJ,  Kielhofner  G,  Wu  MY  and  Chen  YL.  Examining  the  validity  of  the  model  of  human  occupation  screening  
tool:  Using  classical  test  theory  and  item  response  theory.  British  Journal  of  Occupational  Therapy  74:34-40,  2011.  
with  Connell  J,  Brazier  J,  O'Cathain  A,  Lloyd-Jones  M,  Paisley  S.  Quality  of  life  of  people  with  mental  health  problems:  a  synthesis  of  qualitative  research.  
Health  Qual  Life  Outcomes.  2012  Nov  22;10:138.  
aneuploidies.  Neuropsychopharmacology  44:9-21,  2019.  
Kramer  J,  Kielhofner  G,  Lee  SW,  Ashpole  E  and  Castle  L.  Utility  of  the  model  of  human  occupation  screening  tool  for  detecting  
assessment)  in  an  acute  psychiatric  setting.  Occupational  Therapy  in  Health  Care  22:63-75,  2008.  Occupational  Therapy  74:399-405,  2011.  
Kielhofner  G,  Fan  CW,  Morley  M,  Garnham  M,  Heasman  D,  Forsyth  K,  Lee  SW  and  Taylor  RR.  A  psychometric  study  of  the  
Lima  EMFA.  Mental  Health  in  the  paths  of  Occupational  Therapy.  The  world  of  health  30:117-122,  2006.
Occupational  Health  at  the  University  of  São  Paulo  19:72-75,  2008.
Occupational  Therapy  in  Mental  Health  30:381-389,  2014.  Screening  Tool”  MOHOST.  In  Biblioteca  ESSA-SCML:1-34,2005.  
model  of  human  occupation  screening  tool  (MOHOST).  Hong  Kong  Journal  of  Occupational  Therapy  20:63-70,  2010.  British  Journal  of  
2008.  
Lee  SW,  Taylor  R,  Kielhofner  G  and  Fisher  G.  Theory  Use  in  Practice:  A  National  Survey  of  Therapists  Who  Use  the  Model  of  Human  Occupation.  
American  Journal  of  Occupational  Therapy  62:106-117,  2008.  
Ribeiro  MC  and  Machado  AL.  Occupational  Therapy  and  the  new  forms  of  mental  health  care.  Therapy  MagazineFekadu  W,  Mihiretu  A,  Craig  TKJ  and  Fekadu  A.  Multidimensional  impact  of  severe  mental  illness  on  family  members:  Systematic  review.  BMJ  
Open  9:1-12,  2019.  
Kruckow  L,  Linnet  K  and  Banner  J.  Psychiatric  disorders  are  overlooked  in  patients  with  drug  abuse.  Danish  Medical  Journal  63,  team.  British  Journal  of  Occupational  Therapy  73:564-567,  2010.  
Peuker  AC,  Habigzang  LF,  Koller  SH  and  Araujo  LB.  Process  and  outcome  evaluation  in  psychotherapies:  A  review.
Impact  of  using  the  Model  of  Human  Occupation:  A  survey  of  occupational  therapy  mental  health  practitioners'  perceptions.  
Scandinavian  Journal  of  Occupational  Therapy  19:450-456,  2012.  Green  T,  Flash  S  and  Reiss  AL.  Sex  differences  in  psychiatric  disorders:  what  we  can  learn  from  sex  chromosome  
occupation  screening  tool  of  hypothesized  variables.  Occupational  Therapy  in  Mental  Health  25:127-137,  2009.  
Parkinson  S,  Chester  A,  Cratchley  S  and  Rowbottom  J.  Application  of  the  model  of  human  occupation  screening  tool  (MOHOST  
Smith  J  and  Mairs  HJ.  Use  and  Results  of  MOHO  Global  Assessments  in  Community  Mental  Health:  A  Practice  Analysis.  Gravato  J,  Ferreira  M.  and  Gonçalves  S.  Contribution  to  the  adaptation  and  validation  of  “The  Model  of  Human  Occupation
Kielhofner  G,  Fogg  L,  Braveman  B,  Forsyth  K,  Kramer  J  and  Duncan  E.  A  factor  analytic  study  of  the  model  of  human  
Maciver  D,  Morley  M,  Forsyth  K,  Bertram  N,  Edwards  T,  Heasman  D,  Rennison  J,  Rush  R  and  Willis  S.  Innovating  with  the  Model  of  Human  
Occupation  in  Mental  Health.  Occupational  Therapy  in  Mental  Health  31:144-154,  2015.  
Rouleau  S,  Dion  K  and  Korner-Bitensky  N.  Assessment  practices  of  Canadian  occupational  therapists  working  adults  with  mental  
disorders.  Canadian  Journal  of  Occupational  Therapy  82:181-193,  2015.  
88  Machine Translated by Google

Changes  in  occupational  performance  after  Covid-19  ICU  admission:  The  
perception  of  Leiria  Hospital  users  The  perception  of  users  of  Hospital  de  LeiriaChange  in  occupational  performance  after  hospitalization  in  ICU  due  to  Covid-19:
Ana  Rita  Ferreira1 ;  Mariana  Rodrigues1 ;  Raquel  Cardoso1 ;  *Inês  Sabino1 ;  Liliana
Teixeira1
89  Liliana  Teixeira:  0000-0001-9408-859X
by  the  National  Health  Service  (2021),  825  633  confirmed  cases  of  Severe  Acute  Respiratory  Syndrome  infection  and  16  899  Covid-19  is  a  disease  caused  by  the  SARS-CoV-2  virus  that  has  significantly  adversely  affected  public  health  and
this  investigation  is  expected  that  users  of  the  Centro  Hospitalar  de  Leiria,  hospitalized  for  Covid-19,  report  deficits  in  the
depression  and  muscle  weakness,  which  can  lead  to  changes  in  occupational  performance.  Therefore,  given  the  above  and  the  provided  by  the  National  Health  Service  (2021),  825,633  confirmed  cases  of  SARS-CoV-2  infection  and  16,899  deaths,  in
activities  of  daily  living  and  instrumental,  in  rest  and  sleep  and  in  work/education.
hospitalization,  the  relevance  of  investigating  "What  is  the  perception  of  users  hospitalized  in  an  Intensive  Care  Units  at  the  Centro  ORCID  do  autor:  
and  hospitalization,  the  need  arose  to  investigate  “What  is  the  perception  of  patients  hospitalized  in  a  Health  Care  Unit
to  the  participants  in  order  to  collect  data  to  help  answer  the  research  question.  With  this  research  it  is  expected  that  the  users  of  1School  of  Health,  Polytechnic  of  Leiria,  Leiria,  Portugal
and  muscle  weakness,  which  may  lead  to  changes  in  occupational  performance.  Thus,  in  view  of  the  aforementioned  and  the  fact  that
Abstract  
deaths,  in  Portugal.  Covid-19  can  cause  some  consequences,  such  as  fatigue,  disturbance  of  the  sleep  cycle,  anxiety  and /  or  semi-structured  interview  with  the  participants,  in  order  to  collect  data  that  help  in  answering  the  research  question.  WithSummary
health  and  the  world  economy,  thus  giving  rise  to  a  global  pandemic,  having  caused  until  April  8,  2021,  according  to  data  provided  
respiratory  deficits,  which  is  expected  to  cause  changes  in  daily  living  and  instrumental  activities,  rest  and  sleep,  work/education.  the  world  economy,  thus  giving  rise  to  a  global  pandemic,  having  caused  until  April  8,  2021,  according  to  the  data
occupational  performance,  mainly  due  to  physical  and  respiratory  changes,  and  is  expected  to  cause  changes  in
fact  that,  to  date,  there  is  no  sufficient  literature  supporting  the  changes  in  occupational  performance  resulting  from  Covid-19  and  Keywords:  Covid-19;  occupational  performance;  deficits;  Intensive  Care  Unit;  Daily  Living  Activities.Portugal.  Covid-19  can  cause  some  consequences,  such  as  fatigue,  sleep  cycle  disturbance,  anxiety  and/or  depression.
Hospitalar  de  Leiria  for  Covid-19  in  the  change  in  occupational  performance"  emerged.  A  semi-structured  interview  will  be  applied  to  date  there  is  not  enough  literature  to  support  the  changes  in  occupational  performance  resulting  from  Covid-19
Covid-19  is  a  disease  caused  by  the  Severe  Acute  Respiratory  Syndrome  virus,  which  has  significantly  negatively  affected  public  
Santo  André-  Leiria  Hospital,  hospitalized  by  Covid-19,  report  deficits  in  occupational  performance,  mainly  due  to  physical  and  *Corresponding  author:  Liliana  Teixeira:  liliana.teixeira@ipleiria.pt.  Higher  School  of  Health  of  the  Polytechnic  of  Leiria,  Campus  2  -  
Morro  do  Lena,  Alto  do  Vieiro  -  Apartment  4137,  2411-901  Leiria
Keywords:  Covid-19,  occupational  performance,  deficits,  Intensive  Care  Units,  Activities  of  Daily  Living.  Intensive  Care,  at  Centro  Hospitalar  de  Leiria,  due  to  Covid-19  in  the  alteration  of  occupational  performance”,  so  aMachine Translated by Google

Introduction
90  respiratory  distress,  requiring  hospitalization  and  80%  of  Covid-19  cases  have
This  virus  affects  the  respiratory  system  and  can  cause  a  respiratory  infection,  which  can  beCovid-19  is  a  disease  caused  by  the  SARS-CoV-2  virus,  which  originated  in  the  city
SARS-CoV-2  can  also  reach  the  gastrointestinal  tract  (Silva  &  Silva,  2021).  According  to  the  SNS  (2021),Portugal  registered  until  April  8,  2021,  825,633  confirmed  cases  and  16,899  deaths  from  Covid-19,
2021).  According  to  the  General  Directorate  of  Health  -  DGS  (2021),  the  transmission  period  can  beginassociated  (Direção  Geral  da  Saúde  –  DGS,  2021).  According  to  the  World  Health  Organization  (2021),a  global  pandemic,  declared  by  the  World  Health  Organization  on  March  11,  2020,  that
on  average  for  up  to  two  weeks  (Silva  &  Silva,  2021).  They  are  considered  risk  groups  for
main  symptoms,  dry  cough,  shortness  of  breath,  headache,  ageusia  (loss  of  taste)  or  dysgeusiaIn  Portugal,  of  the  individuals  with  Covid-19  disease,  5%  may  need  intensive  care  with  the  need  for  
ventilation,  15%  of  the  cases  present  a  serious  condition,  with  pneumonia,
2  is  a  virus  that  belongs  to  the  family  Coronaviridae,  of  the  genus  Beta  that  has  ribonucleic  acid
according  to  Silva  &  Silva  (2021)  they  also  have  fever,  tiredness  and  muscle  pain.  Some  individuals  can  
progress  to  pneumonia  and  even  death  (if  there  is  alveolar  damage,  which  causesof  Health  -  SNS,  2021).  The  first  case  to  be  registered  in  Portugal  was  confirmed  on  March  2
SARS-CoV-2  and  2,875,672  deaths,  with  the  American  continent  and  then  Europe  being  the  most
immune  system  (such  as  patients  undergoing  chemotherapy,  treatment  of  autoimmune  diseases,
similar  to  a  common  flu  or  progress  to  more  serious  illnesses  (SNS,  2021).  However,  themild  illness,  i.e.  mild  symptoms,  namely  fever,  rhinorrhea,  headache  and  myalgias  (SNS,  2021).
contaminated  and  by  droplets,  with  an  estimated  incubation  period  of  1  to  14  days  (Silva  &  Silva,
chronic  diseases  (SNS,  2021).Chinese  city  of  Wuhan,  with  the  first  case  identified  on  November  27,  2019,  causing
and  most  of  the  deaths  occurred  in  older  people  and  with  other  comorbidities
about  one  to  two  days  before  the  onset  of  symptoms  and  throughout  the  symptomatic  period.  Regarding  
the  period  of  infection,  it  is  estimated  that  it  lasts  from  7  to  12  days  in  moderate  cases,  in  cases
although  there  are  asymptomatic  individuals,  the  majority  of  positive  individuals  for  Covid-19  have  asCovid-19,  elderly  individuals  (aged  65  and  over)  and  with  system  impairmentsignificantly  negatively  affected  public  health  and  the  world  economy  (National  System
worldwide,  132,485,386  cases  of  infection  were  confirmed  by  April  8,  2021.
(taste  disturbance),  anosmia  (total  loss  of  smell)  or  hyposmia  (partial  loss  of  smell)  andaffected  both  in  terms  of  the  number  of  confirmed  cases  and  the  number  of  deaths.  The  SARS-CoV
infected  with  human  immunodeficiency  virus/AIDS  and  transplant  patients)  and  people  with2020  and  the  first  death  by  Covid-19  on  March  16,  2020  (Paulino,  Dumas-Diniz  &  Brissos,  2020).
encapsulated  as  genetic  material,  transmitted  by  contact  with  surfaces  that  areMachine Translated by Google

progressive  respiratory  failure).  Also  based  on  the  cohort  study  by  Huang  et  al.  (2021),
environment  (Gritti,  Paulino  &  Marques,  2015).  Second,  Marques  &  Trigueiro  (2011a  and  2011b),  anynumerous  sequelae  are  identified,  such  as  fatigue,  sleep  cycle  disturbance,  anxiety  and/or
The  main  objective  of  this  project  is  to  understand  the  perception  of  users  hospitalized  in  ICU,  in  thedirecting  them  to  the  most  appropriate  rehabilitation.  Occupational  performance  is  independent  of  gender,  age  
and  disability  or  limitation.  Therefore,  it  is  characterized  by  the  individual's  ability  to  perform  daily  activities,  taking  
into  account  performance  skills,  occupational  roles,  and
provoked  namely  a  semi-structured  interview  and  the  Canadian  Performance  Measure2011).  All  relevant  information  will  be  collected  from  the  participants,  through  direct  observation
Occupational,  as  it  is  a  validated  and  standardized  instrument  for  the  Portuguese  population,  which  gives  greater  
credibility  to  the  project,  which  is  a  means  of  complementing  the  informationunderstand  the  impact  of  the  consequences  and  how  health  professionals  can  intervene,
relevant  to  deepen  and  investigate  this  topic,  in  order  to  verify  if  there  are  changes  in  the  performance
occupational  disease,  in  individuals  after  hospitalization  in  ICU  for  Covid-19.
through  empirical  evidence  collected  at  specific  locations  (in  this  case,  hospital)  (Martins  &  Belfohospitalization  for  Covid-19,  therefore,  a  multidisciplinary  evaluation  is  recommended  to(2020),  these  consequences  may  impair  the  quality  of  life  of  users  even  after
in  occupational  performance,  which  come  from  the  sequelae  described  above,  so  it  becomes
Covid-19,  since,  if  it  intends  to  develop  scientific  knowledge  on  the  subject  in  question,(memory,  concentration),  cough,  vocal  alterations,  incontinence  and  dysphagia.  According  to  Sheehy
environment,  context  and  activity,  can  lead  to  a  deficit  in  skills  and  occupational  standards  in  performance,  can  
cause  changes  in  occupational  performance.  It  is  common  knowledge  that  any  type  of  cognitive,  respiratory,  
psychological  and/or  physical  deficit  can  cause  changes
according  to  Fortin  (2009),  individuals  who  have  experienced  a  phenomenon,  which  is  the  object  of  study,  are  
chosen,  in  this  case,  patients  with  Covid-19  hospitalized  in  ICU.  This  is  a  case  study,  as  it  will  investigate  a  group  
of  individuals  with  characteristics  in  common,  in  this  case,  hospitalization  forabove,  Halpin,  et  al.,  (2021)  also  mention  respiratory  failure,  pain,  cognitive  deficits
when  there  is  a  rupture  in  the  occupational  balance,  namely  in  the  dynamics  between  people,
most  affected  occupation  and  whether  the  time  and  particularities  of  hospitalization  influence  changes  in  the
occupational  performance.  This  study  has  a  qualitative  observational  cross-sectional  character  sincedepression  and  muscle  weakness,  these  being  the  most  common.  In  addition  to  the  consequences  mentioned
individual  needs,  in  accordance  with  his  preferences  and  needs,  to  engage  in  occupations  and
to  integrate  them  into  their  daily  lives  in  the  most  autonomous  and  independent  way  possible.  Although,
CHL,  by  Covid-19  in  the  change  of  occupational  performance  and  still  understand  which  areas  ofMaterial  and  methods
91  Machine Translated by Google

smoking,  sport,  diet  and  travel,  thus  realizing  whether  some  habits  or  lack  of  them  could  be  potential  risk  factors  for  
worsening  sequelae,  and  also  obtaining  basic  information  about  the  individual's  routine.  In  a  third  part,  with  six  
questions,  dedicated  to  Covid-19,  where
In  this  way,  from  the  research  question,  secondary  questions  arose  such  as  “Which  areas  areThis  type  of  interview  was  selected  because  it  is  less  rigid  and  demanding,  being  a  kind  of  dialogue,
sequelae/consequences,  difficulties  and  changes  after  hospitalization.  This  information  is
the  information  collected.  Regarding  the  results,  it  is  expected  that  the  sequelae  found  are  the  same  as  those  
mentioned  above,  such  as  fatigue,  anxiety/depression,  cycle  disturbance
internment  have  an  influence  on  changes  in  occupational  performance?”.In  relation  to  the  Canadian  Occupational  Performance  Measure,  the  user  is  asked  to  report  theirin  addition  to  the  questions  asked,  in  order  to  obtain  as  much  information  as  possible.  The  interview
namely  in  different  areas  of  occupation  (daily  and  instrumental  activities,  rest  andabout  their  habits  and  customs  consists  of  seven  questions,  among  which,  the  habits
divided  into  three  areas:  self-care,  productivity  and  leisure  (American  Occupational  Therapybiographical  data,  where  the  individual  is  asked  about  his  or  her  name,  age,  profession,  background,  among  others.
performance  and  satisfaction  with  occupational  performance  in  the  activities  mentioned  by  the  interviewee.  The  
results  indicate  the  occupations  that  represent  a  problem  for  the  user,
As  this  is  a  current  issue  that  affects  the  national  and  world  population  and  is  of  common  interest,
of  occupation  most  affected  after  hospitalization  for  Covid-19?”  and  “The  time  and  the  particularities  of  thenot  obtained  in  the  interview  with  regard  to  the  identification  of  the  main  areas  of  altered  occupation.
tries  to  understand  the  time  and  characteristics  of  the  internment  of  the  individuals  in  question,  the  main
Data  processing  will  provide  qualitative  data  that  allow  you  to  summarize  in  a  narrative  way.
19  may  suffer  as  a  result  of  changes  in  occupational  performance,  then  the  need  to  deepen  this  topic  arose,  and  
for  that,  we  intend  to  answer  the  question  “What  is  the  perception  of  users  hospitalized  in  ICU,  at  CHL,  by  Covid19  
in  the  change  in  occupational  performance?  ”.with  guidelines,  and  it  gives  greater  opening  for  the  interviewee  to  provide  more  information,
fundamental  to  be  able  to  establish  a  connection  between  some  facts.
of  sleep  and  muscle  weakness,  and  also  that  these  cause  changes  in  occupational  performance,
sleep  and  work/education).is  divided  into  three  parts,  the  first  being  composed  of  eight  questions  about  the  data
occupational  performance,  identifying  the  main  problems  in  terms  of  importance,  the
because  he  cannot  perform  them  or  because  he  is  not  satisfied  with  the  way  he  performs  them.  It  is
there  is  still  little  information/studies  that  demonstrate  that  patients  hospitalized  in  ICU  due  to  Covidothers;  This  information  is  important  to  understand  the  context  and  the  environment.  the  second  part
Association,  2007).  
92  Machine Translated by Google

For  this  study,  all  users  admitted  to  the  ICU  will  be  selected  as  a  population,  in  the
by  users  and  family  members.CHL  In  relation  to  the  sample,  this  is  considered  non-probabilistic  for  convenience,  since  the  data
to  the  participants.  Taking  into  account  all  the  ethical  documents  referenced  above,  thispathology  or  comorbidities,  before  admission,  that  influence  occupational  performance  (dementia,  fractures,  
individuals  who  have  prostheses,  disabling  pathologies  -  such  as  cerebral  palsy  or  neurodegenerative  
diseases,  among  others),  included  in  the  clinical  process  or  reported
participants  need  to  be  able  to  consent,  and  refer  that  the  study  must  not  cause  harm
Regarding  the  results,  users  are  expected  to  show  changes  in  performance
occupational  activity,  namely  in  different  areas  of  occupation  (activities  of  daily  living  and  instrumental,
rest  and  sleep  and  work/education),  due  to  the  sequelae  already  mentioned,  such  asover  18  years  of  age.  It  was  also  defined,  as  an  exclusion  criterion,  the  existence  of  another  type  of
stakeholders  can  leave,  without  consequences  for  them,  and  this  must  guarantee  the
anonymity  and  confidentiality  of  participants.  It  is  still  important  to  take  into  account  that  the
fatigue,  anxiety/depression,  sleep  cycle  disturbance  and  muscle  weakness.doctor  at  the  ICU  where  they  were  hospitalized  for  Covid-19,  as  of  September  2021,  and  who  haveFor  the  selection  of  the  sample,  inclusion  criteria  were  defined,  such  as  the  users  who  will  be  discharged.
informed  consent,  so  that  at  any  time,  without  having  to  justify  the  situation,
an  easy-to-access  software,  as  it  is  online,  requiring  no  download.saturation.
Belmont,  who  will  guide  the  study  and  protect  its  participants  (Andrade,  Silva  &  Duarte,  et  al.,  2013;  United  
States  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services,  1979).  The  right  of  decision  of  the  participants  will  be  
taken  into  account  throughout  the  process,  for  which  it  is  necessary  to  prepare
Analysis”.  This  software  will  allow  you  to  categorically  analyze  and  interpret  qualitative  data,  this  beingis  defined,  however,  a  semi-structured  interview  will  be  applied,  preferably  reaching  the
ethical  documents  such  as  the  Nuremberg  Code  Declaration  of  Helsinki  and  the
informed)  will  be  submitted  to  the  CHL  ethics  committee.
To  analyze  and  interpret  qualitative  data,  the  software  “Web  Qualitative  Datathe  fact  that  it  is  performed  in  human  beings,  it  is  essential  to  take  into  account  someFor  the  development  of  this  project,  taking  into  account  its  research  nature  and  thewill  be  collected  at  CHL  as  it  is  easier  to  access.  To  date,  the  sample  size  has  not
study  and  all  documents  related  to  it  (semi-structured  interview,  consent
93  ResultsMachine Translated by Google

conclusions
Bibliographic  references
94  It  can  thus  be  concluded  and  affirmed  that  Occupational  Therapy  in  research  is  an  assetIt  is  considered  that  due  to  the  impact  both  globally  and  nationally  and  taking  into  account  the
for  the  profession  and  for  a  future  as  therapists,  given  that  there  is  little  research  in  this  area,dimension  of  the  number  of  individuals  infected  with  SARS-CoV-2,  and  also  due  to  the  fact  that  there  is  no
this  being  necessary  and  fundamental  for  evidence-based  practice,  which  consequentlyenough  studies  on  this  topic,  in  Portugal,  it  is  necessary  to  investigate  the  answer  to  the  question  of
will  be  essential  to  guide  and  guide  the  practice  as  health  professionals.aforementioned  investigation.
Huang  C,  Huang  L,  Wang  Y,  Li  X,  Ren  L,  Gu  X,  Kang  L,  Guo  L,  Liu  M,  Zhou  X,  Luo  J,  Huang  Z,  Tu  S,  Zhao  Y,  Chen  L,  Xu  D,  Li  Y ,  Li  C,  Peng  L,  
Li  Y,  Xie  W,  Cui  D,  Shang  L,  Fan  G,  Xu  J,  Wang  G,  Wang  Y,  Zhong  J,  Wang  C,  Wang  J,  Zhang  D,  Cao  B.  6-
19/,  consulted  on  03-10-2021.Medical  Virology,  93:1013–1022,  2021.  
–  Academia  Magazine  39-71,  2011.
National  Health  Service.  Health  topics  –  COVID-19.  Available  at  https://www.sns24.gov.pt/ tema/doencas-infecciosas/covidHalpin  S,  Mcivor  C,  Whyatt  G,  Adams  A,  Harvey  O,  Mclean  L,  Walshaw  C,  Kemp  S,  Corrado  J,  Singh  R,  Collins  T,  O’Connor  R,  Silvan  M.  
Postdischarge  symptoms  and  rehabilitation  needs  in  survivors  of  COVID  ÿ  19  infection :  A  cross  ÿ  sectional  evaluation.  Journal  of  Occupational  Therapy  of  the  University  of  São  Paulo  26(1):93-101,  2015.
Martins  J  and  Belfo  F.  Qualitative  research  methods  case  studies  in  information  systems  research.  proeliumGritti  C,  Paulino  V  and  Marques  L.  Occupational  performance,  quality  of  life  and  treatment  adherence  in  patients  with  epilepsy.
Paulino  M,  Dumas-Diniz  R,  Brissos  S,  Brites  R,  Alho  L,  Simões  M  and  Silva  C.  COVID-19  in  Portugal:  exploring  the  immediate  psychological  
impact  on  the  general  population.  Taylor  &  Francis  -  Psychology,  Health  &  Medicine,  26(1):  44–55,2020.  Fortin  M.  Fundamentals  and  Stages  of  the  Research  Process.  Lisbon:  Lusodidact.  2009
In:  Framework  for  the  practice  of  Occupational  Therapy  (2nd  ed.).  Livpsic  –  Edições  de  Psicologia,  sl,.  9:  2011b.
Silva  V,  and  Silva  V.  Epidemiological  Situation  of  Covid-19  in  Portugal  in  2020.  Brazilian  Journal  of  Development,  7(1):  11535–11542,  2021.
United  States  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Services.  (1979).  The  Belmont  Report  -  Ethical  Principles  and  Guidelines  for  the  Protection  of  
Human  Subjects  of  Research.  Disponível  em  https://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/regulations-and-policy/belmont  report/read-the-belmont-
report/index.html.  General  Directorate  of  Health.  Common  questions.  Available  at  https://covid19.min-saude.pt/category/perguntas-frequentes/,  accessed  on  
10-03-2021.
Marques  A.,  &  Trigueiro  M.  Glossary.  In:  Framework  for  the  Practice  of  Occupational  Therapy:  Domain  and  Process  (2nd  ed.).  Livpsic  –  Edições  
de  Psicologia,  sl,.  66:  2011a.
Marques  A,  Trigueiro  M.  Introduction  –  Promoting  health  and  participation  throughout  the  day,  through  involvement  in  occupations.
8,  2020.  current  affairs.  EFDeportes,  183,  2013.Andrade  M,  Silva  O,  Duarte,  M,  Ferreira  L,  Dias  O  andCosta  S.  Nuremberg  Code  and  Declaration  of  Helsinki:  transformations  and
month  consequences  of  COVID-19  in  patients  discharged  from  hospital :  a  cohort  study.  The  Lancet,  397:220–232,  2021.  
Sheehy,  L.  Considerations  for  Postacute  Rehabilitation  for  Survivors  of  Corresponding  Author :  JMIR  Public  Health  Surveill,  6(2),  1–  Machine Translated by Google

Machine Translated by Google