## Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology

ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/ncen20

## Attention, flexibility, and imagery in misophonia: Does attention exacerbate everyday disliking of sound?

J. Simner, S. Koursarou, L.J. Rinaldi &amp; J. Ward

To cite this article: J. Simner, S. Koursarou, L.J. Rinaldi &amp; J. Ward (2021) Attention, flexibility, and imagery in misophonia: Does attention exacerbate everyday disliking of sound?, Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology, 43:10, 1006-1017, DOI: 10.1080/13803395.2022.2056581

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/13803395.2022.2056581

© 2022 The Author(s). Published by Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor &amp; Francis Group.

Published online: 24 Mar 2022.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 2653

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 4 View citing articles

## Attention, flexibility, and imagery in misophonia: Does attention exacerbate everyday disliking of sound?

- J. Simner, S. Koursarou, L.J. Rinaldi and J. Ward

School of Psychology, University of Sussex, England

## ABSTRACT

Introduction: Misophonia is an unusually strong aversion to everyday sounds, such as chewing, crunching, or breathing. Here, we ask whether misophonia might be tied to an unusual profile of attention (and related traits), which serves to substantially heighten an otherwise everyday disliking of sounds.

Methods: In  Study 1, we tested 136 misophonics and 203 non-misophonics on self-report measures of attention to detail, cognitive inflexibility, and auditory imagery, as well as collecting details about their misophonia. In Study 2, we administered the Embedded Figures task to 20 misophonics and 36 non-misophonics.

Results: We first showed that the degree to which sounds trigger misophonia reflects the pattern by which they are (more mildly) disliked by everyone. This suggests that misophonia is scaffolded onto existing mechanisms rather than qualitatively different ones. Compared to non-misophonics, we also found that misophonics self-reported greater attention to detail, cognitive inflexibility, and auditory imagery. As their symptoms worsen, they also become more accurate in an attentional task (Embedded Figures).

Conclusions: Our findings provide a better understanding of misophonia and support the hypothesis  that  dispositional  traits  of  attention  to  detail  may  be  key  to  elevating  everyday  disliking  of sound into the more troubling aversions of misophonia.

## Does attention mediate between misophonia and everyday disliking of sound?

Misophonia  is  a  sound  sensitivity  characterized  by unusually  strong aversions to everyday  sounds, which  can  cause  anger,  disgust,  panic,  or  rage. Triggers  are  often  human  sounds  originating  from the  mouth (e.g.,  chewing,  crunching,  breathing,  and lip  smacking)  or  can  be  repetitive  noises  like  tapping  and  clicking.  Most  people  can  easily  ignore these  sounds  but  people  with  misophonia  experience strong emotional reactions, which can have a profound impact on daily life (negatively impacting school,  family,  workplace  etc.;  Wu  et  al.,  2014).  In this  study,  we  investigate  what  traits  might  contribute  to  the  profile  of  people  with  misophonia,  looking  particularly  at  heightened  attention,  as  well  as related  characteristics  of  cognitive  inflexibility  and unusually high auditory imagery. Establishing whether  misophonics  show  unusual  profiles  beyond sound  aversions  themselves  can  provide  valuable insight  into  potential  underlying  mechanisms  for this  condition.

J. Simner

Misophonia  is  relatively  poorly  understood,  having been first recognized only recently (Jastreboff &amp; Jastreboff, 2001). Symptoms tend to emerge in childhood or  adolescence  (Rouw  &amp;  Erfanian,  2018),  but  see  also Cavanna &amp; Seri (2015), and are related to subtle organizational  differences  in  the  brain,  including  increased functional  and  structural  connectivity  in  regions related to threat, emotion,  and  salience  (Kumar et  al., 2017;  Schröder  et  al.,  2019).  This  suggests sounds  may  have  a  larger  salient  and  emotional impact  on  people  with  misophonia,  compared  to most  other  people.  Here  we  examine  this  unusual salience, by looking at potential psychological mechanisms  underlying  it.  Our  hypothesis  here  is that heightened attention to detail (and related traits, see  below)  might  escalate  mild  everyday  disliking into  more  problematic  sound  aversions.

Attention to detail is the ability to allocate cognitive resources  to  all  details  of  a  task  or  environment,  no matter  how  small  (Young  et  al.,  1989).  If  people  with misophonia had superior attention to detail, they might overly  attend  to  sounds  that  would  otherwise  be  only

## ARTICLE HISTORY

Received 20 August 2021 Accepted 17 March 2022

## KEYWORDS

Misophonia; soundsensitivity; sensory sensitivity; aversion; attention

mildly  disturbing  and  easily  ignored  by  other  people. There are two key components to this hypothesis: the first  is  that  people  with  misophonia  may  have  attentional  differences,  and  the  second  is  that  misophonic triggers may be sounds that are already mildly bothersome for other people (albeit to a far lesser degree).

With  respect  to  the  nature  of  misophonia  trigger sounds, early data from Edelstein et al. (2013) suggested that misophonics and non-misophonics do indeed find the  same  stimuli  to  be  aversive  versus  non-aversive. Their  participants  rated  31  sound-clips  for  discomfort on a scale 0-4. There was a moderate by-item correlation across misophonics and non-misophonics (r = .4). However, many items were not misophonic triggers at all (e.g., rainfall, whale song, and bird singing), and the study  tested  just  six  misophonic  participants.  Hence, although  these  results  are  important  and  intriguing, there  are  questions  remaining  about  misophonic  triggers themselves, and the extent to which they might be aversive  for  both  misophonics  and  non-misophonics alike.  We  therefore  address  this  question  by  testing a  large  group of people with and without misophonia, presenting a large number of known triggers of misophonia (see Methods ).

The  second  component  to  our  hypothesis  is  that mildly  aversive  sounds  may  become  heightened  from a  priori traits  of  heightened  attention.  To  begin,  it  is certainly  true  that  people  with  misophonia  find  their aversive  sounds hard to ignore. In a dichotic listening task,  Silva  &amp;  Sanchez  (2019)  showed  that  people  with misophonia  were  significantly  worse  at  attending  to sentences compared with non-misophonics, if sentences were played in the presence of a misophonic sound (e.g., chewing;  but  no  difference  for  other  sounds).  Frank et al. (2020) found similarly for misophonics attending to  on-screen  (visual)  stimuli,  both  during  and  after hearing aversive sounds. Hence, people with misophonia are especially attentive to misophonic triggers, even at  the  expense  of  attention  to  other  stimuli.  Here,  we propose that people with misophonia may also be more widely attentive, as a dispositional trait. In other words, we suggest that people with misophonia may have more general differences in attention to detail - beyond misophonic triggers. If true, this trait difference might act as a  precursor  to  the  emergence  of  misophonia,  causing people with misophonia to overly attend to sounds that others can ignore.

Surprisingly little is known about dispositional traits of attention in misophonia. However, one study of auditoryevoked  EEG  potentials  found  significant  differences between  misophonics  and  non-misophonics  during  an 'oddball task' (Schröder et al., 2014). Participants listened to a stream of regular beeps of 1000 Hz interspersed with

oddball beeps. Data showed that misophonics had significant differences in the mean amplitudes of their N1 peak, an  EEG  feature  linked  to  early  attentional  processing (Näätänen,  1992;  Rinne  et  al.,  2006).  Another  study,  of people  with  misophonia  performing  a  'stop  signal  task' (which  measures  response  inhibition),  found  that  misophonics favored accuracy rather than speed, and employed more attentional resources to this end (Eijsker et al., 2019); i.e., activating posterior cingulate cortices less than non-misophonics  during successful inhibition, where similar deactivation suggests increasing attentional loads).  More  recently,  Eijsker  et  al.  (2021)  have  shown differences  in  white  matter  structure  in  regions  controlling  attention  toward  emotionally  salient  information. These  three  studies  suggest  that  there  may  be  broader attentional  differences  associated  with  misophonia  beyond being unable to ignore trigger sounds themselves.

However, one further study has suggested that misophonics may be broadly in attentive. When Frank et al. (2020) found that aversive sounds distracted misophonics from an on-screen visual task (see above), they also found a null effect suggesting they may be equally inattentive  to  the  screen  even  before  sounds  were  played. However,  we  suggest  that  participants  may  have  been distracted  by  the expectation of  sounds  (because  the authors  based  their  methods  on  Panagopoulos  et  al., 2013, who did indeed forewarn participants before the study began.) Indeed, Frank et al. warn of caution when interpreting their result, suggesting future studies warrant a replication in the complete absence of sounds. In the  current  study,  we  will  test  more  directly  whether people  with  misophonia  have  heightened  attention  to detail using a series of measures. In Study 1, we present the Detail and Flexibility questionnaire (DFlex; Roberts et  al.,  2011)  a  questionnaire  developed  specifically  to detect excessive attention to detail (and also the trait of cognitive inflexibility;  see  below).  We  will  also  use  the Attention to detail the subscale of the Autism Spectrum Quotient (AQ; Baron-Cohen et al., 2001), a second measure of focused attention, and one that has successfully shown differences in other groups with heightened sensory sensitivities (e.g., synaesthetes; Ward et al., 2018). Both  scales  measure  attention-to-detail,  but  the  Dflex additionally taps the related trait of local processing (i.e., a detail/local-focused approach at the relative expense of global context). It was also created to avoid a potential male-bias of the AQ subscale, which (the authors suggest) had been written with the male profile of autism in mind, and may be less sensitive for female samples. We therefore included both scales for their broader focus on traits of attention (and we note the small but significant correlation across scales, r = .26, p &lt; .001; Roberts et al., 2011). Finally, in Study 2, we will present a behavioral

task known to be sensitive to the local processing/attention to detail (the Embedded Figures task; Witkin et al., 1971; see Study 2).

A second psychological trait of interest is Cognitive Inflexibility (also known as a difficulty in set-shifting, or cognitive rigidity). Flexibility is a cognitive style related to  the  ability  to  shift  selectively  between  thoughts  in response to environmental demands (Dajani &amp; Uddin, 2015; Scott, 1962). In flexibility is related to poorer selfregulation and can be involved in clinical vulnerabilities, such as for  obsessive-compulsive disorder  (Van Passel et  al.,  2016)  and  anorexia nervosa (Maria et al., 2020). Importantly,  it  is  also  closely  related  to  the  trait  of perfectionism (Ferrari &amp; Mautz, 1997), a feature found in  misophonia  (Jager  et  al.,  2020).  Most  importantly, models  of  perfectionism  (Shafran  et  al.,  2002)  suggest that perfectionists show an attentional bias, which allocates greater attention to negative information than to positive  information.  In  the  case  of  misophonia,  this would translate into an over-focusing on the negatively perceived sounds. Our use of the DFlex questionnaire to assess attention to detail (see above) also therefore offers the opportunity to explore this relationship with perfectionism (Jager et al., 2020), since the DFlex measure has subscales of both attention and (in)flexibility. We predict greater inflexibility, linked to higher perfectionism (Jager  et  al.,  2020),  and  increased  attention  (which  in daily life might include attention on the negatively perceived sounds).

The final trait of interest is auditory imagery, which we propose may also serve to enhance unwanted attention  toward  sounds.  Auditory  imagery  is  the  mental simulation of sound in the absence of external auditory stimuli  (Lima  et  al.,  2015).  An  example  of  auditory imagery  is  hearing  a  familiar  song  in  your  head  or having  a  mental  internal  dialog.  Imagery  is  quasiiconic  (i.e.,  it resembles  real-world  sounds,  albeit within  the  mind)  but  its  vividness  varies  widely among  individuals  (Lima  et  al.,  2015).  These  differences are also reflected in brain structure: people scoring higher on auditory imagery also show thicker gray matter  in  regions,  such  as  the  superior  temporal  gyri (Halpern,  2015).  Here,  we  ask  whether  auditory  imagery is different in people with misophonia, given the known  relationship  between  imagery  and  attention. Moriya  (2018)  found  that  (visual)  mental  imagery influenced attentional guidance, so could direct attention  during  a  (visual)  search  task.  We  therefore  ask whether  heightened  auditory  imagery  may  lead  to similarly  heightened  auditory  attention  for  sounds, thereby  making it  harder  for  people  with  misophonia to  ignore  them.  To  test  this,  we  will  administer  an adaptation  of  the Clarity  of  Auditory  Imagery  Scale

(CAIS; Willander &amp; Baraldi, 2010), a self-report instrument that allows participants to rate their imagery for sounds, such as someone laughing or people chatting. This type of self-report questionnaire has been shown to tap imagery in a surprisingly robust way, correlating with both behavioral measures of imagery (e.g., Halpern, 2015; Keogh &amp; Pearson, 2018) and with differences in brain structure (Halpern, 2015). We therefore  predict  that  people  with  misophonia  may  show heightened  auditory  imagery,  elsewhere  linked  to heightened attention.

In  summary,  we  propose  to  test  a  group  of  people with and without misophonia (whom we will identify using the Misophonia Questionnaire ; (Wu et al., 2014). We will then examine two different components of our theory  that  (a)  heightened  attention  to  detail,  and related traits of increased auditory imagery and cognitive inflexibility, may lead to greater focus on (b) what would otherwise  be  mildly  aversive  stimuli  for  everyone else. We predict that people with misophonia will score  significantly  higher  on  attention  to  detail  subscales  of  the  AQ  (Baron-Cohen  et  al.,  2001)  and  the DFlex (Roberts et al., 2011) while also showing greater cognitive  rigidity  (Flexibility  subscale  of  the  DFlex), and  higher  auditory  imagery  on  the  CAIS  questionnaire  (Willander  &amp;  Baraldi,  2010).  Additionally,  we predict a strong positive correlation between misophonics  and  non-misophonics  in  how  much  they  dislike a  large  set  of  misophonic  trigger  sounds,  suggesting that  misophonia  may  arise  from  an  unusually  heightened manifestation of the everyday  disliking of sounds.

## Study 1

## Method

## Participants

Our recruitment began with 149 self-declared misophonics  and  344  members  of  the  general  population,  18 +  years.  Self-declared  misophonics  were  recruited  via online  forums  where  misophonia  is  discussed  (e.g., Facebook, Reddit; Twitter), whilst our general population were recruited from the University of Sussex community.  All participants were  screened  using  the Misophonia  Questionnaire  (Wu  et  al.,  2014);  see below). Those  exceeding  the  diagnostic  threshold entered our misophonia group (whether from our selfdeclared  or  general  population  streams),  while  those falling below this threshold entered our nonmisophonics  group  (see Methods ).  We  excluded  any self-declared  misophonic  (n  =  38)  who  did  not  pass the  MQ, along with participants  with  incomplete  data

(n  =  116;  since  our  ethics  allowed  participants  to  skip any single question if they so wished). With these procedures,  n  =  71  members  of  the  general  population moved  into  our  non-misophonics  group,  exactly  in line with the published prevalence of misophonia (Wu et al., 2014).

Our final sample contained 136 misophonics (mean age  =  27.60  years,  SD  =  13.62;  108  female/22  males/2 non-binary/4  preferred  not  to  say)  and  203  nonmisophonics (mean age = 20.19 years, SD = 4.94; 161 female/37  male/4  non-binary/1  preferred  not  to  say). Ethical  approval  for  both  studies  presented  here  was obtained  from  the  Sussex  University  Science  and Technology  Ethics  Committee  ethics  board  prior  to testing  (approval  number  ER/lr290/3).  Participants took  part  without  monetary  incentive,  but  students were offered course credit.

## Materials and procedure

Participants  completed  our  study  online,  using  our  inhouse web application (www.misophonia-hub.org). This online platform is a one-stop resource containing all our tests  and  measures  alongside  advice  and  support  for adults, children, parents, researchers, clinicians, and educators.  Participants  were  sent  a  URL  via  e-mail  to  take part,  which  led  them  directly  to  our  testing  page.  The study began with a request for demographic information on age, gender, etc. Participants then began our testing, which included our five measures presented in the order described  below  (alongside  other  tests  to  be  reported elsewhere). Our task took 25 minutes to complete.

Misophonia Questionnaire (MQ; Wu et al., 2014). The MQ contains three sections  (for  Sections  1  and  2,  see Study 2). Section 3, our measure here, is used to identify individuals with misophonia (Wu et al., 2014). It is a 15point  severity  scale,  where  participants  indicate  any sound sensitivity and its severity, by taking into account their number of triggers, degree of distress, and impairment in their lives (Wu et al.,  2014).  Responses  range from minimal to very severe, where scores ≥7 indicate at least 'moderate sound sensitivities . . . that cause significant interference in my life and which I spend a great deal of conscious energy resisting or being affected by' (St.  Clare,  2003).  Individuals  reporting  ≥7  on  this Severity  Scale  are  considered  to  have  clinically  significant  misophonia  (Wu  et  al.,  2014),  since  this  mirrors cutoffs  for  other  clinical  conditions  (e.g.,  National Institute of Mental Health's Global ObsessiveCompulsive Scale ; St. Clare, 2003). This was the threshold taken in the current study to classify our participants into two groups (misophonics vs non-misophonics; see Participants ).  We  found  this  measure  to  be  reliable  in our sample with a Cronbach's alpha of α = .92.

Sussex  Misophonia  Scale  -  Triggers  (SMS-Triggers; Rinaldi  et  al.,  2021).  The  Sussex  Misophonia  Scale includes  a  section  (Part  1)  dedicated  to  misophonia triggers.  We  included  this  measure  to  estimate  how aversive  are  misophonic  trigger  sounds,  for  both  misophonics and non-misophonics. Here, participants were presented with 48 known triggers for misophonia (e.g., the sound of people eating ) and asked Have you always hated these things? Or don't you mind them? Within this test,  participants  first  saw  eight  broad  categories  of triggers (e.g., People eating ;  see, Table 1) to which they responded individually Yes or No. If all eight responses were  No,  the  measure  ended.  However,  any  category that responded positively revealed a full list of triggers within  that  category.  For  example,  if  the  participant responded Yes to I hate the sound of people eating , this revealed  further  eight  types  of  eating-sound  ( crunchy foods (e.g., apples); crispy snacks; chewing; lip smacking; swallowing; slurping  (a  drink);  wet  mouth  sounds  (e.g., yogurt); other eating sound ; see, Table 1) along with the question Which do you hate hearing? Tick all that apply . In  total,  participants  saw  48  trigger  items,  which  are shown in Table 1.

Detail and Flexibility Questionnaire (DFlex; Roberts et  al.,  2011).  This  self-report  instrument  contains  24 items,  which  measure  two  aspects  of  neurocognitive functioning: cognitive rigidity (i.e., difficulty with flexibility; e.g., 'I like doing things in a particular order or routine') and attention to detail (e.g., 'I tend to focus at one thing at a time and get it out of proportion to the total  situation').  Responses  are  given  using  a  6-point Likert scale (from 1 = 'strongly disagree' to 6 = 'strongly agree). A higher total score indicates more attentive or inflexible behaviors. Both subscales show high internal reliability,  construct  validity,  and  strong  discriminant

Table  1. Triggers  for  misophonia,  and  their  superordinate category.

| Category                        | Trigger                                                                                                                                    |
|---------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| sound of people eating          | crunchy foods (e.g., apples); crispy snacks; chewing; lip smacking; swallowing; slurping (a drink); wet mouth sounds (e.g., yogurt); other |
| sound of repetitive tapping     | pen clicking; foot tapping/ foot on floor; repetitive barking; tapping pen/ pencil; tapping finger; typing on a computer; other            |
| sound of rustling throat sounds | rustling paper; rustling plastic; other throat clearing; hiccups; humming; other                                                           |
| sounds from mouth and nose      | breathing; snorting (e.g., when people laugh); nose sniffing; coughing; snoring; whistling; sneezing; burping; other                       |
| voice sounds                    | certain accents; some people's voices; certain letter sounds; certain vowels; certain consonants; other                                    |
| repetitive visual movements     | repetitive leg rocking; foot shuffling; people rocking back and forth on their chair; other                                                |
| background sounds               | clock ticking; car engines; refrigerator humming; dishwasher; washing machine/ dryer; fan; other                                           |

Note that one category is non-auditory because people with misophonia can also be triggered by repetitive visual movements such as leg-swaying

validity  (based  originally  on  groups  with  and  without eating disorders; (Roberts et al., 2011)). More recently, the  DFlex  questionnaire  was  validated  using  a  French clinical  sample,  where  it  again  showed  good  psychometric  properties  in  distinguishing  clinical  groups (Maria et al., 2020). In our own sample, we found this measure to show excellent reliability with a Cronbach's alpha of α = .91.

Attention  to  detail  Subscale  of  the  Autism  Spectrum Quotient  (AQ; (Baron-Cohen  et  al.,  2001).  The  AQ  is a  widely  used  measure  for  identifying  autistic  traits, including the trait of attention to detail. The full questionnaire  consists  of  50  items  rated  using  a  4-point Likert  scale  (definitely  agree;  slightly  agree,'  'slightly disagree,'  'definitely  disagree').  Here  we  presented one of its five subscales, attention to detail, which contains  10  items  such  as  'I  tend  to  notice  details  that others  do  not'  or  the  reverse  coded  'I  don't  usually notice  small  changes  in  a  situation  or  a  person's appearance.' 1 The total  scores  on  this  sub-scale  range between  0  and  10,  where  higher  total  scores  indicate stronger attention to detail. The AQ scale has previously shown  acceptable  internal  consistency  varying  from α  =  .63  -  .78  (Baron-Cohen  et  al.,  2001;  Kurita  et  al., 2005) and in our own sample showed α = .84. Its subscale of attention to detail reliably predicts other sensory conditions such as synesthesia (Ward et al., 2018).

The Clarity of Auditory Imagery Scale (CAIS; (Willander  &amp;  Baraldi,  2010) -  Adapted .  The  CAIS  is a  self-report  instrument  measuring  auditory  imagery, which  presents  verbal  descriptions  of  sounds  (e.g., a dog barking) and asks participants to rate their auditory  imagery  using  a  5-point  Likert  Scale.  Given  our detailed  work  in  mental  imagery  (Dance,  Jaquiery et  al.,  2021)  we  adapted  this  scale  in  two  ways.  The original  measure  requires  participants  to  rate  how clearly  they  could  'imagine  the  sounds';  however, recent work shows that mental imagery and imagination are  distinct  (people  without  mental  imagery  can  still imagine; e.g., Dance, Jaquiery et al., 2021). We therefore rephrased  the  instructions  as  follows: How clearly  can you HEAR these sounds in your head, as if they were real sounds? Likert  labels  were  changed  accordingly  from 1 = not at all to 6 = very clear (like a real sound) , these last four words being our own addition. From the original item list of Willander and Baraldi (2010), we presented  the  following:  a  clock  ticking,  a  dog  barking, someone sneezing, a person laughing, a group of people chatting. Higher scores on the CAIS scale indicate more vivid imagery and the scale has been previously shown to  have  a  good  internal  consistency  of  α  =  .88.  In  our own sample, we found a yet higher internal reliability of α = .92.

## Analytic plan

We used R version 3.6.3 in RStudio, with the following packages  (and  uses  in  brackets):  We  conducted  all analyses  in  R  version  3.6.3  using  RStudio.  We  used the  following  R  packages  to  conduct  our  analyses: tidyverse (for general data wrangling), afex to perform (ANOVA), stats to  perform  (t-tests),  and effsize to calculate  (effect  sizes).  Prior  to  each  analysis,  data were  checked  for  outliers  by  imposing  cutoffs  at  3 SDs above and below the mean; there were no outliers beyond  these  points  so  all  data  was  retained.  Where appropriate,  we  describe  our  sample  descriptively  in terms  of  using  means  and  standard  deviations  (SDs) where appropriate. We also confirmed the assumptions of  normality  by  checking  QQ  plots  and  the  ShapiroWilk test, and we confirmed that homogeneity of variance  was  checked  using  Levene's  test.  We  use  independent-samples t-tests to investigate groupwise differences  between  misophonics  vs  non-misophonics for  AQ-attention  in  detail  and  the  CAIS.  We  used ANOVA for the DFlex (which contains two subscales). Where  applicable,  we  applied  Bonferroni  correction for  multiple  comparisons.  There  were  no  significant differences between our two groups in terms of gender ratios  (Fisher's  exact  test p =  .428),  therefore  gender did not enter our modeling of dependent variables. In contrast, age was significantly different across groups ( t (337) = 7.09, p &lt; .001, Hedges' g = .79; see Participants for means/SDs) so was entered into our initial models. However, it was a non-significant predictor and so was subsequently dropped from our final models reported below.

## Results

## Do people with misophonia have greater attention to detail (AQ questionnaire)?

Within  the  AQ  subscale  of  attention  to  detail,  scores range  between  0  and  10,  where  higher  scores  indicate greater attention to detail. We followed (Baron-Cohen et al., 2001) in scoring 1 point for responses of 'Slightly/ Definitely agree' to positively worded items (i.e., from the original AQ, items: 5, 6, 9, 12, 19, 23) and 'Slightly/ Definitely disagree' to negatively worded items (28, 29, 30, 49). After confirming that there were no violations in assumptions (Levene's test for homogeneity of variance. . F (1,337) = 1.06, p = .305), we compared attention to detail  across  groups  (misophonics vs. non-misophonics). Misophonics scored a mean of 5.47 ( SD = 1.95), while non-misophonics scored 4.57 ( SD = 2.08) and this difference  was  significant  ( (302.64)  =  -4.05, t p &lt;  .001), with a small-to-medium effect size ( d = -0.44).

## Do people with misophonia have greater attention to detail and inflexibility (DFlex Questionnaire)

Within the DFlex (Roberts et al., 2011), total scores range between 24 and 144, while each subscale of 12 items ranges from 12 to 72. Higher scores indicate greater attention to detail  and  inflexibility.  We  ran  a  2  ×  2  mixed  ANOVA crossing  group  (Misophonics,  Non-misophonics)  with sub-scale (Attention, Inflexibility). We found a significant main  effect  of  subscale  ( F (1,337)  =  59.73, p &lt;  .001, η G = 0.23) since scores were higher overall on Cognitive 2 Rigidity ( M = 41.80, SE = 0.54) versus Attention to detail subscale ( M = 38.80, SE = 0.54). More importantly, we also found a significant main effect of group ( F (1,337) = 31.24, p &lt;  .001,  η G  =  0.75),  indicating  that  misophonics 2 ( M =  43.10, SE =  0.71)  scored  significantly  higher  than the  non-misophonics  ( M =  37.40, SE =  0.71),  with  no interaction  ( F (1,337)  =  0.48, p =  .487,  η G  &lt;.001).  Our 2 data therefore indicate higher scores for misophonics on both  subscales of attention to detail and  cognitive inflexibility.

## Do people with misophonia have higher auditory imagery (CAIS)?

Misophonic  participants  scored  overall  higher  in  the CAIS ( M = 18.99, SD = 5.42) than in non-misophonics ( M = 17.04, SD = 5.42). An independent-samples t-test showed this difference to be significant ( t (289.48)  =  -3.22, p =  .001)  with  a  small  effect  size (Cohen's d =  -.34).  Results  therefore  support  our hypothesis that  misophonic people have higher clarity and vividness of auditory imagery than nonmisophonics.

## Are misophonic trigger-sounds also (mildly) aversive for Non-misophonics? (Sussex misophonia scale)

Our  aim  here  was  to  examine  whether  misophonia stems from an exaggeration of dislike felt by everyone (albeit  shifted  upward  in  severity)  rather  than  qualitative differences in trigger-class. Our analysis began with the  48  triggers  of  the  Sussex  Misophonia  Scale,  which were rated individually by each participant, using checkboxes  to  indicate  if  they  hated  the  sound  (vs.  did  not mind it). We counted the number of 'hate' responses for each trigger and did this separately for misophonics versus  non-misophonics.  This  gave  us  a  ranking  for each  group,  from  the  most-hated  trigger  to  the  leasthated  trigger.  We  then  compared  the  order  of  these rankings across  participant  group,  using  a  Spearman's rank correlation. This analysis revealed a highly

significant  correlation  ( r =  .88, p &lt;  .001),  suggesting that the most aversive triggers for people with misophonia (e.g., chewing) were also those disliked most often by non-misophonics.

In  addition  to  finding  a  strong  correlation  in  the rankings  of  disliked  triggers,  we  also  found  that  the mean  number  of  people  disliking  this  set  of  triggers was - as expected - significantly higher for misophonics ( M = 41.02 SD = 28.74) than non-misophonics ( M = 23.94 SD = 20.34; t( 47) = -8.94, p &lt; .001). For the full-ordered  list  of  triggers  ranked  by  misophonics  and non-misophonics see Supplementary Information (SI).

## Discssion

Here, we tested a model of misophonia, which suggests that  the  sound  aversions  are  related  in  part  to  heightened attention to detail, auditory imagery, and cognitive  inflexibility.  Our  model  produced  four  testable hypotheses:  that results showed  that  misophonics would score significantly higher on attention to detail, including  the  component  of  attention  implicated  in local  (over  global)  processing.  They  also  showed  two different  scales  ((a)  from  the  AQ  and  (b)  DFlex  questionnaires), as well as (c) greater cognitive inflexibility on the DFlex, and (d) heightened auditory imagery on the  CAIS.  Our  hypotheses  were  supported.  We  also predicted  that  the  sounds  that  trigger  misophonia would be somewhat aversive to all people (although far less),  and  this  was  also  supported.  We  return  to  these results in the General Discussion. Before then, we seek objective validation of our self-report findings.

## Study 2

In Study 1 we saw that people with misophonia reported greater attention to detail and related traits (inflexibility, imagery)  than  people  without  misophonia.  However, our measures were self-report questionnaires. In Study 2, we provide behavioral support for these questionnaire data.  One  way  to  measure  attention  to  detail  is  via  its relationship with local processing. As noted above, this is  the  ability  to  focus  on  the  fine-grained  details  of a stimulus, or process information in a more detailedoriented  way  -  for  example,  when  locating  a  face  in a  crowd  (Jolliffe  &amp;  Baron-Cohen,  1997;  Koldewyn et  al.,  2013).  Previous  studies  have  captured  this  by asking participants to scrutinize complex figures or patterns. The most widely known measure is the Embedded Figures Test (Witkin et al., 1971), where participants see a complex and camouflaging gestalt, and their task is to spot a simple form within the complex figure. Clinical groups with heightened attention to detail (e.g., people

with autism) are found to have superior performance in this task (e.g., Jolliffe &amp; Baron-Cohen, 1997). We therefore ask whether the Embedded Figures task can provide behavioral support for the self-reports of greater attention to detail in people with misophonia. We hypothesize  greater  accuracy  and/or  faster  response  times  in detecting embedded figures for people with misophonia.

## Method

## Participants

We  tested  20  misophonics  (mean  age  =  21.2  years, SD =  3.7; 18  female/2  non-binary),  and  36  nonmisophonics  (mean  age  =  19.9  years, SD =  1.3;  29 female/6 males/1 preferred not to say). As before, their group  status  was  determined  objectively  using  the Severity  Scale  of  the  MQ  (Wu  et  al.,  2014;  see  above, and Methods below).

Participants were recruited from the same population as  Study  1.  The  inclusion  criteria  for  Study  2  were  (a) that  participants  had  opted  to  complete  the  full  MQ (rather than just the severity scale required for Study  1),  (b)  they  completed  our  second  measure  in full  ( Embedded Figures ,  see  below),  and  (c)  they  were using  a  device  with  a  trackpad  to  guide  their  pointer. Our task measures response times, which differ depending on  device  (e.g., mouse  requires  greater  armmovement  than  trackpad).  We  therefore  determined which device participants were using (via an on-screen question)  and  selected  trackpad-users  only  because these  represented  our  largest  group.  (In  general,  we find  our  test-participants  are  approximately  55-65% trackpad,  20%  mouse,  5-10%  touchscreen,  with  1020% unknown). Hence, we excluded further 30 participants using non-trackpad pointers, and additional five participants  who  encountered  a  technical  problem (which  inadvertently  repeated  trials  if  the  participant hit refresh).

## Materials and procedure

Participants completed our study online as before (see Study 1). Our task had the two components below, and took 20-30 minutes to complete.

Misophonia Questionnaire (MQ; Wu et al., 2014). The MQ contains 21 questions across three sections. Section  3  is  described  in  Study  1,  while  sections  1 and  2  contain  questions  about  misophonia  soundtriggers  ('Symptoms  scale':  8  items)  and  emotions/ behaviors  ('Emotions  and  behaviours  Scale'  11 items), respectively. Both are answered using a 5-point Likert Scale (0-Not at all true, to 4-Always  true)  and  show  good  internal  consistency (α = .86; Wu et al., 2014). In Section 1, participants indicated  how  many  different  types  of  sound  they are  sensitive  to  in  daily  life  (i.e.,  'In  comparison  to other  people,  I  am  sensitive  to  the  sound  of  . . .  '). Here,  they  selected  one  or  more  from  eight  soundcategories,  which  are  the  most  commonly  known triggers  of  misophonia  (Rinaldi  et  al.,  2021).  These sound-categories comprised: people eating, Repetitive  tapping,  rustling,  people  making  nasal sounds,  people  making  throat  sounds,  certain  consonants  and/or  vowels,  environmental  sounds,  and other.  Each  category  was  accompanied  by  examples (e.g., people  eating:  chewing,  swallowing,  lips  smacking,  slurping,  etc .).  High  scores  on  this  scale  represent  a  greater  aversion  to  sounds  (i.e.,  a  larger number  of  categories  triggering  misophonia).  In Section  2,  participants  describe  how  they  respond to  their  aversive  sounds  by  selecting  one  or  more emotions/behaviors  (e.g., Become angry?  Cover  your ears? ). Again, higher scores represent greater misophonia.

Participants completed the MQ once only, with their data from Section 3 cleaved off for Study 1 to determine group  status,  and  with  all  three  sections  entering  the analysis for Study 2 (with a different statistical approach; see Results ).

Embedded Figures Test ( Witkin et al., 1971). This task had 32 trials, including three practice items. Our materials  were  taken  from  an  adaptation  of  the  Embedded Figures  task  (Ward  et  al.,  2018).  In  each  trial,  participants were shown a line drawing (target shape) at the top  of  the  screen,  and  four  complex  shapes  below (labeled 1, 2, 3, 4). Participants were required to select the option (1-4) which contains the target shape within it (for example, see, Figure 1). Participants were told the target  shape  was  embedded  without  rotating  or  changing in any way. Participants had 12 seconds to respond by selecting the correct answer on screen (i.e., hovering their  pointer  over  1,  2,  3,  or  4  and  clicking  to  select). Participants  began  with  practice  trials  providing  feedback, but there was no feedback during target trials. The Embedded Figures task has been shown to be a reliable measure  with  an  acceptable  internal  consistency  of α = .76 (Mumma, 1993).

## Analytic plan

Our  statistical  tool  and  packages  were  identical  to Study  1,  with  the  addition  of Hmisc for  correlations. Data  were  treated  as  in  Study  1,  except  that  analyses were independent-samples t-tests for groupwise

Figure 1. Example item from the Embedded Figures task. Participants must select the option (1-4) which contains the target shape within it. Here the correct answer is 2.

differences in accuracy/response time, and correlations within  groups.  There  were  no  significant  differences between our two groups in terms of age ( (54) = 1.88, t p = .065, Hedges' g = .53) or gender  ratio ( χ2 (1) = .850, p = .356, Cramér V = .123); see Participants for  descriptive  statistics);  therefore,  age and  gender  did  not  enter  our  modeling  of  dependent variables. (Here, gender was treated as female vs. nonfemale,  given  our  small  sample  size  and  three  zerocells  in  our  2  ×  4  contingency  table  of  Group  × Gender;  see Participants . However,  applying  Fisher's exact  test  to  the  sparse  2  ×  4  table  shows  a  significant difference  of p =  .030.  So  for  added  conservativeness, we also ran initial models including gender but it was a non-significant predictor, so was subsequently dropped  from  our  final  models  below.)

of  triggers  (aversive  sounds,  e.g.,  rustling;  Section  1),  the number  of  resultant  emotions/behaviors  (e.g.,  becoming angry; Section 2), and a severity score (Section 3; used to divide  our  participants  into  groups;  see  above).  In  our analysis, we first simply compare means in the Embedded Figures  task  across  participant  groups,  asking  whether people with misophonia are more accurate and/or faster than non-misophonics. Next, we examined how speed and accuracy are predicted by fine-grained information from the MQ sub-scales.

## Results

The  Embedded Figures  task  produces  an  accuracy  score and  a  response  time  (RT)  for  correct  items.  The  MQ produces one datapoint for each of three subscales: number

We  first  compared  means  groupwise.  An  independent  samples  t-test  showed  no  significant  difference across groups in either accuracy (misophonics M =  19.15, SD =  3.62;  non-misophonics M =  20.64, SD = 4.02; t (42.99) = 1.42, p = .163; d = .38 ) or speed (misophonics M = 6665.55, SD = 1608.12; nonmisophonics M = 6580.67, SD = 1433.62; t (35.70)  =  0.20, p =  .845; d  =  .05 )  with  negligiblesmall effect sizes.

Next, we examined our data at a more fine-grained level,  using  all  the  information  available  across  our three subscales for misophonia - rather than a simple

categorical division of misophonics versus nonmisophonics.  We  hypothesized  that  people  with  misophonia may behave differently to non-misophonics in the Embedded Figures task if we could include all the information across their full range of scores. For example,  on  a  scale  relating  to  trigger-sounds,  this  could range  from  just  one  or  two  types  of  sound  (e.g.,  rustling)  rarely  experienced,  to  as  many  as  eight  sounds experienced very often. We therefore separately correlated  Sub-scales  1  and  2  of  the  MQ  (trigger-sounds, emotions/behavior)  with  speed  and  accuracy  in  our task. 2 Table  2  shows  the  correlation  coefficients  for both  misophonics  and  non-misophonics.  For  people with  misophonia,  there  was  a  significant  relationship between accuracy and the 'Symptoms scale' of the MQ (relating  to  number  and frequency of aversive sounds ( r =  .63, p =  .002,  which  survives  correction;  see, Table  2).  Specifically,  the  greater  the  number  of  trigger-sounds symptoms for people with misophonia, the more accurately they performed in our attention task. No other effects were significant (see, Table 2). Finally, and importantly, MQ scores did not predict the speed of  responding  for  either  group  (misophonia  -  all uncorrected p' s  ≥  .2;  non-misophonics  -  all  uncorrected p' s ≥ .07), suggesting that the superior accuracy of  misophonics  was  not  simply  because  they  slowed down.

## Discussion

We tested groups of people with and without misophonia on the Embedded Figures task, a behavioral measure known to tap into attention to detail. However, in our study, we found a relationship between accuracy in the Embedded Figures task and the degree of misophonia. For our misophonia group only, the greater the misophonia  symptoms  (i.e.,  the  greater  the  number  and frequency of aversive sounds experienced in daily life),

Table  2. Correlation  coefficients  (and  p  values)  for  correlations between each of two MQ subscales (Symptoms, Emotions, and Behaviors)  and  accuracy  (top)  or  response  times  (bottom)  for both misophonics and controls.

| Accuracy        | 'Symptoms' Scale   | 'Emotions and Behaviours' Scale   |
|-----------------|--------------------|-----------------------------------|
| Misophonic      | 0.63 (.002*)       | 0.21 (.382)                       |
| Non- misophonic | -0.04 (.817)       | 0.25 (.146)                       |
| Response time   | 'Symptoms' Scale   | 'Emotions and Behaviours' Scale   |
| Misophonic      | 0.30 (.202)        | 0.17 (.472)                       |
| Non- misophonic | 0.03 (.855)        | 0.31 (.068)                       |

Note: P values are uncorrected; Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons  sets  the  alpha  level  at  .006;  significant  results  at  this  new  level  are indicated with an asterisk the  higher  the  accuracy.  This  accuracy  did  not  come with any response time penalty, and provides behavioral support for our self-report findings in Study 1.

## General discussion

Our research centered around the idea that dispositional differences in attentional traits might lead people with misophonia  to  over-attend  to  otherwise  only  mildly aversive  sounds.  Our  data  supported  this  hypothesis. In Study 1, we found a broad trait-profile of heightened attention  to  detail/local  processing,  as  well  as  related traits  of  cognitive  inflexibility,  and  high  auditory  imagery. In Study 2 we found behavioral support from the Embedded  Figures  task  (which  taps  local  processing/ attention  to  detail)  in  that  misophonics  with  worse symptoms (i.e., many frequent aversive trigger-sounds) performed more accurately than those with fewer aversive trigger-sounds.

Our behavioral results in Study 2 showed a specific pattern of attention in misophonia. Attentional superiority was related to the number/frequency of misophonia triggers (i.e., our correlation was with Scale 1) rather than  the  resultant  behavior/emotions  (no  correlation with  Scale  2).  Understanding  this  difference  provides a clearer interpretation of our results; i.e., attention-todetail  is  linked  with  how  often  someone  encounters misophonia triggers, and not with how much they are upset or impaired. This is a very intuitive finding: better attention  relates  to  more  easily  spotting  annoying sounds.  Of  course,  this  finding  must  be  interpreted within our relatively small sample since we also found a slight trend for Scale 2 ( p = .06 uncorrected against an adjusted alpha of .006). Future studies might therefore seek  to  replicate  this  finding  and/or  use  alternative scales  with  more  items  or  subscales  tapping  behavior/ impact  (e.g.,  Rosenthal  et  al.,  2021;  Vitoratou  et  al., 2021).

Our  findings  on  cognitive  inflexibility  and  attention  to  detail  are  particularly  notable  since  they  are also  seen  in  a  number  of  conditions,  such  as  obsessive-compulsive disorder (Yovel et al., 2005), depression (Kato, 2016), and  perfectionism  (Ferrari  &amp; Mautz,  1997;  Ong  et  al.,  2019).  Importantly,  these same  traits  have  also  been  linked  to  misophonia (Cusack  et  al.,  2018;  Eijsker  et  al.,  2019;  Jager  et  al., 2020).  The  perfectionist  traits  of  people  with  misophonia  can  also  be  seen  in  behavioral  tasks,  such  as the stop signal task, which measures response inhibition. Here,  misophonics  show  longer  stop-signal delays,  meaning  they  favor  accuracy  rather  than speed, implying traits of perfectionism (Eijsker et  al.,  2019).  Our  findings  of  cognitive  inflexibility

and heightened attention to detail also fit within this trait  profile,  and  may  produce  (or  at  the  very  least correlate  with)  an  over-attending  to  sounds.  In  this respect,  misophonia may have similarities  to  phobias (e.g.,  fear  of  spiders)  in  that  it  elicits  both  behavioral avoidance  of  triggering  stimuli  but  also  heightened attention  toward  those  same  stimuli  (Lavy  et  al., 1993; Thorpe  &amp;  Salkovskis, 1997; Watts et al., 1986),  perhaps  stemming  from  a  trait  disposition.

Regarding  misophonic  triggers  themselves,  we  also found evidence to support our theory that these triggers are already mildly aversive for all people (Edelstein et al., 2013). We therefore suggest that attention to detail could over-emphasize  what  are  already  (mildly)  problematic sounds because the sounds disliked by misophonics were largely  similar  to  those  disliked  by  non-misophonics.  In other words, we found that misophonia triggers are aversive  for  all  people,  in  a  similar  pattern  that  they  become more aversive for misophonics (i.e., a strong positive correlation in disliking triggers across both misophonics and non-misophonics).  This  suggests  that  the  mechanisms driving  misophonia  may  stem  -  at  least  in  part  -  from the  same  underlying  valence  judgments  in  the  general population,  albeit  with  an  overlay  of  more  extreme emotions.

We  now  turn  to  our  final  hypothesis  that  misophonics  may  have  more  vivid  experiences  when mentally stimulating sounds are within their auditory imagery.  Misophonics  scored  significantly  higher  in auditory  imagery,  showing  that  they  'hear'  sounds internally  (e.g.,  laughing)  more  clearly  in  their  mind than  do  non-misophonics.  Imagery  self-report  questionnaires have been shown  to tap imagery in a surprisingly robust way, correlating with behavioral measures  of  imagery  (e.g.,  Halpern,  2015;  Keogh  &amp; Pearson,  2018)  and  brain  structure  (Halpern,  2015). We  hypothesized heightened auditory given the known  relationship  between  imagery  and  attention, in which imagery can encourage attentional guidance (Moriya,  2018).  We  therefore  suggest  that  the  heightened  auditory  imagery  attention  may  lead  to  similarly heightened auditory attention for sounds, thereby  making  sounds  harder  to  ignore.

Our finding  of  superior  scores  in  auditory  imagery might also be interpreted in light of Dance, Ward et al. (2021)  who  found  that  mental  imagery  is  highest  in those  with  higher  sensory  sensitivities.  Misophonia  is itself a form of high sensory sensitivity, which means it may be no surprise to find that imagery is also higher. Importantly, Baddeley &amp; Andrade (2000) propose that for increased vividness of imagery, more sensory information may be required to be available to appropriate

systems in working memory. Hence, high attention to the details of a sound may gather more information to bolster high auditory imagery. Alternatively, high imagery  may  itself  cause  higher  attention  to  detail,  and future  research  might  profitably  examine  the  relationship  and  directionality  of  these  two  characteristics. Future research  might also  consider  differences  across genders, since our samples were predominantly female (a limitation of our study). This female-bias may reflect an as-yet-unknown gender bias in misophonia, although equally likely is the well-known participation bias  in  which  women  self-refer  more  often  to  studies than men (Curtin et al., 2000; Singer et al., 2000) and are more  willing  to  self-disclose  information  (Dindia  &amp; Allen,  1992).  This  widely  occurring  bias  has  been known  to  unhelpfully  skew  epidemiological  estimates on  gender  in  other  conditions  (for  discussion,  see Simner  &amp;  Carmichael,  2015).  We  therefore  note  this with  caution  here  and  make  no  assumptions  about whether  our  sample  reflects  a  wider  female  bias  in misophonia.

In summary, we have seen how misophonia is linked with several key traits and characteristics beyond a mere disliking  of  sounds.  Our  data  show  that  people  with misophonia  are  more  attentive  to  detail,  cognitively inflexible,  but  superior  at  mentally  imaging  sounds. Establishing  these  differences  sets  the  stage  for  future research on the underlying mechanisms of misophonia and targeted interventions while adding a new dimension to what we understand about the mental profiles of people with misophonia.

## Notes

- 1. Here  we  report  only  attention  to  detail  questions, these  being  items  5,6,9,12,19,23,28,29,30,49  from  the full  scale.  However,  our  tests  were  embedded  in a  larger  battery,  which  included  the  full  AQ  measure.  Results  pertaining  to  autism  per  se  are  outside the  scope  of  this  study  and  are  to  be  reported elsewhere.
- 2. We could not correlate speed/accuracy against the third subscale  (Severity  subscale)  because  responses  on  this subscale  have  a  different  range  for  misophonics  (who can  score  7-15;  i.e.,  a  9  point  scale)  versus  nonmisophonics  (who  can  score  1-6;  i.e.,  a  6  point  scale). Correlations on a restricted range have a naturally smaller  coefficient,  meaning  we  could  not  make  a  suitable comparison  across  groups.  Nonetheless,  the  concept represented by the Severity subscale (which asks readers to evaluate the number of triggers, their emotional consequences, and their impact in daily life) are also found within the remaining two scales (which ask about triggers-Scale 1, and emotions/behaviors-Scale 2).

## Disclosure statement

No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).

## Funding

The  authors  received  funding  from  the  REAM  foundation, Misophonia Research Fund initiative awarded to JS and JW.

## References

Baddeley, A. D., &amp; Andrade, J. (2000). Working memory and the vividness of imagery. Journal of Experimental Psychology:  General , 129 (1),  126-145.  https://doi.org/10. 1037/0096-3445.129.1.126

Baron-Cohen,  S.,  Wheelwright,  S.,  Skinner,  R.,  Martin,  J., &amp;  Clubley,  E.  (2001).  The  autism-spectrum  quotient (AQ): Evidence from Asperger syndrome/high-functioning autism, males and females, scientists and mathematicians. Journal  of  Autism  and  Developmental Disorders , 31 (1),  5-17.  https://doi.org/10.1023/ A:1005653411471

Cavanna,  A.  E.,  &amp;  Seri,  S.  (2015).  Misophonia:  Current perspectives. Neuropsychiatric  Disease  and  Treatment , 11 (August), 2117-2123. https://doi.org/10.2147/NDT.S81438 Curtin,  R.,  Presser,  S.,  &amp;  Singer,  E.  (2000).  The  effects  of response rate changes on the index of consumer sentiment. Public  Opinion  Quarterly , 64 (4), 413-428. https://doi.org/10.1086/318638

Cusack, S. E., Cash, T. V., &amp; Vrana, S. R. (2018). An examination of the relationship between misophonia, anxiety sensitivity,  and  obsessive-compulsive  symptoms. Journal  of Obsessive-Compulsive  and  Related  Disorders , 18 (July), 67-72. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jocrd.2018.06.004

Dajani, D. R., &amp; Uddin, L. Q. (2015). Demystifying cognitive flexibility: Implications for clinical and developmental neuroscience. Trends in Neurosciences , 38 (9), 571-578. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.tins.2015.07.003

Dance,  C.  J.,  Jaquiery,  M.,  Eagleman,  D.  M.,  Porteous,  D., Zeman, A.,  &amp;  Simner,  J.  (2021).  What  is  the  relationship between Aphantasia, Synaesthesia and Autism? Consciousness  and  Cognition , 89 (March),  103087.  https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2021.103087

Dance,  C.  J.,  Ward,  J.,  &amp;  Simner,  J.  (2021).  What  is  the  Link Between  Mental  Imagery  and  Sensory  Sensitivity?  Insights from Aphantasia. Perception , 50 (9), 757-782. https://doi.org/ 10.1177/03010066211042186

Dindia, K., &amp; Allen, M. (1992). Sex differences in self-disclosure:  A  meta-analysis. Psychological  Bulletin , 112 (1), 106-124. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.112.1.106

Edelstein,  M.,  Brang,  D.,  Rouw,  R.,  &amp;  Ramachandran,  V.  S. (2013).  Misophonia:  Physiological  investigations  and  case descriptions. Frontiers  in  Human  Neuroscience , 7 (JUN), 296. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2013.00296

Eijsker,  N.,  Schröder,  A.,  Liebrand,  L.  C.,  Smit,  D.  J.  A., van Wingen, G., &amp; Denys, D. (2021). White matter abnormalities in misophonia. NeuroImage: Clinical , 32 , 102787.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nicl. 2021.102787

Eijsker,  N.,  Schröder,  A.,  Smit,  D.  J.  A.,  van  Wingen,  G.,  &amp; Denys, D. (2019). Neural basis of response bias on the stop signal  task  in  misophonia. Frontiers  in  Psychiatry , 10 . https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyt.2019.00765

Ferrari, J. R., &amp; Mautz, W. T. (1997). Predicting perfectionism: Applying tests of rigidity. Journal of Clinical Psychology , 53 (1),  1-6.  https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1097-4679(199701) 53:1&lt;1::AID-JCLP1&gt;3.0.CO;2-Y

Frank,  B.,  Roszyk,  M.,  Hurley,  L.,  Drejaj,  L.,  &amp;  McKay,  D. (2020).  Inattention  in  misophonia:  Difficulties  achieving and maintaining alertness. Journal of Clinical and Experimental  Neuropsychology , 42 (1),  66-75.  https://doi. org/10.1080/13803395.2019.1666801

Halpern,  A.  R.  (2015).  Differences  in  auditory  imagery self-report predict neural and behavioral outcomes. Psychomusicology:  Music,  Mind,  and  Brain , 25 (1),  37-47. https://doi.org/10.1037/pmu0000081

- Jager,  I.,  de  Koning,  P.,  Bost,  T.,  Denys,  D.,  &amp;  Vulink,  N. (2020).  Misophonia:  Phenomenology,  comorbidity  and demographics  in  a  large sample. PLoS  ONE , 15 (4), e0231390. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0231390
- Jastreboff,  M.  M.,  &amp;  Jastreboff,  P.  J.  (2001).  Components  of decreased  sound  tolerance:  Hyperacusis,  misophonia, phonophobia. ITHS  Newsletter , 1 (July),  1-5.  https://doi. org/10.1055/s-0034-1372527
- Jolliffe, T., &amp; Baron-Cohen, S. (1997). Are people with autism and  Asperger syndrome  faster than normal  on  the Embedded Figures  Test? Journal  of  Child  Psychology  and Psychiatry,  and  Allied  Disciplines , 38 (5),  527-534.  https:// doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-7610.1997.tb01539.x

Kato,  T.  (2016).  Impact  of  psychological  inflexibility  on depressive  symptoms  and  sleep  difficulty  in  a  Japanese sample. SpringerPlus , 5 (1),  712.  https://doi.org/10.1186/ s40064-016-2393-0

Keogh, R., &amp; Pearson, J. (2018). The blind mind: No sensory visual  imagery  in  aphantasia. Cortex , 105 (2015),  53-60. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2017.10.012

Koldewyn,  K.,  Jiang,  Y.  V.,  Weigelt,  S.,  &amp;  Kanwisher,  N. (2013). Global/local processing in autism: Not a disability, but a disinclination. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders , 43 (10),  2329-2340.  https://doi.org/10.1007/ s10803-013-1777-z

Kumar, S., Tansley-Hancock, O., Sedley, W., Winston, J. S., Callaghan,  M.  F.,  Allen,  M.,  Cope,  T.  E.,  Gander,  P.  E., Bamiou,  D.  E.,  &amp;  Griffiths,  T.  D.  (2017).  The  brain  basis for  misophonia. Current  Biology , 27 (4),  527-533.  https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2016.12.048

Kurita,  H.,  Koyama,  T.,  &amp;  Osada,  H.  (2005).  AutismSpectrum  Quotient-Japanese  version  and its short forms  for  screening  normally  intelligent  persons  with pervasive developmental disorders. Psychiatry and Clinical  Neurosciences , 59 (4),  490-496.  https://doi.org/ 10.1111/j.1440-1819.2005.01403.x

Lavy, E., van den Hout, M., &amp; Arntz, A. (1993). Attentional bias  and  spider  phobia:  Conceptual  and  clinical  issues. Behaviour  Research  and  Therapy , 31 (1),  17-24.  https:// doi.org/10.1016/0005-7967(93)90038-V

Lima, C. F., Lavan, N., Evans, S., Agnew, Z., Halpern, A. R., Shanmugalingam, P., Meekings, S., Boebinger, D., Ostarek, M., McGettigan, C., Warren, J. E., &amp; Scott, S. K. (2015).  Feel  the  noise:  Relating  individual  differences  in

auditory imagery to the structure and function of sensorimotor  systems. Cerebral Cortex , 25 (11), 4638-4650. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhv134

Maria, A. S., Barry, C., Ringuenet, D., Falissard, B., Group, T., &amp;  Berthoz,  S.  (2020).  Subjective  cognitive  rigidity  and attention  to  detail:  A  cross-cultural  validation  of  the Detail  and  Flexibility  Questionnaire  (DFlex)  in  a  French clinical  sample. Journal  of  Clinical  and  Experimental Neuropsychology , 42 (10),  1059-1071.  https://doi.org/10. 1080/13803395.2020.1842333

Moriya,  J.  (2018).  Visual  mental  imagery  influences  attentional guidance in a visual-search task. Attention, Perception,  and  Psychophysics , 80 (5),  1127-1142.  https:// doi.org/10.3758/s13414-018-1520-0

Mumma, G. H. (1993). The Embedded Figures Test: Internal structure  and  development  of  a  short  form*. Personality and Individual Differences , 15 (2), 221-224. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/0191-8869(93)90029-3

Näätänen, R. (1992). Attention and brain function . Erlbaum. Ong, C. W., Barney, J. L., Barrett, T. S., Lee, E. B., Levin, M. E., &amp; Twohig, M. P. (2019). The role of psychological inflexibility and self-compassion in acceptance and commitment therapy  for  clinical  perfectionism. Journal  of  Contextual Behavioral Science , 13 (July), 7-16. https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.jcbs.2019.06.005

- Panagopoulos,  V.  N.,  Greene,  D.  J.,  Campbell,  M.  C.,  &amp; Black,  K.  J.  (2013).  Towards  objectively  quantifying  sensory hypersensitivity: A pilot study of the 'Ariana effect. PeerJ 2013 , (1), e121. https://doi.org/10.7717/PEERJ.121
- Rinaldi, L. J., Ward, J., &amp; Simner, J. (2021, December 1). An Automated Online Assessment for Misophonia: The Sussex Misophonia Scale for  Adults.  Psyarxiv.  https://doi.org/10. 31234/osf.io/5eb39
- Rinne, T., Särkkä, A., Degerman, A., Schröger, E., &amp; Alho, K. (2006). Two separate mechanisms underlie auditory change detection  and  involuntary  control  of  attention. Brain Research , 1077 (1),  135-143.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j. brainres.2006.01.043

Roberts, M. E., Barthel, F. M. S., Lopez, C., Tchanturia, K., &amp; Treasure, J. L. (2011). Development and validation of the detail and  flexibility questionnaire  (DFlex)  in  eating disorders. Eating  Behaviors , 12 (3),  168-174.  https://doi. org/10.1016/j.eatbeh.2011.04.001

- Rosenthal, M. Z., Anand, D., Cassiello-Robbins, C., Williams,  Z.  J.,  Guetta,  R.  E.,  Trumbull,  J.,  &amp;  Kelley,  L.  D. (2021). Development and initial validation of the duke misophonia questionnaire. Frontiers in Psychology , 12 (September), 4197. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2021.709928

Rouw,  R.,  &amp;  Erfanian,  M.  (2018).  A  large-scale  study  of misophonia. Journal of Clinical Psychology , 74 (3), 453-479. https://doi.org/10.1002/jclp.22500

Schröder, A., van Diepen, R., Mazaheri, A., Petropoulos-Petalas, D.,  Soto  de  Amesti,  V.,  Vulink,  N.,  Denys,  D.  (2014). Diminished  N1  Auditory  Evoked  Potentials  to  Oddball Stimuli  in  Misophonia  Patients. Frontiers  in  Behavioral Neuroscience , 8 (April),  1-6.  https://doi.org/10.3389/fnbeh. 2014.00123

Schröder,  A.,  Wingen,  G.  V.,  Eijsker,  N.,  San  Giorgi,  R., Vulink, N. C., Turbyne, C., &amp; Denys, D. (2019). Misophonia is associated with altered brain activity in the auditory cortex and salience network. Scientific Reports , 9 (1), 1-9. https://doi. org/10.1038/s41598-019-44084-8

- Scott, W.  A.  (1962).  Cognitive  complexity  and  cognitive flexibility. Sociometry , 25 (4),  405.  https://doi.org/10.2307/ 2785779
- Shafran,  R.,  Cooper,  Z.,  &amp;  Fairburn,  C.  G.  (2002).  Clinical perfectionism: A cognitive-behavioural analysis. Behaviour Research  and  Therapy , 40 (7),  773-791.  https://doi.org/10. 1016/S0005-7967(01)00059-6
- Silva, F. E. D., &amp; Sanchez, T. G. (2019). Evaluation of selective attention in patients with misophonia. Brazilian Journal of Otorhinolaryngology , 85 (3),  303-309.  https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.bjorl.2018.02.005
- Simner,  J.,  &amp;  Carmichael,  D.  A.  (2015).  Is  synaesthesia a dominantly female trait? Cognitive Neuroscience , 6 (2-3), 68. https://doi.org/10.1080/17588928.2015.1019441
- Singer, E., van Hoewyk, J., &amp; Maher, M. P. (2000). Experiments with incentives in telephone surveys. Public Opinion Quarterly , 64 (2), 171-188. https://doi.org/10.1086/317761
- St.  Clare,  T.  (2003).  Assessment  Procedures.  In  R.  Menzies  &amp; P.  de  Silva  (Eds.), Obsessive  compulsive  disorder:  Theory, research, and treatment (pp. 239-258). John Wiley &amp; Sons Ltd.
- Thorpe, S. J., &amp; Salkovskis, P. M. (1997). The effect of one-session treatment  for  spider  phobia  on  attentional  bias  and  beliefs. British Journal of Clinical Psychology , 36 (2), 225-241. https:// doi.org/10.1111/j.2044-8260.1997.tb01409.x
- van  Passel,  B.,  Danner,  U.,  Dingemans,  A.,  van  Furth,  E., Hendriks, G.-J., Hendriks, G.-J., Hendriks, G.-J., Hendriks, G.-J., Cath, D., &amp; Cath, D. (2016). Cognitive remediation therapy (CRT) as a treatment enhancer of eating disorders and obsessive compulsive disorders: Study protocol for a  randomized  controlled  trial. BMC Psychiatry , 16 (1),  393undefined. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12888-016-1109-x

Vitoratou, S., Uglik-Marucha, N., Hayes, C., &amp; Gregory, J. (2021). Listening to people with misophonia: Exploring the multiple dimensions  of  sound  intolerance  using  a  new  psychometric tool, the S-five, in a large sample of individuals identifying with the  condition. Psych  2021 , 3 (4),  639-662.  https://doi.org/10. 3390/PSYCH3040041

Ward,  J.,  Brown,  P.,  Sherwood,  J.,  &amp;  Simner,  J.  (2018).  An autistic-like profile of attention and perception in synaesthesia. Cortex , 107 (October),  121-130.  https://doi. org/10.1016/j.cortex.2017.10.008

Watts,  F.  N.,  Trezise,  L.,  &amp;  Sharrock,  R.  (1986).  Processing  of phobic  stimuli. British  Journal  of  Clinical  Psychology , 25 (4), 253-259. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.2044-8260.1986.tb00705.x

- Willander, J., &amp; Baraldi, S. (2010). Development of a new clarity of auditory imagery scale. Behavior Research Methods , 42 (3), 785-790. https://doi.org/10.3758/BRM.42.3.785

Witkin, H. A., Oltman, P. K., Raskin, E., &amp; Karp, S. A. (1971). A  manual  for  the  embedded  figures  test . Consulting Psychologist Press.

- Wu, M. S., Lewin, A. B., Murphy, T. K., &amp; Storch, E. A. (2014). Misophonia:  Incidence,  phenomenology,  and  clinical  correlates in an undergraduate student sample. Journal of Clinical Psychology , 70 (10),  994-1007.  https://doi.org/10.1002/jclp. 22098
- Young, M. P., Paterson, I. R., &amp; Perrett, D. I. (1989). Attention to detail? Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 12 (3), 417-418. https:// doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00057022
- Yovel,  I.,  Revelle,  W.,  &amp;  Mineka,  S.  (2005).  Who  sees  trees before  forest?:  The  obsessive-compulsive  style  of  visual attention. Psychological  Science , 16 (2),  123-129.  https:// doi.org/10.1111/j.0956-7976.2005.00792.x