Case Report
Steroids for the Treatment of Misophonia and Misokinesia
Jadon Webb1,2and Afton Williamson1
1Bloom Mental Health, LLC, 26 W Dry Creek Circle, Suite 710, Littleton, CO 80120, USA
2Child Study Center, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, USA
Correspondence should be addressed to Jadon Webb; research@bloommh.com
Received 28 June 2023; Revised 21 November 2023; Accepted 1 December 2023; Published 16 January 2024Academic Editor: Lut Tamam
Copyright ©2024 Jadon Webb and Afton Williamson. This is an open access article distributed under the Creative Commons
Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is
properly cited.
Misophonia and misokinesia are disorders characterized by intensely negative physical and emotional reactions to speci ﬁc auditory
and visual stimuli. The availability of effective treatments, especially pharmacological ones, is limited. This report presents a case of
a 35-year-old male with severe misophonia and misokinesia who experienced nearly complete resolution of symptoms whileundergoing high-dose steroid therapy for an unrelated muscular injury. Two days after starting a 20 mg oral prednisone taper pack(in which the steroid dose is reduced by 4 mg daily), his Amsterdam Misophonia Scale (A-Miso-S) score drastically reduced from abaseline of 23 (i.e., extreme symptoms) to 1, with symptom relief persisting for approximately 2 weeks after completing the taper.
Months later, a daily dose of prednisone (4 mg) was reintroduced. This again resulted in a marked reduction in symptoms (A-Miso-S
of 6), enabling him to resume working in an of ﬁce setting despite his triggers. Symptom improvement remained stable over several
months. This case raises the possibility of the steroid prednisone as a novel treatment for misophonia and misokinesia. However,further investigation is needed to determine the generalizability of this observation.
1. Introduction
Misophonia is a condition characterized by marked emo-
tional and physiological aversion to speci ﬁc sounds. Misoki-
nesia is a similar response to certain visual stimuli. Theseconditions are only recently recognized [1] and are becoming
a topic of increasing clinical interest, as they appear to bequite common and can be quite distressing [2].
Consensus work groups are re ﬁning the diagnostic crite-
ria for misophonia and misokinesia [3]. The emotional andautonomic symptoms experienced in response to triggersoverlap those observed in anxiety-spectrum psychiatric dis-
orders such as phobias, panic disorder, and posttraumatic
stress disorder (PTSD). However, misophonia and misokine-
sia are not currently recognized in diagnostic manuals such as
the International Classi ﬁcation of Diseases, 11th Revision
(ICD-11) [4], or the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders, 5th Edition, Text Revision (DSM-5-TR)
[5], re ﬂecting the need for a deeper understanding of their
etiology, and further standardization of diagnostic criteria.
Thus far, no randomized trials have assessed the effects
of any medication on misophonia or misokinesia symptoms.Published reports suggest that antidepressants [6, 7], beta-blockers such as propranolol [8], and mood-stabilizing anti-psychotics such as risperidone [9, 10] may alleviate symp-toms in some cases. Potent psychotomimetic drugs, such aspsilocybin, ketamine, and MDMA, hold theoretical potential
for addressing some of the core symptoms of misophonia
and misokinesia, although this is still a hypothesis that willrequire clinical assessment [11].
This report contributes to the existing literature by doc-
umenting a case in which prednisone, a synthetic corticoste-roid, was highly effective in treating severe misophonia andmisokinesia. This case suggests a potential role for corticos-
teroids in managing this complex problem that otherwise
still has few treatment options. It also raises questions regard-ing the underlying pathophysiology and the potential in gen-eral for anti-in ﬂammatory approaches.
2. Case Presentation
2.1. Case Summary. The patient, a 35-year-old white male,
sought evaluation and treatment for misophonia and miso-kinesia symptoms. He was in considerable distress and hadHindawi
Case Reports in Psychiatry
Volume 2024, Article ID 3976837, 4 pages
https://doi.org/10.1155/2024/3976837

taken medical leave from his of ﬁce job due to severe triggers
incited by everyday sounds and actions from coworkers. His
primary treatment objective was to mitigate these trigger
responses to manageable levels, thereby allowing his returnto work.
2.2. Misophonia History. The patient ﬁrst experienced mis-
ophonia symptoms at the age of 12, and the severity of his
trigger reactions slowly increased over the years. Triggers
included chewing food or gum, crunching foods, lip smack-
ing, repetitive tapping, and seeing someone shake their leg,all of which were common in his of ﬁce job.
The patient ’s trigger reactions were fairly typical for mis-
ophonia/misokinesia. His primary emotional response wasan intense sensation of anger or rage. This frequently resulted
in an exaggerated focus on the trigger, characterized by a
desire to confront the trigger source to compel it to stop,although he never exhibited aggressive behavior. Feelings ofanxiety and panic were also common, particularly when hefelt trapped in a triggering situation. Once conscious of atrigger, his thoughts became consumed by it, and he wasunable to shift focus until the trigger ceased, and he would
additionally feel an overwhelming compulsion to exit the sit-
uation. In terms of physical response, triggers led to immedi-ate muscle tension and clenching of his ﬁsts. Following a
trigger event, he would feel exhausted and depressed.
2.3. Impairment and Distress from Triggers. When the patient
ﬁrst sought our assistance, his mi sophonia severity, as measured
by the Amsterdam Misophonia S cale (A-Miso-S) [12], was 23,
indicative of “extreme ”symptoms. Trigger responses to family
and coworkers caused signi ﬁcant life impairment, including hav-
ing to take medical leave from his job and being increasingly
unable to tolerate being physically near to his father, with whomhe otherwise shared a good relationship. This impairment was
associated with a growing sense of hopelessness that things could
ever improve and passive suicidal thoughts.
2.4. Medical and Psychiatric History. The patient is an intel-
ligent, articulate 35-year-old engineer who takes great pride
in his highly technical work. He has a decades-long history ofmajor depression, treated periodically with the antidepres-
sant escitalopram 20 mg daily, which was partially effective
for depression but did not affect misophonia/misokinesiasymptoms. He did not consume nicotine, alcohol, or any illicitsubstances and had no other known psychiatric disorders.
2.5. Previous Attempts at Misophonia Treatment. Auditory
interventions such as earplugs and sound-generating devices
were minimally effective, and he had not previously attempted
any behavioral or psychotherapeutic interventions. Adequatesleep, aerobic exercise, and a healthy diet all modestly allevi-ated the intensity of triggers; however, these self-care measureswere insuf ﬁcient to allow him to continue to work and socialize
normally with others.
2.6. Treatment Using the Steroid Prednisone. A medical pro-
vider from another facility initiated a high-dose prednisone
tapering regimen to treat a sports-related abdominal muscletear. The initial dose was prednisone 20 mg on Day 1,reducing by 4 mg each day until tapering off in 5 days.
Within 2 days of starting the prednisone taper, he experi-
enced a remarkable improvement in his misophonia and
misokinesia symptoms. His A-Miso-S score dropped sharply
from 23 to 1, indicating near-complete symptom relief (seeFigure 1 for a comparison of A-Miso-S scores with predni-
sone dosage).
Subjectively, the patient reported that upon taking the
steroid pack, “for the ﬁrst time in a long time …I felt normal, ”
meaning that his misophonia/misokinesia symptoms werenot severely affecting his daily life. His overall mood moder-
ately improved during the steroid taper, but importantly, wedid not identify any signs of mania, a potential steroid side
effect. His sleep was unaffected, and there were no symptoms
of euphoria, excessive energy, rushed speech, grandiosity, or
other unusual changes. The substantial reduction in miso-
phonia/misokinesia symptoms well exceeded what we wouldhave expected from his modest change in mood.
Two weeks after completing the prednisone taper, the
patient ’s misophonia symptoms slowly returned to their
original severity. Given his previous steroid response, butwith concern about long-term risks from the use of steroids,
we initially attempted a low dose (2 mg) daily prednisone
regimen. This resulted in minimal improvement (A-Miso-Sscore of 20, see Figure 1), which we and the patient both
deemed unsatisfactory. We thus increased the prednisone
dose to 4 mg daily, which dramatically improved the miso-
phonia/misokinesia symptoms (A-Miso-S score of 6, or mild
symptoms).
While taking 4 mg daily prednisone, the patient was still
aware of triggers at work but experienced little emotionaldistress from them, stating, “my fuse is so much longer …
it would have taken much more triggering exposure to feelangry. ”He
also reported minimal physical symptoms from0510152025
024 2 0A-Miso-S score
Prednisone dose (mg)
FIGURE 1: Prednisone dose vs. A-Miso-S score. The severity of mis-
ophonia symptoms experienced by this patient, as measured by the
A-Miso-S rating scale vs. the dose of prednisone. Lower scores
mean less misophonia symptoms. Of note, 0 mg was his scorewhen not taking steroids, 2 and 4 mg were daily oral doses of pred-nisone, and 20 mg was the starting dose of a 5-day prednisone taperpack in which the dose was then decreased by 4 mg daily, the score
shown here was from his ﬁrst week of treatment on the steroid pack.2 Case Reports in Psychiatry

triggers and overall did not feel impaired when they occurred.
He was thus able to return to work in the of ﬁce with no
impairment, which he found profoundly helpful. He alsoreconnected with his father, now able to tolerate his triggerseven for extended periods of time together. He reported highoverall satisfaction with the treatment, with a total resolutionof hopeless and passive suicidal thoughts. His affect on recentvisits to our clinic was bright, engaged, pleasant, and hopeful
about the future.
Symptom improvement was sustained for several months
of treatment up to the point of writing this report. No side
effects from the steroids were reported or noted on the exam.Going forward, the treatment plan was regular monitoring forside effects while exploring alternate potential treatments thatmay have fewer long-term side effects and/or may allow him
to periodically take steroid holidays.
3. Discussion
The use of oral prednisone, in this case, elicited a clearly
observable, replicable, stable, and dose-dependent clinicalresponse. This remarkable response raises intriguing possibil-ities for developing new medication treatments and perhapsbetter understanding the mechanism underlying this illness.
That said, we note that other misophonia/misokinesia
patients in our clinic who also incidentally took steroidshave notexperienced similarly clear symptom relief. Thus,
it already seems clear that prednisone is not a universallyeffective treatment for misophonia/misokinesia, and thisone case should not be interpreted as generalized treatmentguidance. The side effects of steroids are a major consider-ation likely to limit this option, particularly for milder cases in
which the risks of treatment are more likely to outweigh the
beneﬁts. Even in this extreme case, we are likely to continue to
explore alternative medications to limit long-term side effects.
3.1. Possible Mechanism of Steroid Action on Misophonia and
Misokinesia. The mechanism through which steroids may
alleviate misophonia and misokinesia symptoms is unknown.Steroids can modify auditory processing at the cortical level,as shown in animal models given exogenous steroids [13].Steroids can also affect psychiatric disorders characterized
by abnormal emotional and physical responses to generally
benign stimuli, such as PTSD. Steroid treatment may improvesymptoms and facilitate fear extinction during PTSD treat-ment, particularly in patients who show high physiologicalresponsiveness to a test dose of steroid [14, 15].
Inﬂammation is increasingly thought to underlie many
psychiatric conditions [16] and is increased during high stressand sleep deprivation. Misophonia symptoms are frequentlyreported as more intense after poor sleep and during stress.Psychiatric medications, including selective serotonin reuptakeinhibitor antidepressants, may function in part by modulatinginﬂammation [17], and a wide range of anti-in ﬂammatory
medications may be effective in treating psychiatric conditions[18]. If inﬂ ammation is a key driver in some cases of misopho-
nia/misokinesia, perhaps steroids work by counteracting this. Ifso, then other anti-in ﬂammatory agents may also be of interest
to consider, including nonsteroidal anti-in ﬂammatory drugs,polyunsaturated fatty acids, cytokine modulators, and atypicalanti-in ﬂammatories such as statins and minocycline.
3.2. Future Directions. Future investigations should system-
atically analyze cases of steroid-induced misophonia/miso-
kinesia symptom relief to ascertain if this treatment has
wider applicability or is a rare occurrence. This could helpguide whether it is worthwhile to pursue controlled clinicaltrials. Identifying potential subpopulations likely to be steroid-responsive may also be bene ﬁcial, perhaps by measuring bio-
markers of in ﬂammation and assessing a patient ’s innate
responsiveness to a steroid challenge, such as through the
dexamethasone suppression test.
3.3. Summary. The clear, positive response of misophonia
and misokinesia symptoms to the oral steroid prednisone
reported in this case expands potential treatment optionsfor a problem that presently has no established medical treat-ment. It also clearly invites further exploration of the gener-alizability of this ﬁnding.
Data Availability
No datasets to share.
Conﬂicts of Interest
The authors declare that they have no con ﬂicts of interest.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank the patient for his consentand input and for seeking to better the lives of others throughsharing this information. We would additionally like tothank Makayla Johnhson, Cassandra Callard, Megan Berry,Ashley Lindeman, and the Bloom team for their expert help
and input.
References
[1] M. M. Jastreboff and P. J. Jastreboff, “Hyperacusis, ”Audiology
Online , 2001, https://www.audiologyonline.com/articles/hype
racusis-1223.
[2] S. M. Jaswal, A. K. F. De Bleser, and T. C. Handy, “Mis-
okinesia is a sensitivity to seeing others ﬁdget that is prevalent
in the general population, ”Scienti ﬁc Reports , vol. 11, Article ID
17204, 2021.
[3] S. E. Swedo, D. M. Baguley, D. Denys et al., “Consensus de ﬁnition
of misophonia: a Delphi study, ”Frontiers in Neuroscience ,v o l .1 6 ,
Article ID 841816, 2022.
[4] World Health Organization, “International classi ﬁcation of
diseases 11th revision (ICD-11 revision), ”https://icd.who.int/en.
[5] M. B. First, D. E. Clarke, L. Yousif, A. M. Eng, N. Gogtay, and
P. S. Appelbaum, “DSM-5-TR : rationale, process, and overview
of changes, ”Psychiatric Services , vol. 74, no. 8, pp. 869 –875,
2023.
[6] E. Sarigedik and N. Yurteri, “Misophonia successfully treated
of with ﬂuoxetine: a case report, ”Clinical Neuropharmacology ,
vol. 44, no. 5, pp. 191-192, 2021.
[7] Z. D. Zuschlag and K. C. Leventhal, “Rapid and sustained
resolution of misophonia-type hyperacusis with the selectiveCase Reports in Psychiatry 3

serotonin reuptake inhibitor sertraline, ”The Primary Care
Companion For CNS Disorders , vol. 23, no. 3, 2021.
[8] J. Webb, “β-Blockers for the treatment of misophonia and
misokinesia, ”Clinical Neuropharmacology , vol. 45, no. 1,
pp. 13-14, 2022.
[9] E. J. Pan, J. Weleff, A. Anand, and B. S. Barnett, “Treatment
of misophonia with risperidone in a patient with autism
spectrum disorder, ”Case Reports in Psychiatry, vol. 2022,
Article ID 3169834, 3 pages, 2022.
[10] A. Naguy, A.-M. Al-Humoud, S. Pridmore, M. Y. Abuzeid,
A. Singh, and D. Elsori, “Low-dose risperidone for an autistic
child with comorbid ARFID and misophonia, ”Psychophar-
macology Bulletin , vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 91 –94, 2022.
[11] J. Webb and S. Keane, “MDMA for the treatment of misophonia,
ap r o p o s a l , ”Frontiers in Psychiatry , vol. 13, Article ID 983285,
2022.
[12] A. Schr öder, N. Vulink, and D. Denys, “Misophonia: diagnostic
criteria for a new psychiatric disorder, ”PLoS ONE , vol. 8, no. 1,
Article ID e54706, 2013.
[13] L. Lei, R. Zhang, L. Ma, Y. Chen, Y. Hao, and P. Yang,
“Dexamethasone induced changes of neural activity in the
auditory cortex of rats, ”Neuroscience Research , vol. 80, pp. 38 –
44, 2014.
[14] V. Michopoulos, S. D. Norrholm, J. S. Stevens et al.,
“Dexamethasone facilitates fear extinction and safety discrimi-
nation in PTSD: a placebo-controlled, double-blind study, ”
Psychoneuroendocrinology , vol. 83, pp. 65 –71, 2017.
[15] R. Yehuda, L. M. Bierer, L. C. Pratchett et al., “Cortisol
augmentation of a psychological treatment for war ﬁghters
with posttraumatic stress disorder: randomized trial showingimproved treatment retention and outcome, ”Psychoneur-
oendocrinology , vol. 51, pp. 589 –597, 2015.
[16] S. Ballaz and M. Bourin, “Anti-in ﬂammatory therapy as a
promising target in neuropsychiatric disorders, ”inNeuroin-
ﬂammation, Gut-Brain Axis and Immunity in Neuropsychiat-
ric Disorders , Y. K. Kim, Ed., vol. 1411 of Advances in
Experimental Medicine and Biology , pp. 459 –486, Springer,
Singapore, 2023.
[17] H. Mojiri-Forushani, E. Khajehali, M. Adelipour, and
A 
. Mohammadi, “Inhibitory effects of ﬂuoxetine on the secretion
of inﬂammatory mediators and JAK/STAT3 and JNK/TLR4 gene
expression,” Molecular Biology Reports , vol. 50, pp. 2231 –2241,
2023.
[18] O. K öhler, J. Krogh, O. Mors, and M. E. Benros, “Inﬂamma-
tion in depression and the potential for anti-in ﬂammatory
treatment, ”Current Neuropharmacology , vol. 14, no. 7, pp. 732 –
742, 2016.4 Case Reports in Psychiatry